CODE OF THE CITY OF BLACKSHEAR, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
BLACKSHEAR, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Preston Brooks Hampton 
Mayor 
____________ 
S. Robbie Bazemore 
Reginald R. Taylor, Jr. 
E. W. (Gene) Baker 
Robert S. (Bob) Archer  David Deloach  Roy Gilleon 
City Council 
____________ 
Phillip N. Golub 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Myra M. Bolden 
City Clerk/Treasurer 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Blackshear, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1987 Code, as supplemented through March 1988, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1987 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Ronald McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mayor Preston Brooks Hampton, and Ms. Myra Bolden, City Clerk/Treasurer for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Blackshear, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Blackshear, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Blackshear, Georgia. 1996. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
CITY OF BLACKSHEAR—NEW CHARTER. 
No. 76 (House Bill No. 399). 
AN ACT 
To provide a new charter for the City of Blackshear; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, method of filling vacancies, compensation, qualifications, prohibitions, conflicts of interest, and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for oaths, organization, quorum, meetings, and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for the office of mayor and certain duties and powers relative to the office of mayor; to provide for administrative responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a mayor pro tempore, a city attorney, a city clerk, a city treasurer, a city accountant, and other personnel and matters relating thereto; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof; to provide for the court's jurisdiction and powers; to provide for the right of certiorari; to provide for the court's practices and procedures; to provide for taxation, licenses, and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for auditing, accounting, budgeting, and appropriations; to provide for city contracts and purchasing; to provide for the sale of property; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for eminent domain; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal a specific Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1993 Ga. Laws, page 4091 which provides a new charter for the city. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Blackshear in Pierce County is reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Blackshear, Georgia." References in this charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Blackshear. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in the manner provided by general law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk of the city and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Blackshear, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the mayor shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
Section 1.12. - Municipal powers. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. Said powers shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city; 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures not inconsistent with general law; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades except as otherwise prohibited by general law; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in O.C.G.A. Title 22 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation within the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares or other public property in the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers, and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under O.C.G.A. Title 22 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and the standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right of way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge; and to impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawnshops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxing or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, adult video rental stores, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvements; 
(37)  Ad valorem taxes. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Other taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; (to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, AND REMOVAL 

Section 2.10. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six councilmembers. The mayor and city councilmembers shall be elected as provided in this charter. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless he or she shall have been a resident of this city for 12 months immediately preceding the election of mayor or councilmembers; each such person shall continue to reside within the city during that person's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. No person's name shall be listed as a candidate on the ballot for election for either mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file a written notice with the clerk of said city that he or she desires his or her name to be placed on said ballot as a candidate either for mayor or councilmember. No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file above said notice within the time provided for in O.C.G.A. Title 21, Ch. 3, the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Section 2.11. - Elections. 
(a)  At any election, all persons who are qualified under the Constitution and laws of Georgia to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia and who are bona fide residents of said city shall be eligible to qualify as voters in the election. 
(b)  All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
(c)  The mayor and councilmembers who are in office on the effective date of this Act shall serve until the expiration of the term of office to which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter or any amendatory Acts thereto, for the purpose of electing members of the Blackshear City Council of the City of Blackshear, the City of Blackshear shall be divided into six election districts described as follows: 
Election District 1 
Beginning at a point on Church Street where it intersects the City Limit line and running North on Church Street to its intersection with Lazy Lane; thence East along Lazy Lane to its intersection with Jenkins Street; thence running South on Jenkins Street to the intersection with Pittman Street; thence running East on Pittman Street to the intersection with College Avenue; thence North to the intersection with Highway 121 (Main Street); thence Southeast on Highway 121 (Main Street) to the City Limits; thence running Southwest along City Limits; thence running East along City Limits; thence running Southeast along City Limits; thence running Southwest along City Limits; thence running South to its intersection with Little River Trail; thence East along Little River Trail; thence running South along the City Limits to Whispering Pines Trail; thence running West along Whispering Pines Trail to its intersection with Highway 121; thence running North along Highway 121 to City Limits; thence running Southwest along City Limits then South along the City Limits to College Avenue; thence running North on College Avenue along the City Limits; thence North to the City Limits; thence Southwest along City Limits to Church Street; being the point of beginning. 
Election District 2 
Beginning at a point at the intersection of Jenkins Street and Pittman Street; thence running North along Jenkins Street to Church Street; thence running Northeast along Church Street to its intersection with Highway 121 (Main Street); thence running Northwest along Highway 121 to its intersection with Highway Avenue; thence running Northeast along Highway Avenue to Highway 84; thence running Northeast along Highway 84 to the City Limits; thence running Southeast along the City Limits to Highway 121 (Main Street); thence running Northwest along Highway 121 (Main Street) to College Avenue; thence running South along College Avenue to Pittman Street; thence running West to Jenkins Street, being the point of beginning. 
Election District 3 
Beginning at a point at the intersection of Highway 84, Hendry, Lee, and Keller Streets; thence running North along Hendry Street to Barney Street; thence running West along Barney Street to Pomeroy Street; thence running North along Pomeroy Street to Pine Street; thence running East along Pine Street to Hendry Street; thence running South along Hendry Street to Strickland Avenue; thence running East along Strickland Avenue to Highway 121 (Gordon Street); thence running North along Gordon Street to its intersection with Carter Avenue; thence running East along Carter Avenue to Highway 84; thence Southwest along Highway 84 to Highway Avenue; thence running Southwest along Highway Avenue to its intersection with Highway 121 (Main Street); thence running Southeast along Highway 121 (Main Street) to NE Central Avenue; thence running Southwest along NE Central Avenue to Repparde Street; thence running Northwest along Repparde Street to Highway Avenue; thence running Southwest to Highway 84; thence running Southwest along Highway 84 to the intersection with Hendry, Lee, and Keller Streets, being the point of beginning. 
Election District 4 
Beginning at a point at the City Limits on Highway 84; thence running Northerly and Westerly along the City Limits to Ware Street; thence running West along Ware Street to the City Limits; thence running Northerly and Easterly along the City Limits to Strickland Avenue; thence running East along Strickland Avenue to Pomeroy Street; thence running South along Pomeroy Street to Barney Street; thence running East along Barney Street to Hendry Street; thence running South along Hendry Street to Highway 84; thence running Southwest to the City Limits, being the point or place of beginning. 
Election District 5 
Beginning at a point at the City Limits on Church Street; thence running Westerly along the City Limits to Highway 84; thence running Northeast along Highway 84 to Highway Avenue; thence running Northeast along Highway Avenue to Repparde Street; thence running Southeast along Repparde Street to NW Central Avenue; thence running Northeast along NW Central Avenue to Highway 121 (Main Street); thence running Southeast along Highway 121 (Main Street) to Church Street; thence running Southwest along Church Street to Jenkins Street; thence running South along Jenkins Street to Lazy Lane; thence running West along Lazy Lane to Church Street; thence running Southwest along Church Street to the City Limits, being the point of beginning. 
Election District 6 
Beginning at a point at the City Limits on Strickland Avenue; thence running Northerly and Easterly along the City Limits to Highway 121 (Gordon Street); thence North on Gordon Street to Moore Street; thence running West along Moore Street to Grady Street; thence running North along Grady Street to the City Limits; thence running East along City Limits; thence South along the Rights-of-Way on the Western side of Highway 121 along the City Limits; thence East to Moore Street; thence South along Gordon Street to City Limits; thence East on City Limits to Old Shiloh Road; thence Northeast on Old Shiloh Road to Moore Street; thence East on Moore Street to City Limits; thence South and Southeast along the City Limits to Highway 84; thence Southwest on Highway 84 to Carter Avenue; thence Northeasterly and Westerly on Carter Avenue to Gordon Street; thence South on Gordon Street to Strickland Avenue; thence West on Strickland Avenue to Grady Street; thence North on Grady to McGregor Street; thence West on McGregor Street to Hendry Street; thence North on Hendry Street to Pine Street; thence West on Pine Street to Pomeroy Street; thence South on Pomeroy Street to Strickland Avenue; thence West on Strickland Avenue to City Limits, being the point of beginning. 
(e)  The mayor and council shall be elected in the manner specified by O.C.G.A. § 21-3-61(a). The mayor and three councilmembers elected in December, 1990, shall have their terms expire on December 31, 1993. On Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 1993, and every four years thereafter an election shall be held to elect the mayor at large and one councilmember from each of Districts 2, 3, and 4. The three councilmembers elected in 1991 shall have their terms expire on December 31, 1995. On Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1995, and every four years thereafter, an election shall be held to elect one councilmember from each of Districts 1, 5, and 6. All elected officials will take office on January 1 following their election and shall hold office until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1(Exh. A), 10-11-11) 
Section 2.12. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)  (1) The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. Title 21, Ch. 3, the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 2.13. - Election by majority. 
The candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Section 2.14. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance and in accordance with O.C.G.A. Title 36, Ch. 35. 
Section 2.15. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he or she is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
(b)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who has any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective city office or other city employment during the term for which he or she was elected. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person holding employment on the effective date of this Act. 
Section 2.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, a councilmember, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating Section 2.15 or any other express prohibition of this charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of any officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of four councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Pierce County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Pierce County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Blackshear. 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT, GENERAL AUTHORITY, AND ORDINANCES 

Section 3.10. - General power and authority. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this charter. 
Section 3.11. - Organization. 
(a)  The city council shall hold an organizational meeting at the first regular meeting on or before the second Tuesday in January following an election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(b)  By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during any disability or absence of the mayor. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. The city council shall by majority vote elect a presiding officer from its number for any period in which the mayor pro tempore is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor. Such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of the city council. 
Section 3.12. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Section 3.13. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or four members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
Section 3.14. - Procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Section 3.15. - Voting. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, four councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a rollcall vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Section 3.16. - Ordinances. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Blackshear hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 3.18 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Section 3.17. - Effect of ordinances. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Section 3.18. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance shall not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least four councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance shall also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Section 3.19. - Codes. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 3.16 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 3.20 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Section 3.20. - Codification of ordinances. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and shall contain such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Blackshear, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the code. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Section 3.21. - Chief executive officer; delegation of powers. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this charter, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act. The mayor shall have the authority to delegate any one or more executive or administrative powers to a person or persons employed by the city and qualified in management and administration. 
Section 3.22. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Appoint and remove, for cause, with confirmation of appointment or removal by the city council, all officers, department heads, and employees of the city except as otherwise provided in this charter; 
(3)  Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(4)  Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; 
(5)  Submit to the council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city and from time to time such other information as the city council may request; 
(6)  Call special meetings of the city council as provided for in Section 3.13 of this charter; 
(7)  Participate in the discussion of all matters brought before the city council and vote on such matters only in the case of a tie vote; 
(8)  Recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he or she may deem expedient; 
(9)  Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever he or she deems it expedient; 
(10)  Sign as a matter of course all written contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; and 
(11)  Perform such other duties as may be required by general state law, this charter, or ordinance. 
Section 3.23. - Mayor pro tempore. 
The city council shall appoint a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence when the city council is advised by the mayor of his or her disability or absence or when any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Section 4.10. - Department heads. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of such director's department or agency. 
(e)  All directors under the supervision of the mayor shall be nominated by the mayor with confirmation of appointment by the city council. The mayor may suspend or remove directors under the mayor's supervision but such suspension or removal shall not be effective for ten calendar days following the mayor's giving written notice of such action and the reason therefor to the director involved and to the city council. The director involved may appeal to the city council which, after a hearing, may override the mayor's action by a vote of four councilmembers. 
Section 4.11. - Boards. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of four members of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice-chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one of its members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, an ordinance of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Section 4.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney who shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and who shall have actively practiced law for at least one year. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the council as directed, shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of such person by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city attorney. 
Section 4.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city clerk. 
Section 4.14. - City treasurer. 
The city council shall appoint a city treasurer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes by the city. The city treasurer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city treasurer. 
Section 4.15. - City accountant. 
The mayor may appoint and the city council shall confirm a city accountant to perform the duties of accountant. 
Section 4.16. - Rules and regulations. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and applications of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE V. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Section 5.10. - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Blackshear. 
Section 5.11. - Judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of four members of the city council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the judge's office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 3.14 of this charter. 
Section 5.12. - Convening of court. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Section 5.13. - Powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine consistent with general law or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine consistent with general law or imprisonment for 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(i)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Section 5.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Pierce County, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 5.15. - Rules. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Section 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Section 6.11. - Millage rate. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 6.12. - Occupation taxes and business license fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.19 of this charter. 
Section 6.13. - Licenses. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individual or corporation who transacts business in this city or who practices or offers to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.19 of this charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by him or her. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Section 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.19 of this charter. 
Section 6.16. - Roads. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess, charge, and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.19 of this charter. 
Section 6.17. - Tax for promoting industry. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy an annual tax not to exceed one mill, in addition to all other taxes, for the purpose of creating a fund to be used exclusively for the following purposes: assisting, promoting, and encouraging the location of new industries in the City of Blackshear; assisting, promoting, and encouraging existing industries in the City of Blackshear; and promoting tourism in the City of Blackshear. 
Section 6.18. - Other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.19. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.18 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 6.20. - Borrowing. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.21. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.22. - Loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 6.23. - Accounting and budgeting. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Section 6.24. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. The city council shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
Section 6.25. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the mayor may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 6.26. - Adoption. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  After the conducting of a budget hearing, the city council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than June 30 of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.24 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Section 6.27. - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Section 6.28. - Changes in budget. 
The city council by majority vote may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes. 
Section 6.29. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with his or her recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 3.18 of this charter. 
(b)  After the conducting of a public hearing, the city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than June 30 of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his or her recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by majority vote of the city council. 
Section 6.30. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Section 6.31. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by him or her to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 3.14 of this charter. 
Section 6.32. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 6.33. - Sale of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Section 7.11. - Rules and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Section 7.12. - Charter language on other general matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 7.13. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural. 
Section 7.14. - Specific repealer. 
An Act reincorporating the City of Blackshear in Pierce County, approved February 9, 1949 (Ga. L. 1949, p. 461), as amended, is repealed in its entirety. 
Section 7.15. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
PUBLIC NOTICE 
Notice is given that there will be introduced at the regular 1993 session of the General Assembly of Georgia a bill to amend an Act amending, consolidating, creating, revising and superseding the several Acts incorporating the City of Blackshear in the County of Pierce and State of Georgia, approved February 9, 1949 (Ga. L. 1949, p. 461), as amended; and for other purposes. 
This 21st day of December, 1992. 

 
GEORGIA, FULTON COUNTY 
Personally appeared before me, the undersigned authority, duly authorized to administer oaths, Tommy Smith, who, on oath, deposes and says that he is Representative from the 169th District, and that the attached copy of Notice of Intention to Introduce Local Legislation was published in the Blackshear Times, which is the official organ of Pierce County, on the following date: December 30, 1992. 

 
Sworn to and subscribed before me, this 1st day of February, 1993. 

 
Approved March 19, 1993. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws in the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Charter of adopted ordinances included herein. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Blackshear, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
Charter. "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Blackshear, Georgia, as printed in Part I of this volume. 
City. "City" shall mean the City of Blackshear, Georgia. 
City council. "City council" shall mean the mayor and councilmembers of Blackshear, Georgia. 
Code. "Code" shall mean this Code of the City of Blackshear, Georgia as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Corporate limits. "Corporate limits" shall mean the corporate limits of the City of Blackshear. 
County. Whenever the words "county," "the county" or "this county" are used they shall refer to Pierce County, Georgia. 
Court. "Court" shall mean the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether the same shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month, year. "Month" and "year" shall mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Blackshear" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Person. "Person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. "Preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. "Property" includes real and personal property. 
Schedule of fees and charges. "Schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription includes the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
State. Whenever the words "state," "the state" or "this state" are used they shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
Street. "Street" shall include streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city, unless otherwise provided. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
Writing. "Writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations, and printed or written designs. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; references and editor's notes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of the City of Blackshear, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of the City of Blackshear, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, unless otherwise provided by state law, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, and by imprisonment in the city or county jail not to exceed six months, and to work on the city streets and public works not exceeding 60 days. Any one or more of these punishments may be inflicted, and the fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. Each day any such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Regulations pertaining to city employees on such subjects as employment policy, employee benefits, holidays, leaves of absence, travel, employee appraisals and drug-free workplace policy are contained in the city's personnel policies and procedures manual adopted Feb. 8, 1994, which is compiled and published separately by the city. An official copy of such manual is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
The city has established a retirement plan for the employees of the city which includes the joint trust agreement and the contract for the administration of said plan between the city and the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System as provided by O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq. An official copy of the retirement plan is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
The Pierce County, Blackshear, Patterson Development Code was adopted by the city pursuant to a resolution dated June 23, 1992. An official copy of the development code is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
The city's zoning ordinance and amendments are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IX, ¶ II; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Polling place. 
The polling place within the city shall be the city hall located at 314 East Taylor Street. 
(Code 1987, § 2-8) 
Charter reference— Elections, § 2.11. 
State Law reference— Duty of municipal governing authority to fix location of polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-163. 
Sec. 2-2. - Assistant city attorney. 
(a)  Assistant city attorney. The city council is authorized and empowered to appoint an assistant city attorney who shall act in the absence of the regularly appointed city attorney. The qualification requirements of the assistant city attorney shall be the same as for the city attorney. 
(b)  Oath. Before entering upon the duties of the office, the assistant city attorney shall take the oath prescribed by the charter for city officers. 
(Code 1987, § 2-9(b), (c)) 
Charter reference— City attorney, § 4.12. 
Sec. 2-3. - Personnel policy. 
(a)  Any employee of the City of Blackshear who is required by the duties of his/her employment with the city to drive any motor vehicle owned by or utilized by the city whose license to drive is suspended due to a criminal conviction of, entry of a plea of nolo contendere or a plea of guilty to or any other disposition of any charges for a violation of any state, federal or local laws, statute or ordinance, other than a dismissal of said charges, or whose license to drive is suspended by any administrative procedure for such violation(s) shall, subject to the provisions of subsection (b) hereof, be terminated from his/her position of employment by the city. 
(b)  (1)  Provided, however, any employee of the city who license is suspended as set forth in subsection (a), hereby, shall be placed on an unpaid leave of absence for a period of 45 days prior to termination from his/her position of employment by the city. 
(2)  Upon written proof of reinstatement of said employee's license to drive, said employee may be reinstated to his/her position of employment with the city. 
(3)  Upon the expiration of the employee's 45-day unpaid leave of absence without reinstatement of his/her license to drive, said employee's termination from his/her position of employment shall be permanent. 
(Ord. of 5-12-98) 
Secs. 2-4—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council creation; composition; number; election, § 2.10. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1. 

Sec. 2-31. - Time of regular meetings; location. 
The city council shall hold regular monthly meetings on the second Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. at the city hall. 
(Code 1987, § 2-27; Ord. of 2-13-06, § 1) 
Charter reference— Meetings, § 3.13. 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-32. - Duty to attend. 
It shall be the duty of each member of the council to attend each meeting of the council, unless such member is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. 
(Code 1987, § 2-27) 
Sec. 2-33. - Rules for the conduct of business. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the conduct of council meetings. 
(1)  Call to order. All meetings of the council shall be open to the public. The mayor, or in the mayor's absence, the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special, or called meeting; and shall immediately call the council to order. 
(2)  Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk or the clerk's deputy shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(3)  Order of business. The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: 
a.  Call to order by presiding officer. 
b.  Roll call. 
c.  Approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
d.  Petitions and communications. 
e.  Reports of standing committees. 
f.  Reports of special committees. 
g.  Unfinished business. 
h.  New business. 
i.  Adjournment. 
Amendment to the above order of business is authorized when desired by the presiding officer on the condition that all items of business are covered. 
(4)  Reading of minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a council member, such minutes may be approved without a reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. 
(5)  Reports by committees. Any business coming before the city council concerning the subject matter of which any standing or special committee has jurisdiction, may be referred to the proper committee for investigation and report. It shall be the duty of each standing or special committee, whenever required by the mayor or by the city council, or any member of the city council, to examine any matter referred to such committee, and make a report thereof at the next regular meeting of the city council, or show good cause why no report is made. Such reports shall not be in writing unless so directed by the presiding officer. Each standing committee shall examine into the condition of the matters within its jurisdiction, and make such reports and recommendations from time to time as may be necessary. 
(6)  Manner of addressing council. No member, while the city council is in session, shall speak on any subject unless recognized by the presiding officer. Every speaker shall address the chair, and no member shall interrupt anyone who is speaking, except to call such person to order or for explanation. 
(7)  Limitations on addressing council. Any person not a member of city council who desires to address the council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer so to do, and then shall step up, give such person's name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and direct the remarks to the council as a body rather than to any particular member, limiting such remarks to ten minutes unless additional time is granted by council. 
(8)  Recording vote. Whenever any member shall request it, the ayes and nays of the members present shall be recorded on the minutes on any question taken. 
(9)  Questions of order. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any council member who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the city council in the manner provided by Robert's Rules of Order for appealing from decisions of presiding officers. 
(10)  Elections. All elections by the city council shall be by ballot, and a majority vote of the whole council shall be necessary to an election. 
(11)  Executive session. The city council may, at any time, upon call thereof by the presiding officer or upon motion duly carried by the council, meet in executive session. Attendance at such sessions shall be limited to the mayor and members of council and such invitees as shall be invited with the unanimous consent of the council. 
(12)  Deadline for agenda items. Except in emergency situations, all items to be presented to the council for formal vote, approval, or other action shall first be placed upon a work session agenda for consideration by the council. The following deadlines shall apply with respect to placing items on the agenda for city council meetings: 
a.  Items not requiring legal review by the city attorney must be submitted to the city clerk no later than noon on the day of the work session and shall be included on the work session agenda for discussion; 
b.  Items requiring legal review by the city attorney must be submitted to the city clerk at least two weeks prior the council meeting at which such item is to be considered as an agenda item, and such item shall also be included on the agenda of the work session held immediately prior to such council meeting; 
c.  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the city council from amending any work session or meeting agenda to include an item not placed upon such agenda in accordance with the foregoing deadlines, but such amendment shall require a two-thirds vote of the councilmembers present and voting. 
(Code 1987, § 2-29; Ord. of 7-10-07(1), § 1; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 3-8-16) 
Charter reference— Procedures, § 3.14. 
Sec. 2-34. - Preparation, etc., of ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced, and adopted in the following manner: 
(1)  Preparation. All ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council, or requested in writing by the mayor, or prepared by the city attorney on the attorney's own initiative. 
(2)  Administrative staff approval. All ordinances, resolutions, and contract documents shall, before presentation to the council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney or the attorney's authorized representative, and shall have been examined and approved for administration by the mayor or the mayor's authorized representative where there are substantive matters of administration involved. All such instruments shall have first been referred to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction the administration of the subject matter of the ordinance, resolution or contract document would devolve and be approved by such department head; provided, however, that if approval is not given, then the same shall be returned to the mayor with a written memorandum of the reasons such approval is withheld. If the questioned instrument is not redrafted to meet a department head objection, or objection is not withdrawn and approval in writing given, then the mayor shall so advise the council and give the reasons advanced by the department head for withholding approval. 
(3)  Introduction and adoption. 
a.  Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council, except that the mayor or city attorney may present ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects, and any council member may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be adopted. 
b.  No ordinance shall be put on its final passage on the same day on which it is introduced. 
c.  All ordinances shall have two separate readings, except that second reading shall never be had on the same day as the first reading. 
d.  No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title, and no ordinance or section thereof, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed, and when practicable all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
e.  An ordinance, resolution, or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives the affirmative vote of a majority of the whole council. For the purposes of tallying such votes, a vote of abstention shall be deemed a negative vote. 
(4)  Effective date. No ordinance shall take effect until five days after the date of its publication, except that an ordinance passed by a majority of the membership of the council, designated therein as a public emergency ordinance necessary for the protection of public health, public safety, public property, or the public peace, may be made effective upon adoption. 
(Code 1987, § 2-31) 
Charter reference— Ordinances, § 3.16. 
Sec. 2-35. - Veto, taking effect of ordinance. 
(a)  The mayor, within five calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the clerk with or without his approval. 
(b)  If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law after publication. If the ordinance is neither approved or disapproved by 12:00 noon on the fifth calendar day after its adoption, publication of ordinance will be ordered by the clerk. If the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the council through the clerk a written statement of such official's reasons for the veto. The clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the clerk to the council at its next regular meeting and should the council then or at its next regular meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of four members, it shall become law. 
(Code 1987, § 2-32) 
Secs. 2-36—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY CLERK AND TREASURER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— City clerk, § 4.13; city treasurer, § 4.14. 
State Law reference— Power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2). 

Sec. 2-61. - Election. 
The city council shall at its first regular meeting after election and qualification elect a city clerk and treasurer. 
(Code 1987, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-62. - Term of office. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall hold office at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1987, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-63. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of the officer, the city clerk and treasurer shall give a good and sufficient bond, payable to the city council, such bond to be fixed and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1987, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-64. - Duties as city clerk. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall have the following duties in the capacity of city clerk: 
(1)  Attend all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Keep correct and full minutes of the proceedings of city council together with all ordinances and resolutions passed by it, in a properly indexed book or register for that purpose; 
(3)  Receive all applications or petitions made to the city and to place them before the city council at the meeting of council next succeeding the receipt thereof; 
(4)  Issue licenses, and keep record thereof, and all permits authorized by the mayor or council; 
(5)  Be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; and 
(6)  Carefully preserve the records and documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of some other office, and to maintain a proper index to all such records and documents so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had. 
(Code 1987, § 2-43) 
Sec. 2-65. - Duties as city treasurer. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall have the following duties in the capacity of city treasurer: 
(1)  Receive all money due the city council, including taxes, and pay out the same only upon orders passed by the city council and signed by the mayor, or in the mayor's absence, the mayor pro tempore; 
(2)  Keep a book of accounts showing all money received on behalf of the city and source and disposition thereof, which book shall be open for inspection by the public and the mayor and city council members; 
(3)  Maintain a uniform system of accounts and keep such other records and accounts as may be required by statute or ordinances; and 
(4)  Furnish the council with quarterly statements detailing all receipts and payments of funds for the quarter. 
(Code 1987, § 2-44) 
Secs. 2-66—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Department heads, § 4.10. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-91. - Departmental organization. 
The administrative service of the city shall be divided into the following departments and heads thereof: 

 
(Code 1987, § 2-70) 
Sec. 2-92. - Employment authority of department heads. 
Each department head, subject to the approval of mayor, shall have authority to employ the necessary personnel, as authorized by council action, to perform the duties of the department, and it shall be the responsibility of each such department head to determine by the physician's report and the applicant's history whether such applicant has the qualifications for the particular position applied for. 
(Code 1987, § 2-50) 
Secs. 2-93—2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 2-111. - Composition. 
The department of public works shall consist of the superintendent of public works, who shall be the head of the department, and all officers and employees assigned thereto by the city council. 
(Code 1987, § 2-80) 
Sec. 2-112. - Duties. 
The superintendent of public works shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Do the buying for the needs of the different sections under such superintendent's supervision, in conformity with the purchasing regulations; 
(2)  Provide for and supervise the care, maintenance, construction and extension of all streets, sidewalks, street gutters and drains, alleys, and public ways; 
(3)  Have charge of and be responsible for the care, maintenance, and operation of the city water distribution system, the sanitary sewer system and disposal plant, and the street lighting system; 
(4)  Have charge of and supervision over all public property of the city, including all parks, parkways, playgrounds, municipal cemeteries, buildings, and utilities not assigned to some other department or officer; 
(5)  Have charge of the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse; 
(6)  Have charge of and be responsible for the condition of all motor vehicles and other equipment of the city, and of all buildings or places in which the same are housed or kept; 
(7)  Be the custodian of all tools, equipment, and other personal property belonging to the city and not assigned to the care of any other public officer of the city; and 
(8)  Perform such additional duties as may be assigned to such superintendent from time to time by the mayor. 
(Code 1987, § 2-82) 
Secs. 2-113—2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-131. - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other officers and personnel as the city council shall prescribe. 
(Code 1987, § 2-90) 
Sec. 2-132. - Duties of police chief. 
The police chief shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Attend all meetings of the city council and all trials before the municipal court; 
(2)  See to the proper service of all summonses, subpoenas, citations, executions, attachments, and rules of the city council; 
(3)  See to the collection of all fines and costs imposed by the municipal court; 
(4)  See that the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and all statutes applicable therein are faithfully enforced; 
(5)  Preserve the public peace, prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators thereof; 
(6)  Protect the rights of persons and property; 
(7)  Oversee the conduct of the officers and other personnel of the police force, and to be held strictly responsible for such conduct and for the general good order of the department; 
(8)  Keep adequate records of all personnel and equipment of the department, including a log of all questions, activities, and investigations; 
(9)  Submit a monthly report to the council outlining the number and type of arrests for state offenses, the number and type of cases involving violations of municipal ordinances, and the number of arrests made and cases reported by each police officer; 
(10)  Submit monthly to the state crime information center the report prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 35-3-36; 
(11)  Discharge such other duties as may be required of such officer by the mayor or city council. 
(Code 1987, § 2-91(c)) 
Sec. 2-133. - Acting chief. 
Upon the resignation, removal, death, or disability of the police chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been duly appointed. 
(Code 1987, § 2-91(d)) 
Secs. 2-134—2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-151. - Composition. 
The fire department shall consist of a chief and such subordinate officers and firefighters as may from time to time be provided for by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1987, § 2-100) 
Sec. 2-152. - Responsibilities and duties of fire chief. 
The fire chief shall be responsible for and have control over the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging to the city, and shall have the following duties: 
(1)  See to the proper and speedy extinguishment of all accidental or intentionally caused fires; 
(2)  See to the enforcement of the city fire prevention code; 
(3)  Keep or cause to be kept adequate records of all fires, inspections, equipment, fire prevention efforts, and other activities of the department; 
(4)  Submit a monthly written report to the city council on the activities of the department; 
(5)  Establish rules and regulations concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care, and management of the fire department, subject to approval by the city council; 
(6)  Investigate the causes of all extensive or destructive fires occurring within the city. 
(Code 1987, § 2-101(b)) 
Sec. 2-153. - Acting chief. 
Upon the resignation, removal, death, or disability of the fire chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been appointed. 
(Code 1987, § 2-101) 
Sec. 2-154. - Command at fires. 
In case of fire, the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire in the best manner possible. Such commanding officer may cause buildings to be removed, torn down, or destroyed when such acts are necessary for the protection of other property and for the prevention of the spread of the conflagration. 
(Code 1987, § 2-104) 
Sec. 2-155. - Persons permitted within vicinity of fire. 
No person, other than firefighters, city officials, police officers, and the property owner or agent, shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of a fire, unless such person is given permission to do so by the fire chief. 
(Code 1987, § 2-105) 
Sec. 2-156. - Person permitted on apparatus. 
No persons other than members of the fire department shall be permitted to ride upon the firefighting apparatus in going to or returning from fires. 
(Code 1987, § 2-106) 
Sec. 2-157. - Use of equipment outside city. 
Upon the orders of the fire chief or the mayor, members of the fire department are authorized to go outside the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of extinguishing fires or rendering aid to other fire departments, or for rendering aid in the case of accidents. 
(Code 1987, § 2-108) 
Secs. 2-158—2-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Finance, art. VI. 
State Law reference— Discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease by municipality of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq.; disposition of municipal property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; authority to dispose of public utility plants or properties, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-7; grants of state funds to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-176. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30. 
(Code 1987, § 9-1) 
State Law reference— Establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Secs. 2-177—2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Capital equipment means items of a major nature having a useful life generally in excess of one year as opposed to items which lose their identity through incorporation into or with other items. Examples: land, motor vehicles, water towers, etc. 
Competitive bids means bids received as a result of advertising for supplies or services when required to be obtained by bids as opposed to local purchase in small quantities. 
Performance bond means a bond required in certain contracts whereby the contractor consents to perform such contractor's portion of a contract within a prescribed time period and in accordance with provisions of the contract. Failure on the contractor's part to do so results in the bond becoming payable to the city. 
Purchasing agent means the individual appointed by the mayor with advice and the consent of the city council, who is charged with all purchases for the city, including capital equipment, land, supplies and services necessary for the proper operation of the city government. 
(Code 1987, § 9-20) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-192. - Purchasing agent—Creation of position; term of office; assignment of duties. 
(a)  There is hereby created the position of purchasing agent. The term of office shall be for an indefinite period or until a successor is appointed and installed. 
(b)  The duties of purchasing agent shall be assigned to the city clerk. 
(Code 1987, § 9-21) 
Sec. 2-193. - Same—Duties. 
The duties of the purchasing agent shall be to ensure that all the steps of the purchasing policies and procedures, as prescribed in this division, are followed and completed; that the prices for items ordered are the best that can be obtained in the local market or elsewhere; that the necessary forms and reports are prepared and filed; and such other duties as may be necessary to ensure efficient purchasing practices or responsibilities as may be prescribed by the mayor or the city council, or both. 
(Code 1987, § 9-22) 
Sec. 2-194. - Same—Authority to handle bids; violations by employees. 
All purchases or contracts to purchase supplies or services shall be made by the purchasing agent after prescribed procedures have been followed. No officer or employee of the city shall handle purchasing operations for any materials or services except through the purchasing agent; no bid shall be honored or awarded if this method is not followed. It shall be considered a breach of duty on the part of any officer or employee of the city who ignores proper purchasing procedures and does not follow the policies prescribed by this article. 
(Code 1987, § 9-23) 
Sec. 2-195. - Same—Use of competitive bids; records open to inspection. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the purchasing agent to make all purchases, except those within prescribed bid limits, on the competitive bid basis. 
(b)  Record of all bids for goods, services or materials of any kind or character purchased by the city shall be subject to inspection at any time by the public. 
(Code 1987, § 9-24) 
Sec. 2-196. - Operations of purchasing system. 
(a)  The mayor, or his or her designee, shall procure and purchase all the materials, equipment, vehicles, supplies and contractual services for the city using competitive bidding from suppliers, to attain and buy from the "lowest and best" bidders meeting specifications. All purchases and contracts estimated to cost over $5,000.00 shall be based on: 
(1)  Formal written bids, and shall have written notices, newspaper advertisements, specifications, sealed bids, public opening of bids, bid deposits or bonds as deemed necessary; 
(2)  Formal request for proposals, and shall have written notices, newspaper advertisements, specifications, sealed proposals, public opening of proposals, bid deposits or bonds as deemed necessary; or 
(3)  Online auction services, including, but not limited to reverse auction services; and 
(4)  Shall all be approved by majority vote of the city council. 
(b)  All purchases and contracts estimated to cost from $3,001.00 to $5,000.00 shall be based, whenever possible, on written competitive quotations, by letter inquiry, or formal written bids, as deemed applicable by the mayor, or his or her designee, and shall be approved by the mayor, or his or her designee. 
(c)  All budgeted purchasing and contracts estimated to cost $3,000.00 or less shall be based, whenever possible, on competitive quotations, either from telephone or letter inquiry, and shall be approved by the mayor, or his or her designee, or the department head making such purchase. 
(d)  "Lowest and best bid" criteria shall include price, and in addition, the mayor, or his or her designee, the department head, and city council shall consider ability, capacity, skill, character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, efficiency, previous performance, compliance to law, service, maintenance ability and financial resources of bidders. Products shall be evaluated on quality, availability, adaptability, delivery time and future maintenance and service. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this Code to the contrary, the Mayor and/or the City Council of Blackshear may proclaim an emergency and may authorize the mayor, or his or her designee, to procure by purchase or lease such goods and services as are deemed necessary and appropriate for the city's emergency response effort. This emergency procurement maybe made in the open market with or without advertisement. The mayor, or his or her designee, shall use his best efforts to obtain competitive pricing for such emergency goods and services, and shall, where possible require sealed bids for such goods and services, and advertise for the procurement for such goods and services. Such emergency procedures shall not be used in violation or contravention of state and federal laws or regulations. The mayor, or his or her designee, shall provide for the council a full written report of all procurements, together with a requisition for the required goods and services during the emergency. 
(Code 1987, § 9-25; Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1, 10-8-13) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the City of Blackshear purchasing annexes, as amended from time to time, are not set out at length herein but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city administrator. 
Secs. 2-197—2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUDGET 

Sec. 2-216. - Transfer of appropriations. 
The mayor may at any time during the fiscal year transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department or office, and the city council may by ordinance transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or office to another, except that no appropriation for debt service or capital improvements may be reduced or transferred during any fiscal year, and under no circumstances may the expenditures exceed the total of the budget. 
(Code 1987, § 9-44) 
Sec. 2-217. - Emergency appropriations. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the city council may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a budget, for a purpose which was not foreseen at the time of the adoption thereof, or for which adequate provision was not made therein. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property, or the public peace, and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues or surplus. If there is no surplus, then temporary borrowing in notes may be made, provided that any such borrowed amounts are included as an appropriation in the next succeeding year's budget. 
(Code 1987, § 9-45) 
Sec. 2-218. - Lapse of appropriations. 
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the next succeeding year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
(Code 1987, § 9-46) 
Sec. 2-219. - Publication of financial statement. 
Within six months after the close of the fiscal year, a statement of revenues and expenditures, that fairly represents the financial condition of the city and that shows all municipal accounts as of the close of such preceding fiscal year, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1987, § 9-47) 
Secs. 2-220—2-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY RETIREMENT PLAN[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-08, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 14, 2011, enacted provisions which did not specify manner of inclusion. Hence, to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been included herein as art. VI, § 2-241. 

Sec. 2-241. - City retirement plan. 
(a)  The retirement plan for the employees of the City of Blackshear, Georgia is hereby restated as set forth in and subject to the terms and conditions stated in the following adoption agreement, and addendum to the adoption agreement, the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System (GMEBS) Master Plan Document, and the GMEBS Trust Agreement. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically required by law or by the terms of the master plan or adoption agreement (or any addendum), the rights and obligations under the plan with respect to persons whose employment or term of office with the city was terminated for any reason whatsoever prior to the effective date of this section [Ordinance No. 2011-08] are fixed and shall be governed by such plan, if any, as it existed and was in effect at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, §§ 1, 2, 11-14-11) 
Secs. 2-242—2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OUT-OF-TOWN TRAVEL EXPENDITURES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-05, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 12, 2012, enacted provisions which did not specify manner of inclusion. Hence, to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been included herein as art. VII, §§ 2-251, 2-252. 

Sec. 2-251. - Prior approval for out-of-town travel—In general. 
All out-of-town travel in connection with city business shall be given prior approval by the mayor before any public funds of the city are expended on such travel. In the event that the mayor does not give prior approval for such out-of-town travel, the council may consider such request for out-of-town travel and approve such request by the affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers present at any meeting where a quorum is present, and the council's decision in that regard shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-252. - Prior approval for out-of-town travel—Mayor. 
With respect to out-of-town travel by the mayor in connection with city business, such travel shall be given prior approval by the mayor pro-tem before any public funds of the city are expended on such travel. In the event that the mayor pro-tem does not give prior approval for such out-of-town travel, the council may consider such request for out-of-town travel and approve such request by the affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers present at any meeting where a quorum is present, and the council's decision in that regard shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, § 2, 6-12-12) 
Secs. 2-253—2-279. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CODE OF ETHICS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, adopted Feb. 12, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as art. VI, §§ 2-220—2-230. To preserve the style of this Code and to avoid duplicate of section numbers, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. VIII, §§ 2-280—2-290. 

Sec. 2-280. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 2-281. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 2-282. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
(a)  City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined herein, does not generally include city employees, but shall specifically include the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city Charter, as amended. The term "city official" shall also include all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
(b)  Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action, or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
(c)  Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
(d)  Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son, or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption, or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
(e)  Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest, held by or accruing to a city official as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A city official shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the city official's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person or entity with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the city official may receive any payment or other benefit, unless the city official is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business or entity in which the city official is a director, officer, employee, member, manager, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided in this article; or 
(4)  Any person or entity of whom the city official is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor. 
(f)  Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of a city official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 2-283. - Prohibitions. 
No city official shall: 
(1)  Use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city; 
(2)  By any conduct, give a reasonable basis for the impression that any person or entity can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of official acts; 
(3)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise or thing of value for himself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the city official in the discharge of official duties; 
(4)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law which is applicable to him by virtue of being a city official; 
(5)  In any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has an interest, other than a remote interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable; 
(6)  Act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body; 
(7)  Directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office, except as may be provided by law or ordinance; 
(8)  Enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law or as follows: 
a.  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city; 
b.  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator, or chief of police); 
c.  Any official who has an interest in an entity doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(9)  Use any public funds for personal economic gain; 
(10)  Dispose of any public property, except as in accordance with state law and city policy; 
(11)  Solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties; furthermore, if a city official accepts, or is soliciting a promise of, future employment from any person or entity who has an interest in a person, entity, or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer; 
(12)  Use city facilities, personnel, equipment, or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public; 
(13)  Grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage, or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large; 
(14)  Directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest; 
(15)  Use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest; 
(16)  Attempt to obligate the city, nor give the impression of obligating the city, without proper prior authorization; 
(17)  Draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training, or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore; or 
(18)  Attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Blackshear, nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a Municipal Court Judge of the City of Blackshear, on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Blackshear. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 2-284. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has an interest, or than a remote interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is a remote interest, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 2-285. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  The board of ethics of the city shall consist of three members, one appointed by the mayor, two appointed by the city council. All members shall serve a two-year term; provided, however, that among the three members appointed immediately following adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives, one shall serve for one year, one shall serve for two years, and one shall serve for three years, so as to provide staggered two-year terms for all future board members. All members shall meet the following prerequisites and conditions for service on the board: 
(1)  All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city and shall remain a resident while serving on the board; 
(2)  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city; 
(3)  Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint, shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint; an alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual; 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide adequate meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities; 
(5)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude; 
(6)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the City of Blackshear; 
(7)  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics; 
(8)  Members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of the city governing authority for cause including, but not limited to, failure to maintain any requirement or condition for qualification to serve on the board of ethics. 
(b)  The city clerk shall maintain a current list of the board members. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 2-286. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city official(s) shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall present it to the mayor and council. The mayor and council may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the city clerk shall serve a copy of such complaint upon the city official(s) charged in such complaint as set forth in section 2-287. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a properly verified complaint, and service of that complaint upon the city official(s) charged in the complaint, the mayor and council, at the next regularly scheduled public meeting or at a specially called public meeting, shall officially appoint the board of ethics to investigate the complaint. The three members of the board shall decide which of them shall serve as chairperson for such investigation and hearing. 
(d)  The board members shall review the complaint to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The board of ethics is empowered to dismiss summarily in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not summarily dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(e)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(f)  In investigating any complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(g)  The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(h)  Upon completion of its investigation of any complaint, the board of ethics shall submit its findings and recommendations to the city council for possible action as set forth in subsection 2-288(c). Such findings and recommendations may be submitted in writing or orally by the chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 2-287. - Service of complaint. 
The city clerk shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official(s) charged as soon as practicable, but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by statutory overnight delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 2-288. - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)  At least one hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint; if the board determines more than one hearing is necessary, other hearings may be scheduled and held by the board as soon as practicable so as not to delay any final decision. The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it shall establish. 
(b)  The city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing and the allegations to be considered at such hearing at least seven calendar days prior to such hearing; shall have the right to be represented by counsel; shall have the right to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses; and shall have the right to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right, but not the obligation, of submitting evidence and calling witnesses on his/her behalf. 
(c)  The finding(s) and recommendation(s) of the board of ethics shall be rendered to the mayor and council within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing, and a copy of the same shall be mailed to the city official subject to the inquiry. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, failure to comply with any of the time deadlines in this section of the ordinance shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 2-289. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. Upon any such appeal, the board of ethics and the city shall be represented by the city attorney. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Pierce County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(c)  The review by the superior court shall be a de novo investigation. The appeal brings up the whole record from the board and the city council, and all competent evidence shall be admissible on the trial thereof, whether adduced at a former hearing or not. Either party is entitled to be heard on the whole merits of the case. If the court finds no error, it shall affirm the decision of the board of ethics. If it finds by a preponderance of the evidence that such action was: 
(1)  Arbitrary or capricious; 
(2)  A denial of a statutory right; 
(3)  Contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege or immunity; 
(4)  In excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, purposes or limitation; 
(5)  Not in accord with the procedures or procedural limitations of this section or otherwise required by law; 
(6)  An abuse or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion, unsupported by any evidence when the record is considered as a whole; or 
(7)  Otherwise contrary to law; 
the court shall hold the decision unlawful and set aside the decision of the board of ethics. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 2-290. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)  Written and oral reprimand by the council, board, commission or committee of which such city official is a member; or 
(2)  Request for resignation by the council, board, commission or committee of which such city official is a member; or 
(3)  Removal from office as provided in section 2.16 of the City Charter; or 
(4)  Any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 2-12-13) 
Secs. 2-291—2-310. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of June 14, 1999 amended ch. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-65, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1987, §§ 3-1—3-3; and Ord. of Aug. 1995, § 1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms as used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
Alcoholic beverages: Whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, cordials, beer, wine or any other liquid having more than one-half percent of alcohol by volume, used as a beverage. 
Consumption on the premises: The sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink and for consumption only on the premises. 
Hotel: A building or other structure, kept, used, maintained advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent, or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests. Motels meeting the qualifications set herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operations of a lounge or restaurant in their premises and the holder of such franchisee shall be included in the definition of hotel thereunder. 
License: The authorization by the city council to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages: Any person duly licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Liquor: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation, or containing more than 21 percent by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Lounge: A separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in hotels as defined herein, or a separate establishment, with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air-conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 25. A lounge, as defined herein, which is operated on a different floor in the premises, or in a separate building, or is not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant shall be considered a separate establishment and shall pay an additional license fee therefor. 
Malt beverage: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of said products and water, containing not more than six percent by volume, and including ale, port, brown, stout, lager beer, beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake known as Japanese rice wine. 
Person: Any individual, company, corporation, association, partnership, or other legal entity. 
Premises or business premises: The definite closed or partitioned-in locality whether a room, shop or building, for which the sale of alcoholic beverage is licensed. 
Private club: A corporation organized and existing under the laws of this state, or a fraternal or veterans organizations actively in operation within the city at least one year immediately prior to the application for a license hereunder, having at least 75 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, semi-annual or annual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any share-holder or member and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members; provided that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profit from the sale of spirituous liquors to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at an annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
Public recreational facility: Any public property within the corporate limits of the City of Blackshear where regularly scheduled recreational activities are conducted by a public agency with said activities being open to the general public. 
Retail dealer or distributor: Any person selling to the general public alcoholic beverages not to be consumed on the premises and not for resale. 
Restaurant: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place were meals are served, and where meals actually are served and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity, and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. 
Tavern manager: Any person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink or for consumption only on the premises. 
Wine: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparking wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Wholesale dealer or distributor: Any person engaged in distribution or selling to licensees for the resale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-2. - Purchase, possession of alcohol by persons under the legal age, as set by state law. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age, as set by state law, to purchase or possess, in or upon any public way or public property, any alcohol beverages. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-3. - Drinking and possession of alcohol by persons under the legal age, as set by state law. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age, as set by state law, to drink or possess any alcoholic beverage on private property. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-4. - Furnishing alcohol to persons under the legal age as set by state law; permitting minors, as set by state law, to be upon premises where alcoholic beverages are sold. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly, directly, or through another person, furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person and such persons employed to furnish alcoholic beverages to any person under 21 years of age; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state, or at a religious ceremony. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages as defined herein (which shall include any person holding a license under "Chapter 6, Alcoholic Beverages" of this Code) knowingly, by himself or through another, whether an agent or employee or otherwise, to permit upon the premises or business premises during hours when alcoholic beverages are being served or sold, any person who is a minor, as set by state law; provided, however, this section shall not apply to a restaurant (as defined in section 6-1) where alcoholic beverages are served or commercial establishment where such beverages are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-5. - Dealing with drunkards. 
No licensee under this chapter shall give, sell, or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to said licensee. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-6. - Consumption in places selling food. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic beverages in any public place of business where food, beer or soft drinks are sold for the purpose of consumption off premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is in charge of any public place of business where food, beer or soft drinks are sold for the purpose of consumption off premises to permit drinking of alcoholic beverages within such place of business located in the city. 
(c)  Provided, however, that the foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply in or to those places of business holding a valid license to engage in the business of alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises issued under the ordinances of the city authorizing the same. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-7. - Consumption upon public ways, public street or highway, public property or public place. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverages in or upon any public way, public street or highway, public property, or public place. "Public street or highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Public place" is defined in section 1-2 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-8. - Times for sale. 
No licensee under this chapter shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages at any of the following times. 
(1)  At any time in violation of the state law or rules or regulations of the state revenue commissioner, except that the sale of alcoholic beverages or liquors within the corporate limits of the city on any election days shall not be permitted and shall be unlawful; or 
(2)  At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or a special order of the city council; or 
(3)  On any day from 1:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
Sec. 6-9. - Sanitary conditions. 
All premises used for the sale of alcoholic beverages, or the storage of alcoholic beverages for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with all state and local ordinances, statutes and regulations regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-10. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to any individual, partnership or corporation unless the proposed location is in compliance with state law. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted unless the following distance requirements, as measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street or highway, are met. 
(1)  The entire business premises of the proposed location shall be situated 200 yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus. 
(2)  The entire business premises of the proposed location shall be situated 100 yards from the property line of any church, provided, that this restriction shall not apply to those places of business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages prior to the location of a church within the prohibited distance. 
(3)  The entire business premises of the proposed location shall be situated 100 yards from the property line of any public recreation facility. 
(c)  Each application for an alcoholic beverage license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance of the nearest school ground, college campus, church or public recreation facility or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this section. 
(d)  The restriction as to locations herein contained, except for restrictions required by state law, shall not apply to the following businesses: 
(1)  Any applicant for a location within a C-4 Central Business District. 
(2)  Any licensee approved to sell alcoholic beverages prior to November 1, 1986, said licensees being restricted by location requirements in effect prior to the date hereinabove. 
(3)  Any location where one or more licenses issued under this chapter is in effect on or before January 1, 1987, and where the licensee sells or transfers the business thereon; provided, however, the proposed purchaser or transferee must be qualified to be licensee under the terms and provisions of this chapter. For the purposes of this section passing of ownership of the business because of death or a probate court proceeding shall be considered as a sale or transfer. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-11. - Business restricted. 
No licensee, except a wholesale distributor who does not sell to the general public, shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverage to any person except in said licensee's place of business. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-12. - Type of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited in establishments. 
The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve, or dispense alcohol beverages for consumption on such premises within the incorporated area of the City of Blackshear, Georgia. 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttock, vulva and genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) above or where such person (persons) perform(s) acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
b.  The caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event of any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) above; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theater which derives less than 20 percent of its gross income from the sale of alcohol beverages. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Secs. 6-13—6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-21. - Separate place of business. 
A separate alcoholic beverage license shall be required for each separate business premises. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-21.1. - Notice. 
An applicant for retail dealer license for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city shall cause a legal advertisement to be published in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-4-27. Said notice shall be published at least once during the 30 days immediately preceding the filing of the application for license and shall contain the information required by said section. The applicant shall at the time of filing the application with the city present a copy of the legal advertisement and shall indicate the date of publication and the newspaper published. Said advertisement shall contain not less than the following information: (1) the type of license for which application has been filed; (2) the exact location of the place of business for which a license is sought; (3) the names and addresses of each owner of the business; and (4) if the applicant is a corporation, the names and titles of all corporate officers. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-22. - Separate license per class. 
A separate alcoholic beverages license is required for each class of business as listed below: 
(1)  Beer and wine—Retail. 
(2)  Liquor and distilled spirits—Pouring. 
(3)  Beer, wine and liquor—Retail. 
(4)  Beer and wine—Pouring. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-23. - One license per place of business. 
Only one alcoholic beverage license at a time in each class shall be issued to each separate business premise. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-24. - Display. 
Licenses issued under this chapter shall be displayed prominently in public view at all times on the premises for which same was issued. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-25. - Suspension. 
The city council shall have the right, upon the recommendation of the chief of police, to suspend any alcoholic beverage license pending the hearing provided for hereinbelow, where in the judgment of the council, such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-26. - Revocation; civil penalties—Grounds. 
(a)  Any license issued pursuant to "chapter 6, Alcoholic Beverages" of this Code shall be subject to revocation on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The licensee or its designee ceases to become a resident of Pierce County, Georgia. 
(2)  The licensee ceases to become a citizen of the United States. 
(3)  The licensee is convicted of a felony after issuance of the license or licenses. 
(4)  The licensee is convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality. 
(5)  The licensee's Georgia state license for the sale of any alcoholic beverage as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 should be revoked. 
(6)  If the licensee is a partnership and one or more partners should cease to be a copartner. 
(7)  If the licensee is a corporation, and if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning 25 percent or more of the stock of such corporation, ceases to be eligible to receive an alcoholic beverage license under this chapter 6 for any reason other than residence in Pierce County. 
(8)  If the person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent and the manager or agent ceases to have the same qualifications required of an individual licensee. 
(9)  If the licensee is convicted of a violation of any federal, state law or city ordinance concerning the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages (as defined in either O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 or as defined in section 6-1 of this Code) or who shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation. 
(10)  If the licensee ceases to own the premises for which the license(s) are held, or, if the premises are held pursuant to a lease, and the lease terminates while the license(s) would otherwise be in force and effect. 
(b)  Any person violating the rules and regulations set out in this chapter, including, but not limited to, those rules and regulations set forth in subsection (a) above, shall be subject to revocation of his license and punishment as prescribed by the city council. In addition to the rules and regulations hereinabove set out, each licensee doing business in the city under this chapter shall comply with all the laws of the state, federal laws, and rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state, and any violation of same shall subject said licensee to immediate suspension or revocation of his retail liquor license and any other license issued by the city under this chapter, and also subject said licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by law, this Code and the ordinances of the city. 
(c)  The city council, in addition to or in lieu of revocation of a license issued pursuant to this chapter, may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation on any licensee violating one or more of the following: 
(1)  Any rule, regulation, or provision set forth in this chapter; 
(2)  The laws of the state governing or regulating the sale and/or distribution of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  The rules and regulations of the revenue commissioner of the state governing or regulating the sale and/or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99; Ord. No. 2013-10, §§ 1, 2, 6-11-13) 
Sec. 6-27. - Same—Procedure. 
No license which has been issued by the city under this chapter shall be revoked or suspended except for due cause. Upon information provided to the council concerning any licensee shall be given notice, in writing, to show cause before the council at a time and place specified therein not less than three days nor more than 14 days from the service of the notice, why said license should not be revoked, stating the grounds therefor. At the appointed time and place, the licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause why said license should not be revoked, after which the council shall take such action as it, in its judgment, shall deem warranted under the facts. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-28. - Same—Appeal. 
Any licensee whose license is revoked pursuant to this section shall have the right to appeal the final decision of the council as governed by the Georgia Administrative Procedures Act. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Secs. 6-29—6-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION 

Sec. 6-36. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a place of business as a tavern manager, distiller, wholesale dealer or retail dealer in alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license as required by this chapter and paying the fee required by the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-37. - Application granted by council. 
No license shall be granted under the provisions of this chapter except by direct action of the city council and only upon written application therefore in the form and manner prescribed by the council, which form shall be made available by the city clerk to the general public. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-38. - Duration. 
Each license issued under the provision of this article shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the calendar year for which it is issued. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-39. - Renewal. 
No license issued under the provisions of the chapter shall be automatically renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next subsequent calendar year shall make an application for such year on or before November 1 of the preceding year. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-40. - Transfer. 
A license issued hereunder shall be a purely personal privilege and shall not constitute property. No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be automatically transferred to another individual, partnership or corporation. A license applicant who desires to continue the business of a prior licensee shall be considered a new applicant and shall be required to comply with all provisions of this chapter currently in effect. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-41. - Fees. 
The annual fee for alcoholic beverages licenses, shall be as follows: _____ 

 
_____ 
Said fee(s) shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license, shall accompany the application and shall be either in cash or a bank certified check. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-42. - Application information. 
Applications for alcoholic beverages licenses shall contain the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the names and address of the officers and directors, and if 25 percent or more interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominee, the name and address if such person. 
(2)  The type of business of the applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed. 
(3)  The length of time said applicant has been in business of that type or in the case of a corporation, the date when it was incorporated. 
(4)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(5)  A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application. 
(6)  A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this article, the laws of this state, or the ordinances of this city. 
(7)  Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government, has been revoked, and the reasons therefor. 
(8)  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State of Georgia, or of the United States, or any ordinance of the city in the conduct of his place of business. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-43. - Restriction on licenses. 
No such license shall be issued to: 
(1)  A person who is not a resident of Pierce County. 
(2)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(3)  A person who has been convicted of a felony, provided that the city council may, at its discretion, issue a license to persons with felony convictions more than five years before the application for license is made. 
(4)  A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality. 
(5)  a.  To a person who had a license revoked for cause under this chapter only once for a period of five years following such revocation; 
b.  To a person who has had a license revoked for cause under this chapter twice for a period of five years following the second such revocation; 
c.  No license shall be issued to a person who has had a license revoked for cause under this chapter three or more times. 
(6)  A partnership, unless all of the members of such partnership shall be qualified to obtain a license. 
(7)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning 25 percent or more of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive an alcoholic beverage license hereunder for any reason other than residence in Pierce County. 
(8)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of an individual licensee. 
(9)  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal, state law or city ordinance concerning the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages or who shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation. 
(10)  A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or who does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is issued. 
(11)  Any person, firm, or corporation not eligible for a state alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-44. - False information. 
The making of any statement on an application for license to sell alcoholic beverages which shall be later found to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of said license. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-45. - Consideration by city council. 
The city council, in its discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant for a license required by this chapter, application or the proposed location of the business. If in its judgment, circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Secs. 6-46—6-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 6-56. - Applicability of article provisions. 
The provision of this article shall apply exclusively to alcoholic beverage licenses for consumption on the premises. Regarding said licenses, the provision of this article shall apply when in conflict with other sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-57. - Quantity of sale. 
The sale of liquor by any consumption on premises licensed in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises is expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-58. - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  No applicant for a license who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude shall be granted a license. 
(b)  No consumption on the premises license shall be granted to any person unless such person is of legal age. 
(c)  In addition to all other requirements, no license shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the definition of a private club, restaurant, hotel, lounge, or retail/wholesale dealer or distributor. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-59. - Premises generally. 
No license under this chapter shall be issued unless the building in which the premises will be located is complete and detailed plans of said buildings are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The complete building of the proposed building shall comply with ordinance of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the laws of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval, when completed, by the code enforcement inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall provide sufficient lighting so that the building itself and all sides of the building is readily visible at all times so as to reveal all of the outside of said building. Each applicant for a consumption on the premises license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. All premises within a building for which a consumption on the premises license shall be issued, shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by customers, therein. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-60. - Knowledge of chapter. 
All holders of a consumption on the premises license shall keep a copy of this chapter in their premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof, and each licensee or his agents selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of his employees in any violation of this chapter, or of the laws of the State of Georgia, or the rules and regulations of the Georgia Revenue Commissioner. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-61. - Inspection of premises. 
The business premises of the holder of a consumption on the premises license shall be open to inspection at any time and all times by officers or officials charged to conduct such inspections. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-62. - Scope of license. 
A licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall have the right to serve liquor, beer, wine, provided he shall secure a business license therefor and pay the license fee as specified by the current business license ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-63. - Location restricted. 
No consumption on the premises license shall be granted under the provisions of this article: 
(1)  For location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the city council because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties, or on the neighborhood. 
(2)  For a location within an area where, in the judgment of the council the number of alcoholic beverage licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest and welfare. 
(3)  For a location at which the operation of the proposed business would be in violation of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(4)  For a location at which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been revoked or suspended and where, in the judgment of the council, the problems which have arisen from the operation of an alcoholic beverage license at such location indicates that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-64. - Employment of minors. 
No person under 18 years of age shall be employed in any capacity in any place of business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Sec. 6-65. - Hours for business operations. 
No licensee authorized under the provision of this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall open his licensed business premises except during the times authorized for sale of alcoholic beverages as described heretofore in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
At large means off the premises, and not controlled by the owner or the owner's immediate family, or someone designated by the owner, by leash, cord, chain or otherwise. 
Dangerous animal means any wild mammal, reptile, or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature, or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters; and any domestic mammal, reptile, or fowl which, because of its size, vicious propensity, or other characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters. 
Domesticated animals means animals which are kept as pets, such as dogs and cats. 
Owner means any person owning, keeping or harboring any animals or fowl. 
Undomesticated animals means horses, mules, cattle, goats, swine and other animals which are not domesticated. 
(Code 1987, § 4-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-2. - Running at large—On private property. 
No person shall allow any animal, whether domesticated or undomesticated, or any fowl, to roam, run or be at large or on the premises of another without such other person's permission. 
(Code 1987, § 4-2) 
Sec. 10-3. - Same—Unmuzzled vicious dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vicious bulldog or bull terrier or any other kind of dog that is considered vicious, owned or kept by such person to run at large on any street, alley or other public place within the city at any time unless such dog shall be securely muzzled, so as to effectively prevent it from biting any person or animal. 
(Code 1987, § 4-3) 
Sec. 10-4. - Destruction of dangerous, vicious domesticated animals. 
Any dangerous, vicious or fierce domesticated animal or any domesticated animal having dangerous, vicious or fierce propensities and tendencies found at large after the owner thereof has previous knowledge or notice that such domesticated animal is dangerous, vicious or fierce or has dangerous, vicious or fierce propensities and tendencies may be killed by a police officer of the city without such officer having to catch or impound such domesticated animal. 
(Code 1987, § 4-4) 
Sec. 10-5. - Rabies vaccination; required, tag. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal to keep or maintain such domesticated animal within the city unless it shall have been vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with anti-rabies vaccine, within one year preceding the date on which such domesticated animal is kept or maintained. 
(b)  The owner of every domesticated animal shall provide a tag issued by a veterinarian, licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, attached to a collar or harness worn by each domesticated animal, showing that such domesticated animal has been vaccinated against rabies within the current year, the date of such vaccination to appear on said tag. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or keep a domesticated animal on any premises within the city unless the domesticated animal wears a collar or harness as above provided securely attached to its body to which shall be securely attached the tag issued for the domesticated animal by the veterinarian. 
(Code 1987, § 4-5) 
Sec. 10-6. - Observation and disposition of rabies-suspect dog. 
(a)  If a dog is believed to have rabies or has been bitten by a dog suspected of having rabies, such dog shall be confined by a leash or chain on the owner's premises and shall be placed under the observation of a veterinarian at the expense of the owner for a period of two weeks. The owner shall notify the poundkeeper of the fact that such owner's dog is believed to have been exposed to rabies, and at the poundkeeper's discretion the poundkeeper is empowered to have such dog removed from the owner's premises to a veterinary hospital and there placed under observation for a period of two weeks at the expense of the owner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner knowing or suspecting a dog to have rabies to allow such dog to be taken off such person's premises or beyond the limits of the city without the written permission of the poundkeeper. 
(c)  Whenever a dog is ascertained to be rabid, notification of the same shall be made to the poundkeeper, who shall cause such dog to be removed to the city pound or summarily destroyed. 
(Code 1987, § 4-6) 
Sec. 10-7. - Dog bites. 
Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of such dog shall immediately notify the poundkeeper who shall order the dog held on the owner's premises or shall have it impounded at the owner's expense for a period of two weeks. The dog shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the end of two-week period. If at the end of two weeks a veterinarian is convinced that the dog is then free from rabies, the dog shall be released from quarantine or from the pound as the case may be. If the dog should die in the interim, its body shall be sent to state for examination for rabies. 
(Code 1987, § 4-7) 
Sec. 10-8. - Compliance with zoning ordinance and health regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or have any animal or fowl within the city except in accordance with the provisions of the city's zoning ordinance and the rules and regulations of the county health department. 
(Code 1987, § 4-8) 
Sec. 10-9. - Control of dog by owner; prohibited acts. 
(a)  General: It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any dog in the city to keep such dog, or to cause dog to be kept, under control at all times, and to prevent such dog from doing any of the following prohibited acts, each of which is declared a public nuisance: 
(1)  Running at large and not confined by a leash (not exceeding eight feet in length) or under voice control upon any public streets, sidewalk, parkway or public area in those portions of the city devoted to commercial or industrial use as defined and described in the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Entering any church, community house, or parish premises, public hall, bank building, automobile gasoline station, public garage, grocery, meat market, bakery, or other retail store or shop, excluding any shop for the sale of animal pets, anywhere within the city during the time that any of such places or establishments are open for use by the public, except that the owner or operator of any business may keep such person's own dog on the premises of the business. 
(3)  Going upon or being upon any private or public school premises or grounds during the hours in which school is in session, or school activities are taking place. 
(4)  Jumping upon any person to the annoyance of such person. 
(5)  Chasing a person, motor vehicle or bicycle on a public or private street or sidewalk. 
(6)  Damaging or destroying private property (including but not limited to gardens, shrubbery and lawns) of any person other than the owner of the dog. 
(7)  Defecating upon any private property other than that of the owner of the dog. 
(8)  Barking or howling so as to disturb the quiet of any person. 
(9)  Running at large of a female dog in heat. 
(b)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs leading blind persons, or security dogs used in commercial establishments. 
(Code 1987, § 4-9) 
Sec. 10-10. - Removal of dead animals. 
If any dead animal in the city shall not be removed and buried by the owner, keeper or custodian, it shall be removed and buried by the sanitary department at the expense of the owner, keeper or custodian, and the sanitary department shall, at the request of the owner, keeper or custodian of any animal that may have died in the city, remove and bury the body without delay. In either case, the owner, keeper or custodian of such animal shall pay to the city to cover the cost of removing and burying the body, the fees set from time to time by the council. 
(Code 1987, § 4-10) 
Sec. 10-11. - Penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00, and/or three days in jail for the first offense; by a fine of $75.00, and/or six days in jail for the second offense; and, by a fine of $100.00, and/or nine days in jail for a third and subsequent offenses. 
(Code 1987, § 4-11; Ord. of 5-11-93, § I) 
Secs. 10-12—10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 10-36. - Duty of officers. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to seize and impound, subject to the provisions of this article, all animals, whether domesticated or undomesticated, found in violation of the provision of this chapter within the city, whether such animal shall be in the immediate presence of its owner or custodian or otherwise. 
(Code 1987, § 4-20) 
Sec. 10-37. - Right-of-entry. 
The police officers are hereby authorized to enter upon any unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animal found thereon in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1987, § 4-21) 
Sec. 10-38. - Register. 
The poundkeeper, upon impounding or receiving any animal under the provisions of this article, shall make a complete registry of such animal, entering breed, color and sex of the animal and whether the animal has been vaccinated, and the time and place of taking such animal into custody. 
(Code 1987, § 4-22) 
Sec. 10-39. - Notice. 
When any animal is impounded, the poundkeeper shall give public notice of the impounding of such animal by posting in a conspicuous place at the pound a description of the animal as contained in the registry of the pound, which notice shall remain posted for not less than five days. When the owner is known, actual notice shall be given to such owner if within the jurisdiction. 
(Code 1987, § 4-23) 
Sec. 10-40. - Right to redeem. 
The owner of any animal which has been impounded under the provisions of this article shall have the right to redeem the same upon the payment of all such fees which may be due and payable for the impoundment of such animal; provided, however, the payment of such impoundment fees shall not bar the imposition of any fine which may be imposed for the violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1987, § 4-24) 
Sec. 10-41. - Time for redemption. 
All impounded animals shall be redeemed within five days after notice has been given as required by section 10-39 or within five days after impoundment if service of notice is not accomplished. Any such animal not redeemed within such time may be sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
(Code 1987, § 4-25) 
Sec. 10-42. - Redemption of unvaccinated animal. 
The owner of any impounded domesticated animal which has not been vaccinated as required by this chapter, upon satisfactory proof of ownership, may redeem such owner's animal by making a deposit of such fees as may be set from time to time by the city council with the poundkeeper and be allowed 24 hours to get such animal vaccinated. If such owner fails to procure a vaccination certificate within such 24 hours, the deposit shall be forfeited and the animal shall be impounded again. Upon presentation within such period of time of a certificate of vaccination issued under this chapter, the deposit shall be refunded. 
(Code 1987, § 4-26) 
Sec. 10-43. - Disposition of animal in case of multiple impoundments. 
Any animal impounded for a total of three times, on the fourth time such animal shall be either destroyed or sold. 
(Code 1987, § 4-27) 
Sec. 10-44. - Redemption of person other than owner. 
If the owner of any animal impounded under this article shall fail to redeem such person's animal within time allowed for redemption, any other person may, upon complying with all provisions of this article, redeem the animal from the pound and be the lawful owner of the animal thereafter. 
(Code 1987, § 4-28) 
Sec. 10-45. - Fees as fixed. 
The fees to be charged for the impoundment of any animal under the provisions of this article shall, from time to time, be set by the city council. 
(Code 1987, § 4-29) 
Sec. 10-46. - Disposition of funds. 
All monies received and collected under the provisions of this article shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1987, § 4-30) 
Sec. 10-47. - Reports. 
The poundkeeper shall file such reports of such poundkeeper's activities under the provisions of this article, under oath, as are required by the city council. 
(Code 1987, § 4-31) 
Secs. 10-48—10-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL 

Sec. 10-66. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms shall be defined as follows: 
Dangerous dog: Any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Dog control officer: An individual selected by the council of the city pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c) to aid the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and such other related laws of the State of Georgia. 
Owner: Any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust, owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog with this city. 
Potentially dangerous dog: Any dog without provocation that bites a human being on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989. 
Proper enclosure: An enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secure in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape wither from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Records of an appropriate authority: Records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of a dog control officer as provided for herein and by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Severe injury: Any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this article. A dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this article if the injury inflicted by the dog within the meaning of this article if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. No. 1989-101, § 1, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 10-67. - Control board. 
(a)  An animal control board is hereby created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(d) for the purposes of conducting hearings under O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24 of the dangerous dog control law. 
(b)  The animal control board shall consist of five persons, who shall serve for a term of three years, except for the initial board members. The member of this board shall be appointed by the council of the city. 
(c)  The terms of the initial board members shall be as follows: one member to serve for one year; two members to serve for two years; and two members to serve for three years. Thereafter, the terms for all subsequently appointed members shall be for three years. 
(d)  No member of the animal control board may participate in a hearing on any matter in which such member previously participated in the classification of the dog at issue. 
(e)  The council of the city may appoint alternate members for the animal control board from time to time as the need may arise. Said alternate members shall serve only for temporary time sitting on the board when a quorum of the animal control board cannot be ascertained due to conflicts which exist by appointed board members. 
(Ord. No. 1989-101, § 2, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 10-68. - Dog control officer. 
(a)  The council of the city shall appoint a dog control officer who shall serve at the pleasure of the council, and whose compensation shall be established by the council of the city. 
(b)  The dog control officer, upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the city from a law enforcement agency, animal control, agency, rabies control officer, or county board of health, shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to determine the validity of such report and whether the dog should be classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or reclassified as a dangerous dog if previously classified as a potentially dangerous dog. 
(c)  Should the dog control officer determine that a dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, said officer shall classify such dog accordingly, and the dog control officer shall notify the dog's owner, in writing by certified mail, to the owner's last known address, of such classification or reclassification. Such notice shall be complete upon its mailing. 
(Ord. No. 1989-101, § 3, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 10-69. - Classification as dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs. 
In classifying or reclassifying dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs, the dog control officer must comply with procedure for classifications set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24 and same is incorporated herein as if fully set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1989-101, § 4, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 10-70. - Requirements for possessing dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. 
(a)  No one shall have or possess with the city a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25 and the provisions thereof are incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this section. 
(b)  The owner of each dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual registration fee at the time of the issuance of the annual certificate of registration. The annual registration fee shall be in the amount of $250.00 for potentially dangerous dogs/$100.00 for dangerous registrations shall be renewed in the month of initial registration. 
(c)  The dog control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or the potentially dangerous dog is confined or continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is in compliance with or continues to be in compliance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-5-25(b) and (c). 
(d)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer if the owner is moving from the city. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the city shall register the dog as required by this article and the "dangerous dog control law" of the State of Georgia, within 30 days after becoming a resident. 
(e)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall provide the dog control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(f)  The issuance of a certificate of registration of the renewal of a certificate of registration by the city does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-025(b) and (c) are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1989-101, § 5, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 10-71. - Confiscation of dogs and the disposition thereof. 
(a)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the dog control officer if the: 
(1)  Owner of the dog does not secure liability or bond required by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25(c); 
(2)  Dog is not validly registered as required by ordinance; 
(3)  Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as denied herein; or 
(4)  Dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26(a). 
(b)  A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: 
(1)  Not validly registered as required by this article and O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25; 
(2)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure as defined herein; or 
(3)  Outside a proper enclosure in violation of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26(b). 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-20 et seq., and upon the payment of the cost of confiscation. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within 20 days of the date of the dog is confiscated, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 1989-101, § 6, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 10-72. - Interpretation of adoption of this article. 
It is the intention of this article to adopt the minimum standards and requirements for the control of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs in compliance with the "dangerous dog control law" (see O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-20 et seq.). Therefore, as stated by the general assembly of the State of Georgia, the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death caused by such dog. Under no circumstances shall the city or any employee or official of said city which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of said law or this article shall be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or by a dog that has been reported to the proper authority as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or by a dog that the city has failed to identify as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or by a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, but has not been kept or restrained in the manner prescribed by law, or by a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1989-101, § 7, 10-10-89) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Codes, § 3.19. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; signs, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120; authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; flow rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50. 

ARTICLE I. - UNFIT BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2011, repealed the former Art. I, §§ 14-1—14-12, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to unfit buildings and derived from Ord. No. 2009-08, § 1, 7-14-09. 

Sec. 14-1. - Findings. 
(1)  The Council of the City of Blackshear, Georgia hereby finds and declares that there exists in the city dwellings, buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business occupancy or uses due to dilapidation and non-compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated buildings, dwellings or structures in which drug crimes are being committed. 
(2)  All the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17, including method and procedure, may also be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said property is in violation of this section and §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-2. - Duty of owners. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-3. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, including, without limitation, all acts amendatory thereto and supplementary thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-4. - Designation of "public officer." 
The chief of police of the Blackshear, Georgia Police Department is the "public officer" designated and appointed to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. The public officer is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17, including the following powers in addition to others granted in the aforementioned [O.C.G.A.] sections: 
(a)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the municipality in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(b)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(c)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(d)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; and 
(e)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-5. - Standards for determining unfitness for habitation. 
(1)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the municipality. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
a.  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
b.  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
c.  Dilapidation; 
d.  Disrepair; 
e.  Structural defects; and 
f.  Uncleanliness. 
(2)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-6. - Complaints; notice and hearing; order to abate. 
(1)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court of the city at a date and time certain and at a place within the municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(2)  If after notice and hearing as provided herein, the court determines that any dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the council of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
a.  If the repair, alternation, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the council of drug crimes; or 
b.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(3)  For purposes of this code section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the courts determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of the repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs or repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-7. - Service of complaints and orders. 
(1)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this code section shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure, or property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
a.  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer or any person designated by the public officer or by any law enforcement officer of the City of Blackshear or Pierce County, and a return or service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
b.  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any; 
c.  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(2)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(3)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-8. - Failure to comply with order. 
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-9. - Salvage. 
If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-10. - Lien against property. 
The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-11. - When lien shall attach. 
(1)  The lien provided for in section 14-10 of this article shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (c) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(2)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this chapter shall transmit to the person responsible for collecting or receiving municipal property and ad valorem taxes a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the person who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically [O.C.G.A.] title 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The person who collects any costs, fees, and expenses owed shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the City of Blackshear. 
(3)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this Code section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the person responsible for collecting or receiving municipal property and ad valorem taxes of the final determination of costs in accordance with this chapter. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. 
(4)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this Code section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this Code section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, municipal tax collector, or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-80 and § 48-4-81. 
(5)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-12. - Issuance of citation. 
In addition to the procedures and remedies in this chapter, the public officer may issue citations for violation of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-13. - Appropriations; grants; donations. 
The City of Blackshear shall be authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of ordinances adopted in connection with the exercise of the powers granted under O.C.G.A. Title 41, Ch. 2. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 14-14. - Powers supplemental to other laws and ordinances. 
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its local enabling act, its charter, or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred hereunder shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Secs. 14-15—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 14-31. - Adoption. 
(a)  All of the state minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20, specifically including those referred to in subdivisions (9)(B)(i)IX through (9)(B)(i)XIV of such section, are hereby adopted as codes of the city, including the amendments thereto made from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-23. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with: 
(1)  Any of the provisions of the state minimum standard codes as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20, together with any amendments thereto; 
(2)  Any code adopted by the city council other than said state minimum standard codes shall be for each such failure, violation or noncompliance be punished as provided for in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(c)  "Person" as used herein shall include, without limitation, a natural born person, a corporation, limited liability company or other entity. 
(Code 1987, § 5-1; Ord. No. 2009-01, §§ A, B, 2-10-09) 
Secs. 14-32—14-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 14-100. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City of Blackshear is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
The city council hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 14-101. - Definitions. 
Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the forgoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the city council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 14-103(b) of this article. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 14-103(c) of this article. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure means a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 14-102. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission. 
(1)  There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "City Of Blackshear Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within the city government. 
(1)  The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(c)  Commission members. Number, appointment, terms and compensation: 
(1)  The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of Blackshear and **shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
(2)  To the extent available in the city, at least four members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions. 
(3)  Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be two members for two years; and three members for three years. 
(4)  Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)  Statement of commission's power. 
(1)  The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
a.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
b.  Recommend to the city council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
c.  Review application for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
d.  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
e.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
f.  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A. § 44-10.1 through 5). 
g.  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
h.  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, the city council, GA DNR Historic Preservation Division or others the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate, for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
i.  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
j.  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties of historic districts designated; 
k.  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the Blackshear historic preservation program; 
l.  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
m.  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
n.  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
o.  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. 
(1)  The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. 
(2)  The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. 
(3)  The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. 
(4)  The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. 
(5)  A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. 
(1)  The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statues and in the City of Blackshear Charters. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. 
(1)  The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings. 
(1)  A public record shall be kept of the commission resolution, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 14-103. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The Commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation. The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification {i.e. contributing, non-contributing or historic, non-historic, vacant, intrusive} of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character of special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city, or in the absence of zoning, on an official map designated as a public record. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Non-contributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section). 
(c)  Designation of a historic property. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, the region or the state for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state, or the region; or 
d.  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts of property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts—A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties—A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  In cases of historic districts. List each property in a proposed historic district by address and describe district boundaries; 
b.  In cases of individual properties. List the proposed individual historic property by address and describe property &boundary; 
c.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
d.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
e.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and be kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Require public hearings. The commission or the city council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principle newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten or more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in subsection 14-103(a)(3), to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(6)  The city council actions on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States Mail shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 14-104. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. 
(1)  After the designation by ordinance of a historic property of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. 
(1)  An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans and documentation as may be required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations. 
(1)  In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. 
(1)  The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. 
(1)  The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
(2)  The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant, as well as anyone likely to be materially affected, an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  Commission action . The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(2)  The Commission shall approve the application and issue a Certificate of Appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the Commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. 
1.  The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features, and to the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
b.  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, trees judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree or object. 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse. 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship. 
(1)  When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. 
(2)  In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. 
(3)  An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The commission and the city council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. 
(1)  A Certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and is renewable. 
(l)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and or all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(m)  Acquisition of property. 
(1)  The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness my appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection 14-104(h)(1) of this article or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action, subsection 14-104(h)(2) of this article. 
(2)  Appeals for properties within the city shall be made to the city council. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. 
(3)  Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the Superior Court of Pierce County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the city ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 14-105. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(1)  Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(1)  Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect. 
a.  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a buildings structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
b.  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
c.  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 14-106 of this article and, at the direction of the city council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
(1)  Nothing in this article shall be constructed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 14-106. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 14-107. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjunction shall in manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 14-108. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 14-109. - Exceptions. 
The state department of transportation and its contractors, by state law, are not required to comply with this article. Local governments, by state law, are not required to comply with this article, however, they must notify the commission 45 days prior to any activity that would normally require a COA. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, 6-12-12) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; signs, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Fair Business Practices Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, adopted June 9, 2015, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 18-31—18-42, was entitled "Occupation Taxes and Regulatory Fees", and derived from: Code 1987, §§ 13-1, 13-3—13-10, 13-12 and 13-13; Ord. of Feb. 14, 1995, § 1; and Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, adopted May 10, 2011. 
Charter reference— Occupation taxes and business license fees, § 6.12. 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq.; local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the following meaning: 
Administrative fee shall mean the fee charged to each person, partnership, corporation or other entity subject to the occupation tax that approximates the reasonable cost of handling, processing, and collecting the occupation tax. 
City means the City of Blackshear, Georgia. 
Employee is defined hereinafter as: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (2) of this definition, "employee" means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of an employer who withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
(2)  An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner that issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2. 
(3)  With respect to the taxation of businesses or practitioners with no location or office in Georgia, "employees" may only include employees working substantially in Georgia. 
Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or vehicle or used for sales or delivery by a business of practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business in the City of Blackshear, Georgia. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 6-9-15) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-32. - Occupation tax levied; computation of full-time employees; occupation tax schedule; administrative fee; limitations; issuance of certificate; certificate to be displayed. 
(a)  An occupation tax based upon number of employees is levied upon a person, partnership, corporation or other entity if such person, partnership, corporation or other entity: 
(1)  Has one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city; or 
(2)  Is an out-of-state businesses or practitioners with no location or office in the city but: 
a.  Has employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients within the corporate limits of the city; or 
b.  Owns personal or real property that generates income and is located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The occupation tax is calculated and levied based on the number of employees of the person, partnership, corporation or other entity as computed on a full-time basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of this computation an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. 
(c)  The occupational tax is levied in accordance with the following schedule: 
0—1 Employees ..... $20.00 
Each additional employee ..... $15.00 
Provided, however, that the city shall not impose an occupational tax of more than $360.00 on any person, partnership, corporation or other entity, regardless of the number of employees. 
(d)  A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $100.00 is assessed in connection with obtaining an occupation tax certificate or the annual renewal of such certificate. Such fee shall be paid in full at the time a person, partnership, corporation or other entity applies for such occupation tax certificate. 
(e)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business operated by a person, partnership, corporation or other entity. 
(f)  A person, partnership, corporation or other entity that has locations in Georgia and is subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in Georgia shall only be subject to occupation tax by the City of Blackshear for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city, provided that: 
(1)  This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local government(s); and 
(2)  If an employee works for the same business in more than one jurisdiction, the city or county in which the employee works the most in a calendar year may count the employee for occupation tax purposes. 
(g)  A person, partnership, corporation or other entity with no location or office in Georgia shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in Georgia where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner, provided that: 
(1)  This limitation shall only apply when the person, partnership, corporation or other entity has provided to the city satisfactory proof of as to the applicability of this subsection; and 
(2)  If a person, partnership, corporation or other entity with no location or office in Georgia provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state that purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(h)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(i)  Upon a person, partnership, corporation or other entity's payment of the occupation tax and compliance with all other regulations hereunder, the city clerk shall issue an occupation tax certificate to such person, partnership, corporation or other entity. 
(j)  Every person, partnership, corporation or other entity subject to payment of the occupation tax shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which the certificate was issued. If the person, partnership, corporation or other entity does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to the city clerk or any police officer upon request. Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity who fails to comply with this subsection shall be subject to the general penalties set forth under section 1-12 of chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 18-33. - Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c) shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 18-32 above, or shall pay an occupation tax of $400.00 per practitioner. On the tax return for 2015 or such later time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect either method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 18-34. - Insurance companies and agents. 
Each insurance company doing business in the city shall pay an annual license fee and other taxes as set forth under article IV of chapter 18. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 18-35. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Disabled veterans of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the United States Armed Forces was involved, whether under United States command or otherwise; 
(2)  Blind persons; 
(3)  Veterans of peace-time service in the United States Armed Forces who has a physical disability which was incurred during that service; 
(4)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(5)  Any state or local authority, nonprofit organization, or vendor acting pursuant to a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair; 
(6)  Real estate brokers, except at the principal or branch office of a real estate broker; 
(7)  Motor vehicles required to be registered with the public service commission; 
(8)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(9)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia; 
(10)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(11)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(12)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(13)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(14)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(15)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(16)  Any business on which the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this ordinance shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 18-36. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person, partnership, corporation or other entity who is licensed under Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated by the examining boards of the Secretary of State's Office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 18-37. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(c)  The city shall not impose registration or other regulatory requirements on attorneys authorized to practice law by the State Bar of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 18-38. - Filing returns; other information required or requested; confidentiality. 
(a)  On or before January 1st of each year, person, partnership, corporation or other entity subject to this occupation tax ordinance shall file with the city clerk, on a form approved by and available from the city, a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such person, partnership, corporation or other entity during the calendar year. 
(b)  A person, partnership, corporation or other entity doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available to the city, within 30 days or such longer time period as the city deems appropriate, such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or to facilitate levying or collecting the occupation tax. 
(c)  Information provided by a person, partnership, corporation or other entity to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax, or levying or collecting the occupation tax, is exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 18-39. - Date due; penalty and interest. 
(a)  Any occupation tax and administrative fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually within 30 days of January 1st for the ensuing calendar year. Occupation taxes imposed on businesses commencing after January 1st will be due and payable immediately prior to the commencement of business. 
(b)  If a person, partnership, corporation or other entity commences business in the city on or after July 1st in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be pro-rated. 
(c)  Payment of an occupation tax or administrative fee shall not be required prior to the commencement of business for attorneys, nor shall it in any other manner act as a precondition on the practice of law. 
(d)  Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity subject to any occupation tax or administrative fee imposed by this article which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due, and interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 18-40. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  It is the duty of the city clerk to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce the ordinance codified in this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the Municipal Court of the City of Blackshear. The city clerk may issue executions against persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for taxes or fees that are due and owing; and any penalty or any interest imposed under this article. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue executions against persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for taxes or fees which are due and owing, penalties or interest. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed or ruled invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the person, partnership, corporation or other entity liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. 
(c)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution, the person, partnership, corporation or other entity against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person, partnership, corporation or other entity against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full, together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(d)  A person, partnership, corporation or other entity who fails or refuses to pay any occupation tax charged pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine, to be imposed by court of competent jurisdiction over enforcement of city's ordinances, not more than $500.00, that may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(e)  A person, partnership, corporation or other entity who fails or refuses to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or for levying or collecting such occupation tax shall be subject to a fine, to be imposed by court of competent jurisdiction over enforcement of city's ordinances, not more than $500.00, that may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(f)  All persons subject to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining business for such person, business or practitioner shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 18-41. - Public hearings. 
(a)  After January 1, 2015, the city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution that will increase the occupation tax rate specified in section 18-32. 
(b)  In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the city shall hold one or more public hearing[s] as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 18-42. - Revocation of certificates. 
(a)  All occupation tax certificates granted under this article shall be subject to revocation upon failure of the person, partnership, corporation or other entity to comply with all valid regulations and ordinances of the city regulating the business conducted by or engaged in by such person, partnership, corporation or other entity. 
(b)  Any occupation tax certificates granted under this article may be revoked by the mayor for noncompliance; provided, however, that before there is such revocation, a hearing shall be granted to the person, partnership, corporation or other entity holding such certificate. 
(c)  Any ruling by the mayor adverse to such person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall be subject to review by the city council at the next regular council meeting after the decision by the mayor, upon the filing of a written appeal by the person, partnership, corporation or other entity with the city clerk. The decision of a majority vote of the city council on such appeal shall be final, unless further appeal is allowed by law. 
(d)  No business shall be conducted or engaged in by any person, partnership, corporation or other entity whose certificate has been revoked by the mayor, unless and until the decision of the mayor is reviewed and reversed by majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 6-9-15) 
Secs. 18-43—18-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means any individual, whether a resident of this city or not, travelling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, for the sale of, as well as the selling, offering for sale or taking or attempting to take orders for the sales of goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale, a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether such individual is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided that such definition shall include any person who, for such person's self or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The word "peddler" shall include the terms "canvasser," "solicitor," "transient or itinerant merchant or vendor" or "transient or itinerant photographer." 
(Code 1987, § 13-20) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-72. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travellers selling in the usual course of business; 
(2)  Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling goods, wares and merchandise according to law; 
(3)  Bona fide residents of the state selling fruits, vegetables, dressed meats, fowl or farm products of their own raising. 
(Code 1987, § 13-21) 
Sec. 18-73. - Solicitations not subject to article. 
The following types of solicitations or donations do not come under the provisions of this article: 
(1)  United Fund, United Health and Welfare Fund, and long established agencies accorded similar public approval, but only on single annual drives. 
(2)  Commercial or strictly institutional advertising in recognized publications having established periods of issue of not less than eight per year and similar advertising over radio stations. 
(3)  Donations of merchandise or money as part of regular business promotion. 
(4)  Solicitations of individuals by fellow members of individual clubs for the benefit of that particular organization. 
(5)  Solicitation for membership in any regularly constituted organization. 
(Code 1987, § 13-22) 
Sec. 18-74. - Endorsement of products. 
It will not be the policy of the city to issue any form of written or verbal endorsement of any solicitation, but only to issue a permit upon approval of application to solicit. 
(Code 1987, § 13-23) 
Sec. 18-75. - Behavior of applicants. 
(a)  Refusal to leave. Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased, or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises, or by such owner's or occupant's agent, to leave the same and not return to such premises, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  Entrance to premises restricted. It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises when such premises are posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Soliciting Allowed" or other words to such effect. Violators shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished accordingly. 
(c)  Misrepresentation. It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality of such peddler's goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
(d)  Hours of operation. It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the city between the hours of one-half hour before sunset and 9:00 a.m. of the following day, or at any time on Sundays, except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer. 
(e)  Solicitations at street or highway intersections. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit funds or distribute literature and/or other materials to motorists or others upon any street or at any intersection in the city or to use any street or intersection in the city for any activity involving the location of any person in such street or intersection in a "roadblock" while the same is open for vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1987, § 13-24) 
Sec. 18-76. - Permit required. 
Every individual desiring to solicit within the city limits must first obtain a permit from the city at the City Hall authorizing such person to solicit. Permits will be issued only to individuals who appear in person at city hall. Under no circumstances will a permit for a group be granted to one individual member of the group unless, in the judgment of the city clerk and/or the mayor, the circumstances allow for such action. 
(Code 1987, § 13-25) 
Sec. 18-77. - Fingerprints. 
At the time of making application for a permit as required by this article, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the chief of police if desired or requested by the city clerk or mayor. 
(Code 1987, § 13-26) 
Sec. 18-78. - Bond. 
(a)  Every applicant, not a resident of this county, or who is a resident of the county and represents a firm whose principal place of business is located outside the state shall, when required by the city clerk or the mayor, file with the city clerk a surety bond running to the city, in the amount of $1,000.00 with surety acceptable to and approved by the mayor, under the condition that the applicant shall comply fully with all applicable provisions of this Code, ordinances of the city, and state law, regulating and concerning the business of peddling and guaranteeing any citizen of the city that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the peddler, and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing business with such peddler that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of the peddler. Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use or benefit of the aggrieved person. 
(b)  If the applicant is an agent, employee, canvasser or solicitor of a corporation authorized to do business in this state or registered under the Fictitious Name Act of the state, such corporation or fictitious name business may be required to furnish one bond in the amount of $1,000.00 for all of its agents, employees, canvassers or solicitors. 
(c)  Before any permit shall be issued under this article, there shall, when required under this section, also be filed with the city clerk an instrument in writing, signed by the applicant under oath, nominating and appointing the city clerk as such applicant's true and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice or process for and on behalf of such applicant, and service of summons in any action brought upon the applicant's bond shall be deemed made when served on the city clerk. 
(Code 1987, § 13-27) 
Sec. 18-79. - False information. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with such person's application for a permit required by this article. 
(Code 1987, § 13-28) 
Sec. 18-80. - Investigation. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this article, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as such officer deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The chief of police shall complete such investigation within one week of receiving the application. 
(Code 1987, § 13-29) 
Sec. 18-81. - Denial of permit. 
If, as a result of investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application such officer's disapproval and the reasons for same, and shall return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that the application is disapproved and that no permit shall be issued. 
(Code 1987, § 13-30) 
Sec. 18-82. - Issuance of permit. 
If, as a result of investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse such officer's approval on the application and return the application to the city clerk. The city clerk shall prepare the permit for carrying on of the business applied for and deliver same to the applicant. At this time, the applicant shall be advised of the restrictions prescribed by this article and advise the applicant of the penalties involved in case of noncompliance. 
(Code 1987, § 13-31) 
Sec. 18-83. - Contents of permit. 
Each permit issued under this article shall show the name and address of the permittee, the purpose for which the permit is issued, the firm represented, the items being sold and to whose benefit the receipts will accrue, date of issuance, period of time for which permit is valid, the permit number and identification of any vehicle to be used in such solicitation. 
(Code 1987, § 13-32) 
Sec. 18-84. - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the mayor or city clerk for the violation by the permittee of any applicable provision of this article, the city code, state law or other city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1987, § 13-33) 
Sec. 18-85. - Withdrawal of permit. 
In case where it is found that the permittee is in violation of this article, contact shall be made with the permittee by a member of the police department, who shall advise permittee of the reported violation and shall secure the permit and return same to the city clerk. 
(Code 1987, § 13-34) 
Sec. 18-86. - Record. 
The city clerk shall maintain a permanent record of all permits issued under this article. 
(Code 1987, § 13-35) 
Sec. 18-87. - Display. 
Each peddler having a permit issued under the provisions of this article and doing business within the city shall display the permit upon request of any person, and failure to do so shall render the permit null and void. 
(Code 1987, § 13-36) 
Sec. 18-88. - Duration. 
Each permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid only for a period of time stated thereon, but in no event shall any such permit be issued for a period of time in excess of 12 months. 
(Code 1987, § 13-37) 
Secs. 18-89—18-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Persons deemed professional bondsmen, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50; local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2; general assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c). 

Sec. 18-116. - Insurer license fees—Company. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 18-117, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $40.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Code 1987, § 13-40; Ord. of 1-8-91, § 1) 
Sec. 18-117. - Same—Insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $40.00 per location for each year. 
(Code 1987, § 13-41; Ord. of 1-8-91, § 2) 
Sec. 18-118. - Same—Agency; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc. not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 18-116, in the amount of $40.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Code 1987, § 13-42; Ord. of 1-8-91, § 3) 
Sec. 18-119. - Gross premiums tax—Life insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 18-116. 
(Code 1987, § 13-43; Ord. of 1-8-91, § 4) 
Sec. 18-120. - Same—All other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Code 1987, § 13-44; Ord. of 1-8-91, § 5) 
Sec. 18-121. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 18-116, 18-117 and 18-118 shall be due and payable on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1987, § 13-45; Ord. of 1-8-91, § 6) 
Sec. 18-122. - Reports—Filing; contents. 
Payments required by this article shall be made to the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a report showing the names and addresses of the agents representing the insurance company in the city, the classes of insurance written, the premiums received for each class, and such other reasonable information as may be required. The required report shall be made on forms prescribed by the city clerk and made out over affidavit of an officer of the company. Payments shall be deemed delinquent if not received within 45 days from the due date. 
(Code 1987, § 13-46) 
Sec. 18-123. - Same—False information; confidentiality. 
(a)  False information. It is hereby declared to be a violation of this article for any person to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any report herein required to be filed. 
(b)  Confidentiality of information. All reports required to be filed shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be used solely by the officers of the city responsible for the administration of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 13-47) 
Sec. 18-124. - Enforcement. 
The taxes levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of this city. 
(Code 1987, § 13-48) 
Secs. 18-125—18-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS, PAWNSHOPS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, adopted Aug. 8, 2017, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. V, §§ 18-151—18-157 was entitled "Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers," and derived from Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, adopted Nov. 11, 2014. 
State Law reference— Duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq.; liens—pawnbrokers, factors, bailees, etc., O.C.G.A. § 44-14-400 et seq.; liens—jewelers, O.C.G.A. § 44-14-430 et seq. 

Sec. 18-151. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article (article V - Dealers in Precious Metals and Gems, Pawnshops and Secondhand Dealers), the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Dealer in precious metals and gems means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, who engages in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or articles containing any precious metal or gem, including coins, from a member of the general public for resale to brokers, dealers or melters. 
Electronic reporting system means a computer based system, as specified by the chief of police, which is designed to record and transmit data and information electronically. 
Gems means any precious or semi-precious stone which is cut and polished. 
Goods means every species of tangible personal property. 
Pawnbroker means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this section. 
Pawnshop means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this section. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or other legal entity however organized. 
Precious metals means gold, silver or platinum or any metal containing gold, silver or platinum. 
Secondhand dealer means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, whose business includes purchasing, storing, selling, exchanging, or receiving secondhand personal property of any kind or description. However, any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, whose business is the purchase and resale of clothing, furniture, or the resale of goods that are donated to a business exempt from federal taxation as a charitable organization shall not be deemed a secondhand dealer under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-152. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be punished upon conviction in the state court as provided in section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-153. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for a buyer of precious metals and gems to engage in such business within the county without first obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-154. - Application for license. 
Applicants for a license pursuant to this article shall file with the city clerk a written application under oath, signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the president of the corporation, and showing the following: 
(1)  The name of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on within the city; the local address of such person while engaged in such business; the permanent address of such person; the capacity in which such person will act, that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise; the name and address of the person on whose account the business will be conducted, if any; and, if a corporation, the name of the state in which the corporation is incorporated; 
(2)  The place within the city where it is proposed to conduct the applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that such business will be conducted; 
(3)  Credentials from the person for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as representative; and 
(4)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity and character of the person having the management or supervision of the business and the manner of doing business as the city council may deem proper in order to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-155. - Bond. 
(a)  Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this article, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a bond binding the applicant to the city in the full sum of $10,000.00, executed by the applicant as principal and by a surety approved by the county commission, conditioned on the applicant's full compliance with the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state governing the conduct of such business and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of such ordinances or statutes. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city in its own behalf. 
(b)  Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this article, the applicant shall file with the city clerk an instrument appointing the clerk of the city as his true and lawful agent for service of process upon the applicant for the performance of the conditions of the bond or for any breach thereof. Immediately upon service of process upon the clerk of the city as provided in this article, the clerk shall send to the licensee, at his last known address, by registered mail, a copy of such process. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-156. - Posting of license. 
The license issued pursuant to this article shall be posted conspicuously and prominently in the place of business named therein. If the applicant desires to do business in more than one place within the county, separate licenses shall be purchased and issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously and prominently in each place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-157. - License fee. 
Licensees under this article shall pay a license fee of $50.00 for each calendar year or portion of a year in which the licensee engages in business within the county. For each business location in addition to one, the licensee shall pay an additional license fee of $50.00 for each calendar year or portion of a year in which the licensee conducts business at such additional location. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-158. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the chairman and county commission, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with any purchase transaction; 
(3)  Failure to maintain the daily record as required in this article; 
(4)  Any other violation of this article; or 
(5)  Conducting the business licensed under this article in any unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be served on the licensee by handing the notice personally to the person in charge of the licensee's business, or by mailing the notice, postage prepaid, to the licensee, at his last known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-159. - Records and information to be recorded. 
Every person or business engaged as a pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems within the county shall secure from every person from whom he or she receives any goods, except used books, whether by purchase or through pledge, trade, pawn or exchange, the following: 
(1)  Government-issued photo identification card, such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card or passport; 
(2)  The name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, date of birth, and a Social Security or driver's license number; 
(3)  A digital photograph clearly showing a frontal view of the subject's face. Each digital image shall be labeled with the date and time of the transaction and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption. If the same subject makes additional transactions within 30 days of the original transaction; provides the same government issued photo identification card as mentioned above; and the subject's appearance has not materially changed, a new digital photograph shall not be required until a transaction is made after 30 days from the original transaction; 
(4)  A complete and accurate description of the goods acquired, and a digital photograph or image of the goods acquired including the following information, if available: 
a.  Brand name; 
b.  Model number; 
c.  Manufacturer's serial number; 
d.  Size; 
e.  Color, as apparent to the untrained eye; 
f.  Precious metal type, weight, and content if known; 
g.  Gemstone description, including the number of stones; 
h.  In the case of firearms, the type of action, caliber or gauge, number of barrels, barrel length, and finish; 
i.  Any other unique identifying marks, numbers, or letters; 
j.  The date and time of the transaction. 
(5)  The pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems shall maintain the above information and digital photographs or images for a period of three years and make the same available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(6)  The pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems shall require the seller to sign a statement verifying that the seller is the rightful owner of the goods or is entitled to sell, consign, or trade the goods. 
(7)  This section shall not apply to the receipt of used books or pawn transactions commonly known as "title pawn" transactions where the pawnbroker takes possession of a motor vehicle certificate of title, takes a security interest in the motor vehicle certificate of title, and retains physical possession of the vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-160. - Report to chief of police; required format. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems located within the county shall make a computer-generated daily report, in such format as prescribed by the Chief of Police for the City of Blackshear, Georgia, of all transactions that occurred during the 24-hour period ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. A report shall be made each day prior to 11:59 p.m. for each day the operator or dealer transacts business. If an operator or dealer is closed, or does not otherwise engage in any transactions on a particular day, a report indicating "no transactions" shall be filed for that day. Daily reports shall be filed electronically by posting to a law enforcement web site designated by the chief of police. When technological problems prevent posting the daily report electronically, a printed, typed or legibly handwritten report shall be delivered to the City of Blackshear Police Department. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the receipt of used books or pawn transactions commonly known as "title pawn" transactions where the pawnbroker takes possession of a motor vehicle certificate of title; takes a security interest in the motor vehicle certificate of title, and retains physical possession of the vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-161. - Hold period; police holds. 
(a)  Any pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, dealer in precious metals and gems, or person operating under a license granted pursuant to this article who takes goods on pawn or who buys goods, taking full title thereto, shall hold the goods so taken in pawn for at least 30 days before disposing of the goods by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(b)  The Blackshear Police Department or any other law enforcement agency, has the authority to place property that is the subject of law enforcement investigation on "police hold". In that event, Blackshear Police Department, or other law enforcement agency, shall notify the pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems of the need for a "police hold" and identify all property subject to the "police hold". Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from "police hold" status or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 18-162. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, dealer in precious metals and gems or person operating under a license granted pursuant to this article to commit any of the following acts: 
(1)  Fail to make an entry of any material matter in the daily record of said business; 
(2)  Make any false entry in the daily record of said business; 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate or destroy the daily record of said business or remove the daily record from the place of business; 
(4)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect the daily record of said business or any goods in the possession of said business during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time; or 
(5)  Fail to comply with this article in any other material way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 8-8-17) 
Secs. 18-163—18-190. - Reserved. 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1—4, adopted July 9, 2013, amended ch. 22 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 22, §§ 22-1—22-7, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1987, §§ 6-1—6-7. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.; Georgia Cemetery Act of 1983, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Casket means an ornamented and lined rectangular box used to place human remains in for burial. 
Cemetery means the Blackshear Cemetery, as shown and depicted on all recorded and unrecorded plats. 
Cemetery superintendent means an employee of the city designated by the city manager to supervise cemetery operations. 
Coping means a raised border surrounding grave spaces or lots. 
Cremains or cremated remains means residual ash fragments of human bones remaining after the process of cremation. 
Cremation means the process of reducing human remains to ash through incineration. 
Deceased human being or human remains or remains means the body or bodies of deceased persons, including bodies in any stage of decomposition and cremated remains. 
Deed means the document issued only by the city that conveys ownership interest in a lot in the cemetery. 
Deferred payment plan means a method of paying for a lot or lots by first depositing a portion of the total cost of the lot or lots with the city with the stipulation that the balance will be paid within 12 months. 
Disinterment means removal of human remains from a grave. 
Grave or grave space means an area of ground sufficient for the burial of human remains. See also lot. 
Indigent means a destitute person. 
Interment means burial of human remains in a grave. 
Lot means one or more adjoining grave spaces. 
Lot owner means one or more individuals whose names are shown on the deed. Any individual names on the deed may give written instructions to the city. 
Marker means a small individual memorial placed at either the head or foot of a grave. 
Memorial means a marker, monument or vase placed on a lot and shall include any monument, memorial, marker, or vase in whole or in part at ground level or above ground, or other structure on the cemetery lot. 
Monument means a large slab placed flat on a lot. 
Urn means a receptacle of cast bronze, marble, or other acceptable permanent material containing cremated remains, which is placed in the ground. 
Vault means a reinforced concrete container used in the above or below ground burial of human remains in which the casket is placed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-2. - Reserved. 
Sec. 22-3. - No liability for damages. 
The city will not be held responsible for any vandalism or damages to any memorial, monument, urn or marker. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-4. - Management; appointment of cemetery superintendent. 
The control and management of the cemetery shall be under the direct supervision of the mayor, who shall administer this chapter. He shall assign a city employee as cemetery superintendent to take charge of burials and ensure the operational integrity of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-5. - Duties of cemetery superintendent. 
The cemetery superintendent shall issue burial permits and refuse burial until the permit and related or required documents comply with state law and the provisions of the City Code. The cemetery superintendent shall inspect the closed grave to insure that the remaining fill has been removed from the gravesite. The cemetery superintendent shall do all other work required in the operation of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-6. - Executing instructions. 
(a)  In all cases where a lot is owned by more than one person, the city may act upon the authority of any one of the owners. If all lot owners desire that no instructions be followed unless signed by all lot owners shown on the deed, all lot owners must submit a signed and notarized statement with that request. 
(b)  All matters relating to the opening of graves, the interment of remains, disinterments, and reinterments shall be in writing from the lot owner. The city shall not execute instructions given by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-7. - City's right to correct errors. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to correct any errors that may be made by it in good faith by taking such actions as it deems necessary and appropriate in the circumstances. If the error shall involve the interment of remains, the city shall have the right, at its expense, to remove and reinter the remains to another lot of equal value and similar location. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to correct any error it may make in placement of any memorial, marker, vase, or vault. The city shall not be liable for any error so made. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-8. - Fees, gratuities and commissions. 
No city employee shall receive any fee, gratuity or commission either directly or indirectly, except from the city or work performed in the cemetery. No city employee shall influence the city in regard to any allied service or commodity under penalty of immediate dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 7-9-13) 
Secs. 22-9—22-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-36. - Subdivision of cemetery. 
The Blackshear City Council shall have sole authority to subdivide the cemetery into divisions, blocks, sections, lots, grave spaces, and streets, and to determine the dimensions and locations of each. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 2, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-37. - City's right to replat, regrade and use property. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to replat any parts of the property within the cemetery not sold for burial purposes, including the right to open, close, or change the location or grade of streets or walkways. The city shall have a perpetual right of ingress and egress over lots for the purpose of passage to and from other lots when no other means of passage is available. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to close and sell the grounds lying between lots, known as walkways, provided that by said closing adequate access to adjoining lots is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 2, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-38. - Sale, place of payment; cemetery fund. 
(a)  Sale of lots. The sale of lots shall be by deed. A comprehensive record of the cemetery deeds, plats, and other records related thereto, shall be kept by the city clerk. The record shall show all lots which are sold or are for sale and a record made of the date, name of the purchaser, division or block, section, lot and grave number. A deed shall be issued upon the receipt of full payment, naming any special restrictions, which are not embodied in this chapter, and signed by the proper city officials. 
(b)  Place of payment; cemetery fund. All payments for the sale of lots and all service charges shall be payable to the city at the Blackshear City Hall. All executed deeds shall be delivered to the owner through the city clerk. All receipts from the sale of cemetery lots, burial fees, and beautification services shall be placed in the cemetery fund. Money placed in this fund shall only be used for cemetery purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 2, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-39. - Charges; bulk purchases. 
(a)  The price for the purchase of grave space shall be according to the following schedule: 
(1)  All grave spaces located in Blackshear Cemetery shall be sold for a sum to be set by resolution of the Blackshear City Council. 
(2)  The city will provide a grave space for an indigent who is a city resident. Proof of residency and indigency shall be provided by signed affidavits, provided by the funeral home. The grave space will be determined by cemetery superintendent. 
(b)  Any cemetery lot purchase in excess of eight lots requires written justification by the applicant and approval by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 2, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-40. - Deferred payment plan. 
(a)  A prospective purchaser of grave lots may purchase up to four lots on a deferred payment plan. A written agreement will be required. Upon signing the agreement, a payment of one-fourth of the total cost of all the lots to be purchased shall be required. The balance will be due within 12 months. No interest shall be required during the initial, 12-month term of the agreement. If the balance is not paid in full within 12 months, one extension of six months may be allowed, and interest may be charged. In the case of an agreement for multiple lots, payments made will be credited to an individual lot, and when sufficient payments have been received to cover the cost of one lot, a deed may be issued for that lot. 
(b)  If the purchaser fails to make full payment within the time period allocated, the city reserves the right to cancel the agreement. At the time of cancellation of the agreement, the city may list the grave lots for sale, and the purchaser shall have no right to any of the lots covered under the agreement. A deed will be issued for any lots which have been paid for in full during the term of the agreement. If the agreement has been cancelled for nonpayment, and the city has not received enough money to pay for a lot in full, the city may impose a cancellation fee to be established by the Blackshear City Council by resolution, and will then return any balance to the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 2, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-41. - Reserved. 
Sec. 22-42. - Correct mailing address of lot owners. 
Each lot owner shall have the duty to keep the city informed as to his or her correct mailing address. Any notice mailed to a lot owner at the last address on file with the city shall be equivalent to actual delivery of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 2, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-43. - Transfer of ownership. 
(a)  No lot owner shall allow interment in his or her lot for a remuneration, nor shall any transfer of interest in the lot be valid except by written consent of the city. Such transfer or assignment shall be recorded in the records of the cemetery. No transfer for consideration shall be authorized. Any attempted transfer of a lot or interest in a lot to one not authorized to own the lot shall be invalid and of no force and effect. The city shall not be obligated to honor the transfer. 
(b)  The city may refuse to consent to a transfer or to an assignment as long as there is any indebtedness due the city from the lot owner for interment rights in the lot involved. 
(c)  In every case where a lot owner wishes to dispose of vacant lots, the city shall have the option to repurchase the lot at a price agreed upon between the lot owner and the official representative of the city. The price shall not exceed 75 percent of the original purchase price, including perpetual care. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 2, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-44. - Decorations. 
(a)  No permanent flower receptacles may be placed on any lot unless, of an approved size, material and design, set wholly beneath the level of the grass. Only one vase will be permitted for each marker or grave space. 
(b)  Potted plants, wreaths, floral arrangements, metal emblems, markers, or flags may be permitted upon lots on holidays. If not removed within five days, said decorations may, at the option of the city, be removed. Potted plants, wreaths and floral arrangements will be removed from the lot or grave at the time of mowing or trimming the grass. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to remove all floral arrangements, wreaths and the like as soon after a funeral as in the judgment of the city they become wilted or unsightly. 
(d)  The city shall not be responsible for any items of decoration that become lost, misplaced or damaged. 
(e)  The city shall not be responsible for plantings damaged by the elements, thieves, vandals, or by other causes beyond its control. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 2, 7-9-13) 
Secs. 22-45—22-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERPETUAL CARE 

Sec. 22-56. - Perpetual care trust fund. 
There is established a perpetual care trust fund known as the Blackshear Cemetery Trust Fund. All money received from the owners of lots in the ancient section for perpetual care, together with 65 percent of the money received from the sale of the lots, shall be paid to the city and deposited in the fund. The city shall invest such funds in accordance with city investment policy. The income from the trust fund shall be used exclusively for the care and maintenance of the lots and cemetery grounds. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 2, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-57. - Perpetual care services; fees. 
(a)  Perpetual care service shall consist of cutting, trimming, top dressing, and annual fertilizing of all grass area. Any additional care desired will be the responsibility of the owner. All owners of grave spaces for which perpetual care has not been previously included shall purchase perpetual care prior to the opening and closing of a grave and shall pay the city a sum to be set by resolution of the Blackshear City Council. 
(b)  Upon the payment of the perpetual care fee, the cemetery superintendent or designee is authorized to deliver to the purchaser a certificate evidencing the purchase, signed by him or her on behalf of the city. Full perpetual care payment for a grave space or lot must be paid prior to interment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 2, 7-9-13) 
Secs. 22-58—22-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INTERMENT 

Sec. 22-81. - Burial permit required; cost. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any undertaker or other person legally entitled to bury the body of a deceased human being without first securing from the cemetery superintendent a burial permit signed by the cemetery superintendent or his or her designee. A burial permit shall be issued only when all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations relative to burials have been complied with and all fees and costs previously billed by the city have been paid. The cemetery superintendent may request a properly executed death certificate or a burial transit permit of the decedent. The burial permit shall show the name, address, sex, age, place of burial, and any other details and information as the cemetery superintendent may require. 
(b)  The charge for a burial permit shall be a sum set by resolution of the Blackshear City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 3, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-82. - Prerequisites to burial; charges; minimum depth of graves. 
(a)  The opening and closing of all graves shall be conducted under the supervision of the city. No burial shall be performed in the cemetery without the completion of state prescribed burial forms by a sub-registrar. A burial permit shall be obtained from the cemetery superintendent before the interment of any human remains. 
(b)  To verify that a monument is installed on the proper grave and to mark and inspect the installation of a monument, marker, memorial or coping, there shall be a fee set by resolution of the Blackshear City Council. 
(c)  The minimum depth of all graves shall be 4½ feet; the minimum depth for vaults shall be 3½ feet. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 3, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-83. - Regulations for interments and disinterments. 
(a)  All interments and disinterments shall be made subject to state law, city ordinances, and operating rules and regulations of the cemetery. 
(b)  No interment will be made without written authority from the owner or one of the owners of the lot in question. If there is more than one owner, no disinterment will be made without the written consent of all owners or upon presentation of a court order. Disinterments shall be made at the city's convenience. 
(c)  All disinterments shall be done by or under the supervision of the cemetery superintendent. The cemetery will exercise the utmost care in making a removal, but it assumes no liability for damage to any casket or urn incurred in the process of making a removal. 
(d)  When instructions regarding the location of an interment space in a lot cannot be obtained, are indefinite, or when for any reason the interment space cannot be opened where specified, the city may, in its discretion, open a space in another location in the lot as it deems best and proper, so as not to delay the funeral. 
(e)  Not more than one body shall be interred in any one grave space, except in cases where a parent and infant child, or two infant children, are buried at the same time. In such cases, only one memorial shall be permitted; however, the memorial may bear both names. Cremated remains may be interred at the foot of a grave space. The name of the person may be combined with an adjoining single marker, or incorporated into a companion marker for both graves. Two cremated remains instead of one body may be interred into a grave space. In that case, a single marker designating the two cremated remains may be installed in the grave space. 
(f)  No interment of any body or the cremated remains of any body, other than that of a human being, shall be permitted. 
(g)  Removal, by the heirs, of a body so that the lot may be sold for profit to themselves, or removal contrary to the expressed or implied wish of the original lot owners shall not be permitted. 
(h)  Besides being subject to the rules and regulations set out in this article, all interments, disinterments, and removals are subject to the orders and laws of the properly constituted authorities of the city, Pierce County and the State of Georgia. 
(i)  At the expense of the family a body or cremated remains may be removed from its original lot to a larger or more desirable lot in the cemetery where there has been an exchange or purchase for that purpose. 
(j)  Once a casket containing a body is within the confines of the cemetery, no funeral director, embalmer, assistant, employee, or agent shall be permitted to open a casket or to touch the body without the consent of the legal representative of the deceased, a relative in charge of the funeral, or a court order. 
(k)  All interments and disinterments must be made at the time, in the manner, and upon the charges as fixed from time to time by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 3, 7-9-13) 
Secs. 22-84—22-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-106. - Visitors; proper conduct. 
(a)  Visiting hours are restricted to daylight hours and shall be as specified by the city. Any unauthorized person(s) found in the cemetery after dark will be considered a trespasser. 
(b)  In order that the proper atmosphere may be maintained at the cemetery, children under 15 years of age, unless attended by an adult responsible for their conduct, and persons having firearms in their possession, except military personnel, law enforcement personnel and honor guards in attendance upon a funeral, are prohibited from entering the cemetery. 
(c)  In order to safeguard the quiet and peaceful atmosphere of the cemetery visitors are prohibited from using loud, boisterous or obscene language from sitting or climbing on markers, monuments, or fixtures of any kind; from peddling, begging, soliciting, or collecting; and from displaying or distributing cards, handbills and circulars of any nature, unless approved by the cemetery superintendent. 
(d)  Visitors are prohibited from bringing into the cemetery dogs, other than guide dogs for the handicapped, and alcoholic beverages. Visitors are prohibited from removing, scratching, marring, defacing, injuring, or disturbing any monument, memorial bench, vase, building, fence, or anything within the limits of the cemetery; and from putting paper, rubbish, dead or wilted flowers, shrubs, plants, or any other unsightly or improper thing in any place except in the containers provided for such materials. Persons within the cemetery shall use only the walks and roads. No person shall gather flowers, damage trees, shrubbery or plants. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 4, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-107. - Planting of trees, shrubs and other improvements. 
(a)  The city undertakes to maintain, as nearly as may be practical, the plantings of trees and shrubs which serve as a backdrop on the cemetery grounds and to preserve the landscape features, but it does not undertake to maintain plants upon individual lots. 
(b)  Permanent planting of grass, shrubs, flowers, and the like shall be made by the city. Further planting may be permitted only at the discretion of the city and with a permit issued by the cemetery superintendent. The ownership of lots or grave spaces does not convey any right to do planting without the express approval of the city. 
(c)  No elevated mounds shall be built over graves and no lot shall be filled above the grade established by the cemetery superintendent. 
(d)  If any tree, shrub or plant standing upon any lot, by means of its roots, branches or otherwise, be or become detrimental to adjacent lots, walks or streets, or if for any reason its removal is deemed necessary, the cemetery superintendent shall have the right and duty to remove the tree, plant or shrub or any part thereof, or otherwise correct the existing condition. 
(e)  No planting of flowers, shrubs, or herbage of any kind is permitted on single graves. All improvements and planting on lots shall be subject to prior approval of the cemetery superintendent. Any improvement or planting made on a lot by or for a lot owner without prior approval may be removed by the cemetery superintendent at the expense of the lot owner. 
(f)  No trees, shrubs, plants, or herbage of any kind shall be removed from any lot without the prior consent of the cemetery superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 4, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-108. - Vehicle operation. 
(a)  All motor vehicles must be operated within the limits of the cemetery in a quiet, safe and orderly manner. Vehicles shall be driven at not more than 15 miles per hour, shall be driven on streets provided, and shall be operated in accordance with the laws of the city and the state. All vehicles shall be parked on the streets in a manner that will permit other vehicles to pass without leaving the street. 
(b)  Except in the performance of duties within the cemetery grounds or in unusual circumstances, vehicles other than passenger cars and funeral cars, and in particular, trucks, bicycles, motorcycles, and motorbikes, are prohibited from entering the cemetery gates. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 4, 7-9-13) 
Sec. 22-109. - Memorial and vault installations. 
All memorial work shall be done between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays. Persons in charge of memorial work shall notify the cemetery superintendent prior to entering the cemetery to perform the work, and must procure the required permit in accordance with subsection 22-82(b) for each setting. All memorial work must comply with the standards as provided by the cemetery superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 4, 7-9-13) 
Secs. 22-110—22-135. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Pierce County Emergency Operations Plan was approved by city and county officials in 1995. It will be activated by the county emergency management director when directed by the chairman of the board of commissioners of the county or when an emergency is declared by the governor. An official copy of such plan is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; floods, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19); Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq. 

Chapter 30 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, § 5.10 et seq. 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Powers of presiding officer in court of a municipal corporation to bind over or commit criminal offenders to jail, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; agreements between private entities and municipal court judges for probation services, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-102; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 30-30. - Municipal court proceedings date and time. 
(a)  The Municipal Court of the City of Blackshear shall convene on the third Friday of every month beginning at 9:00 a.m. This change in court date and time shall take effect beginning on the third Friday of July, 2014, and until such time, the regular court date of the second Tuesday of every month shall remain in effect. 
(b)  The chief judge of municipal court, in consultation with the chief of police, shall have the authority to convene the municipal court for special sessions as necessary to accommodate case scheduling and case load requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, §§ 1, 2, 4-8-14) 
Sec. 30-31. - Bailiff. 
(a)  The bailiff of the municipal court shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of city council. 
(b)  The duties of the bailiff shall consist generally of seeing that the courtroom is in proper condition for sessions of court, of assisting in keeping order while court is in session, and of doing such other acts of assistance as may be required of such bailiff by the judge of the court and the city clerk. 
(Code 1987, § 8-4) 
Sec. 30-32. - Record of cases. 
A record of all cases heard in the municipal court for violation of this Code or other municipal ordinances shall be kept in a suitable bound volume by the city clerk. Such records shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final disposition of the case, and the date of final disposition. 
(Code 1987, § 8-5) 
Sec. 30-33. - Additional methods for giving, forfeiture and collection of appearance bonds. 
(a)  When any person is charged with an offense against the laws or ordinances of the City of Blackshear or other cases subject to trial in the city municipal court, or when any person is arrested for any such offense, such person shall: 
(1)  Give bond for his or her appearance at any session of the city municipal court in the same manner as bonds are given for appearance in the state superior courts; or 
(2)  Give bond in any manner now provided by the Charter, Code, ordinances, resolutions of the city, and laws of the state applicable to the city municipal court. 
(b)  If any person so charged shall fail to appear at the time appointed in said bond, then and in such event said bond or recognizance shall be forfeited and the amount of same collected from the principal and his sureties thereon as set forth herein. 
(c)  A bond forfeiture proceeding shall be commenced immediately upon the failure of appearance of a principal of any bond or recognizance given for the appearance of that person. 
(d)  Execution (forfeiture) hearing: 
(1)  The judge of the municipal court shall, upon the failure of the principal to appear, set an execution hearing for a date within 30 days after said failure to appear or as soon thereafter as the case may be heard. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed by first class mail by the clerk of the court to the principal and to each surety at the addresses given on the bond. 
(2)  If at the hearing it is determined that the bond should be forfeited, the judge shall so order and an execution on the order shall immediately be issued. 
(e)  Nonappearance; when no judgment shall be rendered decreeing forfeiture: 
(1)  No judgment shall be rendered decreeing the forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court by the sworn statement of a reputable physician that the principal in the bond was prevented from attending by some physical disability. 
(2)  No judgment shall be rendered decreeing the forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the principal on the bond was prevented from attending because he was detained in a penal institution in another jurisdiction. A sworn affidavit of the warden or other responsible officer of the penal institution in which the principal has been detained shall be considered adequate proof of the principal's detention. 
(3)  If the prosecution does not try the charges against a defendant within a period of three years after the date of posting bond, no judgment rendered after such period decreeing the forfeiture of the appearance bond may be enforced against the surety of the bond. However, this provision shall not apply where the prosecution's failure to try the charges is due to the fault of the defendant. 
(f)  (1)  On the entering of such judgment, the city clerk shall issue an execution against the principal and the surety or sureties on conformity with such judgment, and in substantially the form and manner that executions are issued by the city for taxes. The execution shall be placed in the hands of the chief of police who shall proceed to collect the same as tax executions are enforced and collected. 
(2)  Effect of article on forfeitures. This article shall not affect the procedures now in force for the forfeiture of any sum of money that is deposited by any person for his appearance in the municipal's court. 
(g)  This section shall not alter or amend the existing means and methods for the giving of appearance bonds in said court by posting a cash bond in United States coin and currency or for the forfeiture and collection of the same. The purpose of this section is to provide additional means and methods for giving an appearance bond and for forfeiture and collection of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, 10-14-08) 
Sec. 30-34. - Bond; effective period. 
Bond to remain in effect until disposition of case completed or until released by court. Once a bond signed by a person as surety has been posted and given, the bond and surety shall remain in effect until the disposition of the case for which it was posted has been completed, including the payment of any fines imposed by the municipal court, or until the municipal court otherwise releases said bond. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, 10-14-08) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIR POLLUTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— The Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq.; authority to control air quality, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(13). 

Sec. 34-31. - Emissions of gases, vapors, and odors. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, or allow any emissions of gases, vapors, or odors beyond the property line from which such emissions occur to be in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as is or is likely to be injurious to the public welfare; to the health of human, plant, or animal life; or to property; or which interfere with the enjoyment of life and property. 
(b)  Detectable odors emitted from the following sources of emission are hereby declared to be objectionable per se: 
(1)  Ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine manufacture. 
(2)  Asphalt manufacture or refining. 
(3)  Blood processing. 
(4)  Bag cleaning. 
(5)  Celluloid manufacture. 
(6)  Coal tar products manufacture. 
(7)  Compost heaps. 
(8)  Crematory. 
(9)  Creosote treatment or manufacture. 
(10)  Disinfectants manufacture. 
(11)  Distillation of bones, coal, or wood. 
(12)  Dyestuff manufacture. 
(13)  Fat rendering. 
(14)  Fertilizer manufacture and bone grinding. 
(15)  Glue or gelatine manufacture. 
(16)  Incinerator or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal, or refuse. 
(17)  Oiled rubber or leather goods manufacture. 
(18)  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, or varnish manufacture. 
(19)  Paper and pulp manufacture. 
(20)  Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture. 
(21)  Sauerkraut manufacture. 
(22)  Shoe-blacking manufacture. 
(23)  Soap manufacture. 
(24)  Stock yards. 
(25)  Sulphuric, nitric, or hydrochloric acid manufacture. 
(26)  Tanning, curing, or storage of hides or skins. 
(27)  Tar distillation or manufacture. 
(28)  Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture. 
(29)  Any other air contaminant discharged into open air of a character and in a quantity which is detrimental to or endangers the public health. 
(Code 1987, § 11-1) 
Sec. 34-32. - Open burning. 
(a)  In general. No person shall kindle an open fire in any public or private place outside any building. Fire started in violation of this section shall be promptly extinguished by the persons responsible for same upon notice by the fire chief or the chief's duly designated agent. During the existence of an air pollution alert, as may be declared by the mayor, all exceptions are void and no open fires shall be kindled. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Fires may be used for the cooking of food, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(2)  Salamanders or other devices may be used for heating by construction or other workers, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(3)  Fires may be set in the course of agricultural operations in growing crops or raising fowl or animals, provided no nuisance is created. 
(4)  Open fires may be set for recreational purposes, such as campfires, provided no smoke violation or nuisance is created. 
(c)  Setting fires by public officer. Open fires may be set in performance of an official duty of any public officer if the fire is necessary for one or more of the following reasons or purposes: 
(1)  For the prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other means; 
(2)  For the instruction of public firefighters or industrial employees under supervision of the county health unit. 
(Code 1987, § 11-2) 
Sec. 34-33. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of the air pollution provisions of this article shall be enforced by the fire chief and the police chief and such subordinate officers of the fire department and police department as are necessary to effectuate the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Code 1987, § 11-3) 
Sec. 34-34. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any air pollution provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-12. 
(b)  Action pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall not be a bar to enforcement by injunction or other appropriate remedy, and the police chief shall have the power to institute and maintain in the name of the city any and all such enforcement proceedings. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge, limit, or otherwise impair the right of any person to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding for damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property. 
(Code 1987, § 11-4) 
Secs. 34-35—34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

Sec. 34-61. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing within the city. 
(Code 1987, § 11-5) 
Sec. 34-62. - Illustrative enumeration. 
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exhaustive. 
(1)  Motor vehicle horns. The sounding of any horn on any automobile, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle on any street or public place of the city except as a warning signal. 
(2)  Radios, television sets, and similar devices. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighboring residents. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and amplifiers. The using or operating of any loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device mounted upon any vehicle within the city for the purpose of broadcasting or advertising any information about any business or activity for any other purpose, unless a permit for such sound amplification has been obtained from the mayor or chief of police. 
(4)  Construction equipment and activity. The operating of any equipment or the performing of any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, roads, or projects within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless a permit for such construction or repair work between such hours has been obtained from the mayor or chief of police. 
(5)  Exhausts. The discharging into the open air of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(6)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by frequent or continuous barking, chirping, or other means of communication disturbs the comfort or repose of the residents of any residential neighborhood. 
(7)  Vehicle repair in residential areas. The repairing, rebuilding, or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the residents of the area. 
(8)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creating of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, or court street. 
(9)  Hawkers and peddlers. The selling of anything by outcry within the residential area of the city, except at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
(10)  Drums. The using of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the city, unless a permit for such use has been obtained from the mayor or chief of police. 
(Code 1987, § 11-6) 
Sec. 34-63. - Same—Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals and warning devices. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(3)  Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(Code 1987, § 11-7) 
Sec. 34-64. - Same—Injunctions. 
In addition to punishment of a violator of the noise regulations as provided in section 1-12, the operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of the noise regulations of this article which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents of this city shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1987, § 11-8) 
Secs. 34-65—34-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord.\No. 2011-03, § 1, adopted Aug. 9, 2011, repealed the former Art. IV, Div. 1, Div. 2, §§ 34-106—34-109, Div. 3, §§ 34-126—34-129 and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to nuisances and derived from the Code of 1987, § 11-9—11-13; and Ord. of 10-10-00. 

Sec. 34-91. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or other entity to create, commit, maintain, or permit to be created, committed, or maintained, within the municipal limits of the City of Blackshear, any nuisance as defined herein. Each day that the offender fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with this code section shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. Any person convicted under this code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to punishment by imprisonment for not more than six months or a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or both, plus court costs and fees, or any other penalty authorized under this charter or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 34-92. - Nuisance defined. 
(1)  A "nuisance" is anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
(2)  For purposes of this article, the various nuisances herein specifically described and enumerated shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this code. 
(3)  The following specific acts, conditions, and things, either alone or in combination with each other, are hereby declared to constitute a nuisance: 
a.  Any act, condition, or thing defined as a nuisance under Georgia law or elsewhere in this Code; 
b.  Imperfect plumbing. Any imperfect, leaking, unclean, or filthy sink, water closet, urinal, or other plumbing fixture in any building used or occupied by human beings. 
c.  Garbage or refuse. Depositing, maintaining, or permitting to be maintained or to accumulate on any public or private property any animal or vegetable matter which attends the processing, preparation, transportation, cooking, eating, sale, or storage of meat, fish, vegetables, fruit and all other food or food products found within the city which is likely to cause or transmit disease, or which may be a hazard to health. 
d.  Impure water. Any well or other supply of water used for drinking or household purposes which is polluted or which is so constructed or situated that it may become polluted. 
e.  Flies, mosquitoes, rodents, wild animals. The accumulations of manure, garbage, stagnant water, waste materials, abandoned property, or any other things that are attracting, harboring, or which provide breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, rodents, and other wild animals. 
f.  Poison ivy. Permitting poison ivy to grow upon any public or private property. 
g.  Dead animals. An owner of a dead animal permitting it to remain un-disposed of longer than 24 hours after its death. 
h.  Polluting body of water. Throwing or leaving any dead animal or decayed animal, or vegetable matter, or garbage or filth whatever, either solid or fluid, into any pool of water or into any other stream, river, or waterway. 
i.  Bonfires. Burning, causing, or permitting to be burned any fire that is prohibited under section 34-32 of this Code. 
j.  Private sanitary landfill. Operating or permitting the operation of a private sanitary landfill without controlling rodents, insects, and litter; without compacting and covering solid waste each day; and without preventing and prohibiting burning. 
k.  Privies and cesspools. Erecting or maintaining any privy or cesspool except such sanitary privies and cesspools, the plans of which are approved by the local health department. 
l.  Rubbish. Depositing, maintaining, or permitting to be maintained or accumulated upon any public or private property any combustible refuse matter such as papers, sweepings, rags, grass, tree branches, wood shavings, wood, magazines, cardboard, etc. 
m.  Waste material. All noncombustible inorganic matter such as ashes, glass, sand, earth, stones, concrete, mortar, metals, tin cans, etc. 
n.  Livestock waste. Any accumulation of waste manure or straw resulting from the transportation, housing, or confining of animals. 
o.  Litter. Allowing to accumulate, to scatter, or to be deposited outside an approved container any garbage, waste, or refuse. 
p.  Vegetation. Any weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthful growths that obtain a height exceeding one foot on any property. For the purposes of this section, "weeds" shall be defined to include, but not limited to, the following: ragweed, pusley, pigweed, nettle, thistle of any kind, goldenrod, tumbleweed, cocklebur, sandbur, wild oats, milkweed, mustard, jimson, burdock, dandelion, or other unsightly growths of a like kind. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the cultivation of crops not otherwise prohibited under the current Code or zoning laws of the city. 
q.  Dead trees and limbs. Any dead trees, dead tree limbs, or fallen tree limbs on public or private property, if such trees and limbs constitute a fire hazard or other health hazard. 
r.  Abandoned property. Any deteriorated, wrecked, or derelict property in unusable condition, having no value other than nominal scrap or junk value, if any, and which has been left unprotected from the elements outside of a permanent structure or shelter, which shall include but not be limited to, deteriorated, wrecked, inoperative, or partially dismantled motor vehicles, trailers, boats, machinery, appliances, furniture, and any other similar articles in such condition. 
s.  Graffiti. Any writing, printing, marks, signs, symbols, figures, designs, inscriptions, or other drawings that are scratched, scrawled, painted, drawn or otherwise placed on any exterior surface of a building, wall, fence, sidewalk, curb, or other permanent structure on public or private property and which has the effect of defacing the property. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 34-93. - Remedies against nuisances. 
The city shall have the following rights and remedies to address nuisance conditions: 
(a)  Civil action in the appropriate judicial forum; 
(b)  Complaint in rem seeking abatement pursuant to this code and state law; 
(c)  Citation for violation of municipal ordinance; 
(d)  Use of the contempt powers of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 34-94. - Authority of code officer. 
The chief of police, or any police officer he may so designate, shall act as "code officer" as set forth herein and shall have the following powers: 
(a)  To investigate complaints of nuisances; 
(b)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and inspections; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(c)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(d)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; 
(e)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate; 
(f)  If a nuisance is found to exist, to take whatever action necessary to abate such nuisance; and, 
(g)  To exercise such other general police powers necessary and proper for the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 34-95. - Right of entry and inspection. 
Whenever the code officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition constituting a nuisance as provided in this article, the code officer may enter such building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or examine the same or perform any duty imposed upon the code officer by this article, provided that: 
(a)  If such building or premises are occupied, the code officer shall first present proper credentials and request entry; 
(b)  If such building or premises are unoccupied, the code officer shall first make reasonable efforts to locate and contact the owner(s) or other person(s) having charge or control of the building or premises and present proper credentials and request entry; upon leaving such unoccupied premises, the code officer shall post a written notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises stating the name of the person making such entry and the date and time that such entry was made by the code officer; 
(c)  If unable to obtain entry after requested of the occupant or owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises, then the code officer shall obtain a warrant from the judge of the municipal court prior to entering said building or premises; 
(d)  Any such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 34-96. - Notice of nuisance condition. 
(1)  Written notice of nuisance condition. Upon making a determination that a nuisance exists on any property located within the municipal limits of the city, the code officer shall provide written notice, either personally or by certified mail, of the nuisance condition to the occupant(s) of such property, or if unoccupied, the owner(s) of such premises. The written notice shall provide the following information: 
a.  The name of the code officer who made the determination that a nuisance existed, along with the date and time of the inspection or examination of the property; 
b.  A description of the nuisance(s) determined to exist on the property; 
c.  The specific action(s) that must be taken by the occupant(s) or owner(s) to abate the nuisance; 
d.  The time period within which the nuisance must be abated, which shall be not less than ten days nor more than 30 days of the date of the notice, and 
e.  Notice that failure to abate such nuisance within the time period may result in the city pursuing its various remedies under section [34-93] of this article. 
(2)  When written notice not required. The code officer shall issue a written notice in every nuisance situation, unless: 
a.  The code officer determines that a nuisance constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety, and general welfare of the public; or 
b.  The code officer has previously issued a notice for the same type of nuisance(s) existing upon the same property within the preceding three-month period. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 34-97. - Complaint in rem. 
(1)  Filing of complaint in rem. Whenever the code officer becomes aware of the existence of any nuisance for which abatement is sought, the code officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such nuisance condition exists. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and all known interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the code officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall be issued by the clerk of the municipal court and shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the judge of the municipal court at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of such complaint. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint prior to the hearing date and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(2)  "Interested parties" Defined. For purposes of this section, the term "interested parties" shall include: 
a.  The owner of the property; 
b.  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
c.  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
d.  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the reasonably ascertainable from the municipal real property tax records; however, "interested parties" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; 
e.  Persons in possession of said property and premises; and 
f.  Such other persons defined under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8(6). 
(3)  Service of complaint. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Additionally, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways upon all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the municipal real property tax records: 
a.  If such person(s) is a resident of the county, then by personal service upon such person. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the code officer, or his designee, or by any law enforcement officer of the city or the county, and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the municipal court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
b.  If such person(s) is a resident of this state, but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing to the most recent address available for said person(s); 
c.  If such person(s) is a nonresident of this state whose mailing address is known, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing; 
d.  If such person(s) is a nonresident of this state whose mailing address is unknown, service shall be perfected by publishing a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing in the newspaper in the legal organ for the county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing, with the second notice being published at least seven days prior to the date of the hearing. 
e.  If such person(s) is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served as provided under subsections (a) through (d). If such person has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by personal service on the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located, or a person designated by the probate judge as county administrator or guardian ad litem, at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. The judge, or such other person designated by him, shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person. 
f.  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, service shall be perfected by personal service on the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located, or a person designated by the probate judge as county administrator or guardian ad litem, at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. The judge, or such other person designated by him, shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
g.  In the event the whereabouts of any interested party is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the code officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if any interested party cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the code officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (d), and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
h.  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing, or his attorney, by regular mail to said person(s) address provided to the clerk of municipal court. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(4)  Lis pendens. A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 34-98. - Hearings; order for abatement. 
(1)  The judge of the municipal court shall preside at the hearing on any complaint in rem filed under this article. The city attorney, or his designee, shall represent the code officer and the city at any such hearing. Any interested party who shall file an answer and appear at the hearing may either represent himself or be represented by legal counsel of his own choosing. If such person requests the appointment of legal counsel, the court shall appoint legal counsel if it is determined that such person is indigent. 
(2)  If, after notice and hearing, the court determines that a nuisance condition exists upon the subject real property identified in the complaint, the court shall state written findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
a.  If abatement of the nuisance condition can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the subject real property, requiring the owner or other interested party, within the time specified in the order, to take whatever action necessary to abate the nuisance condition and bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; or 
b.  If the abatement of the nuisance condition cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the subject real property, requiring the owner or other interested party, within the time specified in order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the subject real property without consideration of the value of the land on which the nuisance condition is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a nuisance condition may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the courts determination. The present value of subject real property and the costs of the repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs or repair, alteration, or improvement of the nuisance condition shall be the cost necessary to bring the subject real property into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 34-99. - Failure to comply with order. 
If the owner or other interested party fails to comply with an order rendered by the court under section 34-98 of this article, the code officer or other building official may cause such nuisance condition to be abated by the city at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Sec. 34-100. - Lien against property; recovery of costs. 
The city shall have the right to recover any cost or expense incurred by the city in abating any nuisance condition pursuant to the provisions of this article from the owner of the property upon which the nuisance condition exists, and the city shall have a lien against the property for the same. The city clerk, or a designee, shall issue an execution against the property owner for the costs and expenses incurred by the city in such abatement, said execution to be signed by the city clerk, or a designee, and directed to the tax commissioner responsible for collecting the municipal real property taxes, as in the case of regular taxes due to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Sec 34-101. - Lien to attach. 
(1)  The lien provided for in section 34-100 of this article shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring abatement in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records and lien records of the county and shall enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force and effect until paid in full. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the code officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the tax commissioner responsible for collecting the municipal real property taxes. It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the city. 
(2)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the tax commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this section. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this section. 
(3)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, municipal tax collector, or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(4)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for the abatement of such nuisance condition or rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 8-9-11) 
Secs. 34-102—34-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-09, §§ I—X, adopted Oct. 12, 2004, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, §§ 34-146—34-174, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of Nov. 20, 1995, §§ II—IX. 
State Law reference— Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-14; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17; minimum standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17; erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land-disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; permits for land-disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-7, 12-7-9. 

Sec. 34-146. - Title. 
This article will be known as "City of Blackshear Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. 2004-09, § I, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 34-147. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMP's): A collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission: The state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Department of Natural Resources. 
Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
District: The Satilla River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan: A plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan". 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 34-148(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (a) Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (b) Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Qualified personnel: Any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Satilla River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. 2004-09, § II, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 34-148. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 34-149 of this article and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 34-149 of this article and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 34-149(c)(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1) through (8), (9) and (10) herein; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. 2004-09, § III, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 34-149. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (2) below or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (16) below, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. 2004-09, § IV, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 34-150. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Blackshear without first obtaining a permit from the Pierce County Joint Planning Commission to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Pierce County Joint Planning Commission and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of subsections 34-149(b) and (c) of this article. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
(3)  A fee, in the amount of $80.00 shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) and (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 34-149(c)(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per this subsection have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(6)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the erosion and sedimentation act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 34-149(b) and (c) of this article. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be criteria in the current issue or the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  Data required for site plan. 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior disturbing activities." 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.  Scale drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  Maintenance statement—"Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." 
(3)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 34-149(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 34-150(b)(5) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(Ord. 2004-09, § V, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 34-151. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The Pierce County Code Inspector will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permitees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permitees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permitee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permitees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The Pierce County Joint Planning Commission shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The board, on or before December 31, 2003, shall promulgate rules and regulations setting forth the requirements and standards for certification and the procedures for decertification of a local issuing authority. The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. 2004-09, § VI, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 34-152. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 34-150(b)(5). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. 2004-09, § VII, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 34-153. - Education and certification. 
After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(Ord. 2004-09, § VIII, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 34-154. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 30 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Pierce County. 
(Ord. 2004-09, § IX, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 34-155. - Effectivity; validity; liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on October 12, 2004. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not effect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. 2004-09, § X, 10-12-04) 
Secs. 34-156—34-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 34-201. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Blackshear Wetlands Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 1, 7-11-05) 
Sec. 34-202. - Intent and purpose. 
The wetlands of Blackshear, Georgia are important to the environment and shall be protected. The purpose of this article is to recognize and require adherence to federal regulations and procedures that govern the development of land that contain wetlands within the city. The regulations contained in this article are created under the requirement of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §1344), ("CWA"). Any city government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. In the event of a conflict between or among any provisions of this article, the Clean Water Act or any other ordinance, resolution or regulation of the city, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. It is not the intent of this article to regulate individual properties where activities will not impact wetlands and do not require a land-disturbing permit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 2, 7-11-05) 
Sec. 34-203. - Definitions. 
All words in these standards have their customary dictionary definitions except as specifically defined herein. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. 
Anaerobic: Not having molecular oxygen (O 2 ) present. 
Applicant: Any person who seeks permission to engage in any regulated activity on any land that contains wetland areas, as those terms are defined herein. 
COE: United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
Director: The director or his/her designee of the City of Blackshear Community Development Department. 
Generalized wetlands map: The latest edition of the City of Blackshear maps generated from national wetlands inventory mapping. 
Hydrophytic vegetation: Any plant growing in water or in soil that is at least periodically anaerobic as a result of saturation; plants typically found in wet habitats. 
Jurisdictional wetlands determination: A delineation of jurisdictional wetlands boundaries by the U.S, Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §1344. as amended). 
Jurisdictional wetlands: A wetlands area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
National Wetlands inventory (NWI) maps: A series of maps produced by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service showing the location and classification of wetlands in standard topographical areas. A wetlands inventory area does not necessarily represent jurisdictional wetlands and shall not serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or wetland delineation. 
Regulated activity: Any activity that will, or which may reasonably be expected to result in the discharge of dredged or fills material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands: As defined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency means an area that is inundated or saturated by surfacewater or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions commonly know as hydrophilic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve temporary or permanent sources of water to cause soil saturation. 
Wetlands delineation: The establishment of wetlands boundaries by a representative of the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and authority designated by the COE, or the director, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1344), as amended. Wetlands shall be delineated on the basis of hydrophytic vegetation, hydric soils, and wetlands hydrology, in accordance with the techniques outlined in the COE, Wetlands Delineation Manual (Technical Report Y-87-1, January 1987). 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 3, 7-11-05) 
Sec. 34-204. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
(a)  Generally. The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Blackshear, Georgia that are identified, designated and mapped as wetland areas by the city mayor and council. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
The generalized wetlands map and the established wetlands protection district do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and shall not serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries approved by the COE, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article shall not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
The generalized wetlands map is available in the community development department and incorporated by reference. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be allowed as of right within an area shown as a wetland on the generalized wetlands map, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except as provided herein. 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that an individual 404 permit is required. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 4, 7-11-05) 
Sec. 34-205. - Benefits. 
Important benefits to the city citizens that are derived from wetlands protection include: 
(1)  Flood control. 
(2)  Erosion control. 
(3)  Improved water quality due to the retention of sediment, nutrients, and toxic materials. 
(4)  Aesthetics. 
(5)  Recreational and natural resource education opportunities. 
(6)  Open space. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 5, 7-11-05) 
Sec. 34-206. - Authority and applicability. 
(a)  Generally. Terms and provision of the wetlands protections ordinance, established herein, shall apply to all activities that require the issuance of a land disturbance permit on any real property within the city. No land-disturbing permit shall be issued by the building inspector without it being determined that the proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  Site plans. Application for a land disturbing permit within the wetlands protection division shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetlands boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection system designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(c)  Activities to comply with site plan. All activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform to the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal or change the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the building official/inspector. Minor changes such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(d)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans. 
(1)  Single-family detached and duplex dwellings constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 6, 7-11-05) 
Sec. 34-207. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Jurisdictional wetlands shall be protected according to the regulation of the State of Georgia, COE, Environmental Protection Agency and all other applicable state and federal regulations. Under current federal law and state policy, alterations or degradation of wetlands should be avoided unless it can be demonstrated that there will be no long-term impacts or net loss of wetlands. Any unavoidable degradation or loss must be mitigated through the restoration, creation, enhancement or preservation of other waters of the United States. 
If the applicant can provide to the building inspector a valid COE wetlands delineation that verifies that the proposed activity is not located within jurisdictional wetlands, or if the applicant can provide a valid COE permit or letter that authorized the proposed activity within jurisdictional wetlands, then the building inspector shall follow current procedures for issuing a land disturbance permit. If such evidence of compliance with COE permitting requirements is not provided, then the procedures are as follows: 
(1)  The building inspector shall consult the generalized wetlands map to assess whether the proposed activity is located in the wetlands protection district or within 100 feet of the wetlands protection district. 
(2)  If the building inspector determines that the proposed activity is of a type that could not result in a disturbance of wetlands or if the proposed activity is not located in the wetlands protection district or within 100 feet of the wetlands protection district, the building inspector shall follow current procedures for issuing a land-disturbing permit. 
(3)  If the building inspector determines that the proposed activity is located in the wetlands protection district or within 100 feet of the wetlands protection district and that the proposed activity is of a type that could result in a disturbance of wetlands, a COE jurisdictional wetlands determination shall be required prior to issuance of a land-disturbing permit. 
(4)  If the COE determines that a permit or letter of permission is required, a land-disturbing permit shall be issued only following issuance of a COE permit or letter of permission. If the COE determines that the proposed activity would not require a COE permit or letter of permission, the building inspector shall proceed with current procedures for issuing a land disturbance permit based on documentation of the COE determination. If the COE determines that wetlands mitigation is required, the applicant shall perform mitigation in the city, unless such action conflicts with the direction of COE. 
(5)  If under any of the provision of this section a conflict occurs between the building inspector and the applicant with regards to the proposed activity being a type that could result in a disturbance of wetlands, the applicant shall provide the building inspector with the appropriate COE documentation to resolve the conflict. 
(b)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the city inspections and permits division and will be reviewed within 15 days. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, disapproval) by the building inspector/official. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is deemed to be approved. Decisions of the building official/inspector may be appealed to the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 7, 7-11-05) 
Sec. 34-208. - Penalties. 
When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may be required to remove the structure and will be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 702 of the Pierce County Development Code. 
When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation as far as practicable. 
If the community development director determines that a violation of this article also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the community development director shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the applicant and/or property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 8, 7-11-05) 
Secs. 34-209—34-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WATER CONSERVATION 
DIVISION 1. - UNIFORM REQUIREMENTS FOR CRITICAL WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE 

Sec. 34-221. - Adoption of requirements. 
The mayor and council adopt the following uniform requirements for possible future critical emergency situations for the city's water supply and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the City of Blackshear hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 2-10-09) 
Sec. 34-222. - Drought indicators and triggers. 
The "Georgia Drought Management Plan" uses four primary drought indicators which determine the health of the hydrologic system, climatic changes, and drought conditions. The drought indicators are selected for each of the nine climate divisions (CDs) found in the state. These indicators are: precipitation, reservoir levels, groundwater levels, and stream flows. These indicators are continuously monitored and evaluated by the state climatology office and EPD. 
According to the US Climate Division, the city is within the climate division 9 where the drought indicators are the precipitation during the last three, six, and 12 months compared to the same months historically. 
Drought triggers are specific values of indicators used to determine drought levels. The state drought management plan describes four levels of drought (see table below). 

 
When one of the trigger values reaches a severe level for two consecutive months, then a preliminary evaluation is set up by the climatologist and EPD. If the preliminary evaluation indicates the need of a drought response declaration, then EPD will determine the level of response and the local government and water supply provider will be notified with the actions to be taken. 
The state climatologist and EPD will continue to monitor the drought indicators to determine any changes. To get out of a drought and to decrease the level of response, all the triggers that are part of the CD 9 must be under the severe level for at least four consecutive months. 
The city will include pre-drought strategies in their drought contingency plan according to the state drought management plan. The pre-drought strategies shall be implemented before a drought for the purpose of preparedness, mitigation, monitoring, and conservation and are applied to the following areas: municipal and industrial, agriculture, and water quality, flora, and fauna. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 2-10-09) 
Sec. 34-223. - Potable water use priorities. 
During a response to drought conditions, the city shall determine the use priorities for all customers, including: residential, commercial, and others. Following are the drought responses in accordance to the state drought management plan. 
(a)  Municipal and industrial drought responses. 
(1)  Outdoor watering reduction schedule: 
• Outdoor watering other than those exempted activities is to occur only on scheduled days. 
• Prior to onset of declared drought conditions, outdoor water use can occur during any hours on the scheduled days. 
• During declared drought conditions, outdoor water use will only be allowed during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. 
Scheduled days are defined as follows: 
• Odd-numbered addresses may water on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
• Even-numbered or unnumbered addresses may water on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
Scheduled weekend day is defined as follows: 
• Odd-numbered addresses may water on Sundays. 
• Even-numbered or unnumbered addresses may water on Saturdays. 
Drought Response Table 

 
a.  Landscape irrigation—Established landscapes. Residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, and recreational landscapes: 
• Established landscapes using small capacity wells not requiring EPD water withdrawal permits for groundwater use are exempt from the above schedule. 
• EPD will grant exemptions from the above schedule for use of recycled treated wastewater as determined on a case-by-case basis by EPD. 
• Irrigation of personal food gardens is exempt from restrictions. 
• Irrigation of landscapes (turf, ornamentals, annuals, and containerized plants) follows declared drought response levels schedule (above). 
b.  Landscape irrigation—Newly installed landscapes (in place less than 30 days). Residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, and recreational landscapes: 
• Irrigation of landscapes (turf, ornamentals, annuals, and containerized plants) allowed any day of the week, during allowed hours for the level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. After this 30-day period, irrigation of newly installed landscapes follows schedule for established landscapes. 
• For landscapes installed by licensed professionals, please see commercial exemptions below. 
c.  Golf courses. 
• Irrigation of fairways shall follow landscape irrigation schedules above, for unnumbered addresses. 
• Golf course using small capacity wells not requiring EPD water withdrawal permits for groundwater use are exempt from the above schedule. 
• EPD will grant exemptions from the above schedule for use of recycled treated wastewater as determined on a case-by-case basis by EPD. 
• Irrigation of greens and tees are exempt from restrictions. 
d.  Other restricted outdoor water uses. Follow basic schedule for levels one and two (see Drought Response Table above). The following listed activities are prohibited for levels three and four. 
• Filling installed swimming pools (except when necessary for health care or structural integrity). 
• Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts. 
• Washing buildings or structures (except for immediate fire protection). 
• Noncommercial fund-raisers, such as car washes. 
• Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls (Except when necessary to support aquatic life). 
Follow basic schedule for level one (see drought response table). The following listed activities are prohibited for levels two, three, and four: 
• Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways (Except when necessary for public health and safety). 
Activities prohibited during all drought response levels: 
• Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing. 
(2)  Commercial uses exempt from state-mandated outdoor water use restrictions: 
• Professional licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers: during installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
• Irrigation contractors: during installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
• Sod producers. 
• Ornamental growers. 
• Fruit and vegetable growers. 
• Retail garden centers. 
• Hydro-seeding. 
• Power-washing. 
• Construction sites (e.g., to re-implement vegetation after earth moving). 
• Producers of food and fiber. 
• Car washes. 
• Other activities essential to daily business. 
Prudent water management will be expected of all commercial uses. 
Note that some of these state allowed exemptions may be curtailed in drought response levels three and four by locally imposed restrictions by mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 2-10-09) 
Sec. 34-224. - Declaration of emergency. 
The declaration of such emergency will be published in the local press and announcements made over local radio stations in both English and Spanish. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 2, 2-10-09) 
Secs. 34-225—34-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATERING SCHEDULE 

Sec. 34-231. - Definitions. 
When used in this division: 
Address means the "house number" (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. "Even numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. "Odd numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 2-10-09) 
State Law reference— Authority O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-90 et seq., 12-5-170 et seq. History. Original rule entitled "definitions" adopted. F. June 8, 2004; eff. June 28, 2004. 
Sec. 34-232. - Applicability of rule. 
These rules apply to any entity, and its customers, permitted by the state environmental protection division (EPD) for water withdrawal or for operation of a drinking water system. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 2-10-09) 
State Law reference— Authority O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-90 et seq., 12-5-170 et seq. History. Original rule entitled "applicability of rule" adopted. F. June 8, 2004; eff. June 28, 2004. 
Sec. 34-233. - Outdoor water use schedule during non-drought periods. 
(1)  Outdoor water use other than exempted activities shall occur only as follows: 
a.  Odd-numbered addresses: outdoor water use is allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
b.  Even-numbered addresses: outdoor water use is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 2-10-09) 
State Law reference— Authority O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-90 et seq., 12-5-170 et seq. History. Original rule entitled "outdoor water use schedule during non-drought periods" adopted. F. June 8, 2004; eff. June 28, 2004. 
Sec. 34-234. - Outdoor water use schedule during declared drought response levels. 
(1)  The director of the environmental protection division is authorized to make drought declarations. 
(2)  During declared drought conditions, outdoor water use other than activities exempted in [section 34-235], shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. 
(3)  Declared drought response level one: Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
a.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
b.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
c.  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing is prohibited. 
(4)  Declared drought response level two: Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
a.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
b.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
c.  The following uses are prohibited: 
1.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing; 
2.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways except when necessary for public health and safety; 
(5)  Declared drought response level three: Outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
a.  The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday. 
b.  The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday. 
c.  The following uses are prohibited: 
1.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing; 
2.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety 
3.  Filling installed swimming pools except when necessary for health care or structural integrity; 
4.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts; 
5.  Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection; 
6.  Non-commercial fund-raisers, such as car washes; 
7.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
(6)  Declared drought response level four: No outdoor water use is allowed, other than for activities exempted in [section 34-235], or as the EPD director may order. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 2-10-09) 
State Law reference— Authority O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-90 et seq., 12-5-170 et seq. History. Original rule entitled "outdoor water use schedule during declared drought response levels" adopted. F. June 8, 2004; eff. June 28, 2004. 
Sec. 34-235. - Exemptions. 
(1)  This rule shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
a.  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
b.  Reuse of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(2)  The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule. 
a.  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
b.  Irrigation of personal food gardens. 
(3)  Newly (in place less than 30 days) installed landscapes are subject to the following: 
a.  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during drought response level four. 
b.  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. 
(4)  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule: 
a.  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
b.  Irrigation of fairways during times of non-drought and declared drought response level one. 
c.  Irrigation of tees during times of non-drought and declared drought response levels one, two and three. 
d.  Irrigation of greens. 
(5)  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule: 
a.  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers: during installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
b.  Irrigation contractors: during installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
c.  Sod producers. 
d.  Ornamental growers. 
e.  Fruit and vegetable growers. 
f.  Retail garden centers. 
g.  Hydro-seeding. 
h.  Power-washing. 
i.  Construction sites. 
j.  Producers of food and fiber. 
k.  Car washes. 
l.  Other activities essential to daily business. 
m.  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 2-10-09) 
State Law reference— Authority O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-90 et seq., 12-5-170 et seq. History. Original rule entitled "exemptions" adopted. F. June 8, 2004; eff. June 28, 2004. 
Chapter 35 - EXCISE TAX 
ARTICLE I. - LODGING EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 35-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City. The City of Blackshear and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the City of Blackshear is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
City clerk. The duly appointed city clerk of the City of Blackshear or his designee. 
Due date. The twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability. The operator's prospective tax liability based upon tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room. A room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel. Any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truck stop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator. Any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Permanent resident. Any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than ten continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax. The tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 35-2. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of five percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 35-4 of this article. The lodging excise tax shall be levied at this rate and the resulting revenues shall be used pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 35-3. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every operator renting guest rooms in this city shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 35-4 of this article. The operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant and shall be collected by the operator at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 35-4. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat exempted by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 35-5. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that [this chapter] becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 35-6. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for each monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. An operator who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the state commissioner of revenue, and city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; operators required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for an operator who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such operator shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the operator. Such grant may not be applicable for a longer period than 12 consecutive months. An operator granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 35-7. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation to tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any operator, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 35-6 of this article. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 35-8. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the operator failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection [35-7(c)]. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 35-6 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 35-9. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Operator selling or quitting business. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than one or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the governing authority. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the governing authority, the excess amount paid to the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 35-10. - Administration of ordinance; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Application for sales tax audit reports. Each year, in the month of January, the city clerk shall request in writing from the state commissioner of revenue any reports of sales tax audits conducted of hotels in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 35-11. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 35-12. - Effective date. 
This article and the tax levied hereby shall become effective on the first day of the second month following its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 4-14-09) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 26; parks and recreation, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; false fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Sprinkler Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-11-1 et seq.; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; smoke detector requirements, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; local fire safety standards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; following fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247; the Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Bonfires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, during a holiday or at any time, to build a bonfire of any description within the city limits, except at places approved and designated by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1987, § 10-6) 
Sec. 38-2. - Smoking of cigarettes, cigars, pipes and other devices. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to determine that the smoking of cigarettes, cigars, pipes, and other devices used for smoking tobacco, shall be a fire hazard at any gathering of more than 200 people inside any building within the city. If the chief of police determines that the smoking of cigarettes, cigars, pipes, and other devices used for smoking tobacco is a fire hazard at such gathering and assembly, such chief shall announce to the gathering that there shall be no smoking. Any person who shall smoke after such announcement shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1987, § 10-7) 
Sec. 38-3. - Fireworks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, display, shoot or explode any fireworks in the city; provided, however, public fireworks exhibitions by a professional company may be allowed upon approval by the fire chief or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 38-4. - Illegal use of water from fire hydrant. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from any fire hydrant, whether public or private, for any purpose other than for the extinguishment of fires, or for lawful city purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 38-5. - Tampering with fire hydrant. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper or interfere with any fire hydrant of the city, except in case of fire and under instructions from the chief of the fire department, without first obtaining a permit from the fire chief, and without notifying the chief of the nature of such interference. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 38-6. - Obstructing fire station entrance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, in any manner, the entrance to any fire station in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 38-7. - Conditions for lighting fires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or set fire to trash, rubbish, weeds, grass, or any other combustible material, on any premises within the city without first having confined the area so to be burned so as not to endanger any wood, fences, houses or any property of any description whatsoever; and before any fire shall be so set it shall be the duty of the person responsible to obtain a burn permit from the fire chief or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 38-8. - Fire lanes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park in, block any, or stop for any reason in any fire lane in the city, either by traffic or other means. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 38-9. - Penalty provision. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the City of Blackshear. Any person convicted under this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to punishment by imprisonment for not more than six months or a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or both, plus court costs and fees, or any other penalty authorized under the Charter or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 12-9-14) 
Secs. 38-10—38-30. - Reserved. 
Chapter 42 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-12, adopted Sept. 9, 2009, repealed the former Ch. 42, Art. I, Art. II, Div. 1, §§ 42-31—42-46, Div. 2, §§ 42-66—42-68, and enacted a new Ch. 42 as set out herein. The former Ch. 42 pertained to floods and derived from Ord. of 11-14-95, art. 1, §§ B—D; art. 2, §§ A—H; art. 3, §§ A—C; art. 4, §§ A—C; art. 5, § I; art. 6. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 26; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 42-1. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 1, § A, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-2. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Blackshear, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 1, § B, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 1, § C, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 1, § D, 9-9-09) 
Secs. 42-5—42-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 42-11. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Blackshear, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 2, § A, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-12. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Unincorporated Pierce County, Georgia are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. Within the jurisdiction of Blackshear, Georgia. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Blackshear City Hall, 318 Taylor Street, Blackshear, Georgia 31516. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 2, § B, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-13. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 2, § C, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-14. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 2, § D, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-15. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 2, § E, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-16. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 2, § F, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-17. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of City of Blackshear, Georgia or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 2, § G, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-18. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 2, § H, 9-9-09) 
Secs. 42-19—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 42-31. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The planning and codes director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 3, § A, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-32. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the planning and codes director on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 42-42(2) of this chapter; 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The planning and codes director shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 3, § B, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-33. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the planning and codes director shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-12 of this chapter, then the planning and codes director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article IV of this chapter. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 42-32(2) of this article. 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 42-32(2) of this article. 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the planning and codes director shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 42-32(1)c. of this article and subsection 42-42(2) or subsection 42-44(2) of this chapter. 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the planning and codes director shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the planning and codes director and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 3, § C, 9-9-09) 
Secs. 42-34—42-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 42-41. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater: 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 4, § A, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-42. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-41(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 42-33(6) of this chapter. 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 42-41(6) above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a, c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-12 of this chapter, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 4, § B, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-43. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-12 of this chapter, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-12 of this chapter, then the planning and codes director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-41(4) "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The planning and codes director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 4, § C, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-44. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-12 of this chapter, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 42-42 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 4, § D, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-45. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-12 of this chapter, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-41(4), "elevated buildings". 
The planning and codes director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 42-32(1)c. and 42-32(2) of this chapter. 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 4, § E, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-46. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 4, § F, 9-9-09) 
Sec. 42-47. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 4, § G, 9-9-09) 
Secs. 42-48—42-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 42-51. - Variances. 
(a)  The joint planning commission as established by the city shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the planning and codes director in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and codes director may appeal such decision to the county superior court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the joint planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The planning and codes director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the joint planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 5, 9-9-09) 
Secs. 42-52—42-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 42-61. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the planning and codes director's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 42-12 of this chapter. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
a.  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
b.  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
c.  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
d.  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 25, 2009. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 25, 2009. [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study. The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
2.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 25, 2009 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 25, 2009 [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after September 25, 2009. [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, Art. 6, 9-9-09) 
Chapter 46 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by state department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; authority of county to provide public health facilities and services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq.; regulations for septic tanks or individual sewerage management systems in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; power of county board of health to adopt rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE WATER WELLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Water well standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq. 

Sec. 46-31. - Wells for drinking water prohibited. 
Except for the purposes set forth in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person located within the city, where city water service is provided, to utilize any type of well for the purpose of obtaining drinking water. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § 1) 
Sec. 46-32. - Permit for irrigation wells. 
(a)  It shall be permissible for city residents to maintain and utilize wells for irrigation purposes only. 
(b)  Any resident wishing to utilize a well for irrigation purposes shall notify the city clerk of this fact. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § 2) 
Sec. 46-33. - Septic tanks restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or utilize a septic tank in any area in which the city provides sewage service. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § 3) 
Sec. 46-34. - Wells for industrial/commercial purposes. 
(a)  With written permission of the city, it shall be permissible to utilize industrial/commercial wells to entities which need water in quantities which the city is not able to provide. 
(b)  Any such wells shall be utilized only for industrial/commercial purposes and not for human consumption or irrigation purposes. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § 4) 
Sec. 46-35. - Consideration of permit application. 
Upon any application for a permit to utilize a well for any of the purposes permitted in this article, the city council (or the appropriate committee of the city council) shall review such application and, upon verification of the purposes stated in such application, shall grant permission for such use unless it is determined that the applicant will not comply with the written request as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § 8) 
Sec. 46-36. - Permit fee. 
Any person requesting permission to utilize a well for any purpose permitted in this article shall pay to the city an initial application fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, which shall be a one-time fee and shall not be chargeable for the renewal of any permit which has been previously granted by the city. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § 5) 
Sec. 46-37. - Connection to city water system prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any type of well to the water system of the city for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § 6) 
Sec. 46-38. - Certain wells excepted. 
The provisions of this article shall not affect any well being utilized by city residents as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § 7) 
Sec. 46-39. - Penalties for violation. 
Any violation of the terms of this article shall be punishable upon conviction as follows: 
(1)  First offense, warning. 
(2)  Second offense, fine of $50.00 or five days in jail, or both. 
(3)  Third offense, fine of $75.00 or ten days in jail, or both. 
(4)  Fourth and subsequent offense, fine of $100.00 or 15 days in jail, or both. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § 8) 
Secs. 46-40—46-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY SEWER USE 

Sec. 46-60. - Discharge of storm water, groundwater, etc., to sanitary sewer. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as storm water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to the city's POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, 10-12-05) 
Sec. 46-61. - Prohibited wastes. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas; 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five or higher than nine, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the city; 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as but not limited to ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  Any waters that will cause a pass thru of the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, 10-12-05) 
Sec. 46-62. - Discharge of septage. 
Septage or the contents of commercial vehicles employed in the pumping and cleaning of septic tanks may be discharged into the public sewerage system only at the wastewater treatment plant, and then only upon approval of the city at the point so designated. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, 10-12-05) 
Sec. 46-63. - Restricted substances. 
The following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes shall be limited in discharges to concentrations or quantities which will not have an adverse effect on the sewers or wastewater treatment plant, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, or public property, or constitute a nuisance. The city may set limitations more stringent than established in this section if, in his opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the objectives of this section. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows: 
(1)  Steam and boiler blowoffs or any other discharges resulting in wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or causing the temperature at the treatment plant headworks influent to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Wastewater containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Wastewater containing more than 100 mg/l of oils, fat, or grease. 
(4)  Wastewater at a strength higher than 300 mg/l BOD or 300 mg/l suspended solids. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the city. 
(6)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(7)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a slug as defined herein. 
(8)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(9)  Any water or wastes which by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, 10-12-05) 
Sec. 46-64. - Standards for industrial users. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, all industrial users shall meet applicable federal pretreatment standards, 40 CFR 403, established by the environmental protection agency. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, 10-12-05) 
Sec. 46-65. - Authority of city to reject wastes, require pretreatment, etc. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this section and which in the judgment of the city may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of this article. 
If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, 10-12-05) 
Sec. 46-66. - Grease interceptors. 
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the city they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in this article, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity (min: 1,000 gal.) approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning, sampling, and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the city. Any removal must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms and manifest forwarded to the city's public works department. Grease traps must be cleaned at minimum every three months. Traps must be fully pumped. Trap cleaning manifest must be kept on file at facility for three years. All facilities will be inspected at least annually to assure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, 10-12-05) 
Sec. 46-67. - Observation, sampling, and testing. 
When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his/her expense and shall be maintained by him/her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. All sampling and cost involved (employee time, shipping, analysis, etc.) will be the responsibility of the user in question. When compliance samplings are in question, the city's analytical results will be the final determination. 
Sec. 46-68. - Supplying of information to determine compliance. 
The city may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article. These requirements may include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period: 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters; 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer. 
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, 10-12-05) 
Sec. 46-69. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Persons duly authorized by the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the POTW or to natural outlets in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city or other duly authorized persons are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system or to natural outlets. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, 10-12-05) 
Sec. 46-70. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for above shall be subject to surcharges, fines, and or service termination. Each day in which any such violation shall continue beyond the time limit shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, 10-12-05) 
Secs. 46-71—46-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARD OF HEALTH RULES AND REGULATIONS OF TATTOO/BODY PIERCING ARTISTS AND STUDIOS 

Sec. 46-101. - Authority. 
The legal authority for this rule is O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-71, 31-40-1—31-40-9, and ch. 31-5. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-102. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules and regulations is to establish reasonable standards for individuals performing tattoo and body piercing procedures and for the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards should insure the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving these services. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-103. - Exemptions. 
These regulations do not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under chapter 34 of title 43, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-104. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined by specific sections as used in these rules and regulations the term: 
Antibacterial solution: Any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly. 
Appropriate disinfectant: An EPA registered disinfectant or a 1:10 dilution of bleach and water. 
Body piercing: The creation of an opening in an individual's body other than the individual's ear, to insert jewelry or other decoration. 
Body piercing artist: Any person who performs body piercing. 
County: The local county board of health or its duly authorized representatives. 
Currently licensed health care professional: Includes physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
Department: The Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia. 
Governing body: The partnership, the corporation, the association, or the person or group of persons who maintain and control the tattoo/body-piercing studio and who are legally responsible for the operation of the studio. 
Permit: The authorization granted by the county to the governing body to operate a tattoo/body-piercing studio. 
Plan of correction: A plan for correcting deficiencies in meeting rules and regulations of the department of human resources. 
Sanitary: Clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
Sanitized: Effective antibacterial treatment by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacteria count including pathogens to a safe level on equipment. 
Sterilization: Holding an instrument in an autoclave for required length of time at 15-30 pounds pressure at a temperature of 273 degrees Fahrenheit or 121 degrees Celsius. 
Tattoo: To mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin. 
Tattoo artist: Any person who performs tattooing. 
Tattoo/body piercing studio: Any permanent building or structure on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business license and permit from the county board of health, wherein a tattoo/body piercing artist performs tattooing or body piercing. 
OSHA: Occupational Safety and Health Association. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-105. - Governing body. 
(a)  The governing body shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in O.C.G.A. ch. 31-40, with applicable administrative rules and regulations of the Pierce County Board of Health, including but not limited to all applicable statutes, rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(b)  Prior to being granted a permit each tattoo/body-piercing studio shall develop a written statement of policies and procedures outlining the responsibilities of management. 
(1)  Tattoo/body piercing artists shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing tattoo/body-piercing procedures. 
(2)  No person shall be tattooed or pierced who appears to be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. 
(3)  No animals, except for guide dogs accompanying blind persons, shall be allowed in the tattoo studio. 
(4)  No minors are to be tattooed (O.C.G.A. § 16-5-71), or receive body piercing. 
(5)  Written report of any infection or allergic reaction resulting from the application of a tattoo or body piercing shall be forwarded to the health department within five working days of its occurrence or knowledge thereof. 
(6)  Tattoo artists shall not remove an existing tattoo from a person. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-106. - Minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)  The tattoo/body-piercing studio shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers. 
(b)  The studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the tattoo/body piercing adequate privacy from observers. The work area shall be separate from the waiting area. 
(c)  Tattoo/body piercing studios must have adequate ventilation. 
(d)  Walls and ceilings must be painted or covered in a manner which would allow for easy and effective cleaning. Paint or covering must be light in color. 
(e)  Floors of the work area must not be carpeted. Surfaces shall be of a nonabsorbent material that would allow for effective cleaning by conventional methods. 
(f)  A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility shall be made accessible to customers; however, it shall be separate from the work area. 
(g)  The work area shall be equipped with at least one sink and basin providing hot and cold running water for the use of the artists for washing their hands and preparing customers for tattooing/piercing. This area shall be provided with soap, an antibacterial solution, single use towels or air blower, and individual hand brushes for each artist. 
(h)  The work area shall be provided with adequate lighting. 
(i)  The work area shall not be used as a corridor for access to other rooms. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-107. - Furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishings of the tattoo/body-piercing studio shall be maintained in good condition, intact, and functional. Furnishings should be made of or covered in a material that is easily cleanable and non-absorbent. The studio shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, single use articles, carbon, and stencils shall be provided for each tattoo artist and shall be maintained in a sanitary manner which protects them from contamination. 
(c)  Work tables and chairs shall be provided for each tattoo/body piercing artist. 
(1)  Surfaces of all worktables and chairs shall be constructed of material that is smooth, light colored, nonabsorbent, corrosive resistant, and easily sanitized. 
(2)  Work tables and chairs shall be sanitized with a bactericidal solution after each application. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-108. - Supplies. 
(a)  Bulk single use articles shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These articles shall be stored in an area separate from the toilet facilities. 
(b)  All materials applied to the human skin shall be from single use containers and shall be disposed of after each use. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-109. - Dyes and pigments. 
(a)  All dyes and pigments used in tattooing shall be from professional suppliers specifically providing dyes and/or pigments for the tattooing of human skin. 
(b)  In preparing dyes or pigments to be used by a tattoo artist, only nontoxic sterile materials shall be used. Single-use or individual portions of dyes or pigments in clean, sterilized individual containers or single-use containers shall be used for each patron. 
(c)  After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use or individual containers shall be discarded along with the container. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-110. - Regarding piercer's jewelry. 
(a)  Client and piercer should have appropriate size and quality jewelry chosen before the procedure begins. 
(b)  Only appropriate jewelry should be used in piercing. Appropriate jewelry is made of implant grade, high quality surgical stainless steel (316 LVM series), solid 18K gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum. Appropriate jewelry has no nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces that might endanger the tissues. 
(c)  Ear studs or other jewelry designed for earlobe piercing are not appropriate jewelry for other body parts and must not be used by piercers. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-111. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Prior to the start of the tattoo/body piercing procedure the artist should inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Trim fingernails to insure that gloves are not punctured. 
(b)  All jewelry such as watches, rings, etc. should be removed prior to the start of the tattoo procedure. 
(c)  Before working on each client, the fingernails and hands of the tattoo/body piercing artist shall be thoroughly washed and scrubbed with warm water, and antibacterial soap, using an individual hand brush that is clean and in good repair. The hands should then be dried by either an air blower or by single use towels prior to beginning work on each client or when interrupted in the process. 
(d)  Single use disposable latex or neoprene vinyl examination gloves shall be worn during the tattooing process. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the application of the tattoo, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whenever their ability to function is compromised. 
(e)  Each artist shall wear a clean outer garment, apron or smock. These items shall be changed after each client. 
(f)  Tattoo/body piercing artists who are experiencing symptoms of diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, or skin infections shall refrain from tattooing/body piercing activities. 
(g)  Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each artist for the entire day and night operation. 
(h)  Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the area to be tattooed. 
(i)  Smoking and consumption of food or drink is prohibited in tattoo/body piercing studio. 
(j)  Universal precautions are to be followed per OSHA standards and guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-112. - Sterilization. 
(a)  An operational sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided in each tattoo/body-piercing studio. 
(b)  Non-disposable instruments shall be kept in a separate puncture resistant container until brush scrubbed in hot water and soap, and then sterilized by autoclaving. 
(c)  The following procedures should be followed during the sterilization process: 
(1)  Prior to being placed in the autoclave all equipment shall be bagged, labeled, dated and sealed. 
(2)  Each autoclave bag may hold no more than one liner and shader tube with needle and bar inserted into tube. 
(3)  To protect needle tips from damage an appropriate sterile protective covering shall be placed on the needle tip. 
(4)  From a cold start, instruments shall remain in the autoclave according to manufacturer's specifications. 
(5)  If the process begins with a hot start, the instruments should be processed according to manufacturer's specifications. 
(6)  To achieve proper sterilization, temperature must reach 273 degrees Fahrenheit and 15—30 psi. 
(7)  Spore indicators shall be used each time and the results must be kept in a log at the location for a minimum of three years. 
(d)  If using pre-sterilized equipment, documentation must be on file from equipment manufacturer that describes the method of sterilization meeting the manufacturer's recommendations for storage and maintenance of sterility. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-113. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)  Before placing the tattoo design on the client's skin, the artist shall treat the skin area with an antibacterial solution. 
(b)  If an acetate stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be thoroughly cleaned and rinsed in a germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes and then dried with sterile gauze or dried in the air on a sanitized surface after each use. 
(c)  If a paper stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be single use and disposable. 
(d)  If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single use article only. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-114. - Requirements. 
Body piercers shall: 
(1)  Set up equipment in front of client. 
(2)  Open sealed autoclave bags containing sterile equipment in front of client, and discard the autoclave bag. 
(3)  Disinfect all jewelry contaminated with only airborne pathogens (not previously worn or contaminated) with a non-hazardous hard surface disinfectant approved by the EPA. All jewelry contaminated or potentially contaminated with blood borne pathogens (previously worn by another person) should be autoclaved, stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(4)  Pre-sterilize all needles used in piercing, use only on one person, at one sitting, for a single piercing, and immediately dispose of in a medical sharps container. 
(5)  Pre-sterilize all forceps, tubes, etc. in sealed, dated, sterile indicator bags. These items are to be used on one person, in one sitting. After one such use, they must be autoclaved and stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-115. - After tattoo/body piercing application. 
(a)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. 
(b)  After the area has dried, apply a thick layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube. 
(c)  A bandage shall then be applied to the tattoo using sealed telfa (non-sticking) pads. 
(d)  Verbal and written instructions, approved by the Pierce County Health Department for the care of the body art procedure site shall be provided to each client by the operator upon completion of the procedure. The written instructions shall advise the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection and contain the name, address and phone number of the establishment. These documents shall be signed and dated by both parties, with a copy given to the client and the operator retaining the original with all other required records. The facility shall also post in public view the name, address and phone number of the Pierce County Health Department and the procedure for filing a complaint. The notice for filing a complaint shall be included in the establishment application packet. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-116. - Disinfection of workplace. 
Each tattoo/body-piercing studio must be kept clean and sanitary. The owner must develop and implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination and tasks or procedures to be performed. This written schedule must be based on the location within the studio, the type of surfaces to be cleaned, type of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the studio. 
The following procedures should be adhered to: 
(1)  Clean and sanitize all equipment and work surfaces with an appropriate disinfectant after completion of tattoo/body piercing procedures and at the end of work shift when surfaces have become contaminated since the last cleaning. 
(2)  Remove and replace protective coverings such as plastic wrap and aluminum foil after each tattoo/body piercing procedure. 
(3)  Inspect and decontaminate, on a regular basis, reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have a likelihood for becoming contaminated. When contamination is visible, clean and decontaminate receptacles immediately, or as soon as feasible. 
(4)  Studios should be free of insects, rodents and vermin. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-117. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)  Needles, razors, or other sharp instruments used during tattoo/body piercing procedures, shall be placed in puncture resistant, closed containers immediately after use. 
(b)  Needles shall not be purposely bent or broken, or otherwise manipulated by hand. 
(c)  Containers of sharp waste shall be sent to a bio-hazardous waste facility where they are either incinerated or otherwise rendered non-hazardous in compliance with 29 CFR Part 1920.1030, Occupational Exposure to Blood Borne Pathogens. Record of disposal must be kept on site. 
(d)  Disposable waste shall be placed in easily cleanable, closed containers provided with tight-fitting lids, to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(e)  Waste containers shall be kept closed when not in use. 
(f)  Disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(g)  The containers shall be located as near as feasible to the area of use. These containers shall not be overfilled. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-118. - Personnel/operator/artist permit. 
(a)  No person shall practice body art procedures without first obtaining an operator/artist permit from the Pierce County Health Department. 
(b)  The operator/artist permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire in one year and must be renewed annually unless revoked sooner by the department. 
(c)  Application for operator/artist permits shall include: 
(1)  Name. 
(2)  Date of birth. 
(3)  Sex. 
(4)  Residence address. 
(5)  Mailing address. 
(6)  Phone number. 
(7)  Place(s) of employment as an operator/artist. 
(8)  Training and or experience. 
(9)  Proof of attendance at a blood borne pathogen training program and first aid course given or approved by the Pierce County Board of Health. 
(10)  Physical examination. 
(11)  Criminal history report. 
(12)  Fingerprinting. 
(13)  Photograph. 
(d)  All operator/artist permits shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where they may be readily observed by clients. 
(e)  Persons performing the tattoo/body piercing operation shall be 18 years of age or older and maintain current certification in CPR first-aid and have proof of attendance at a blood borne pathogen training program (or equivalent), given or approved by the Pierce County Health Department. Training/courses provided by professional body art organizations/associations may also be submitted for consideration. 
(f)  The above certification must be obtained prior to the permit being issued. 
(g)  The artist must obtain a physical examination by a licensed physician within 12 months prior to employment or initial application for permit. The examination must be sufficiently comprehensive to assure that the artist is free of communicable diseases. 
(h)  Proof shall be provided upon request that all operators have completed the Hepatitis B vaccination series; that antibody testing has revealed that the employee is immune to Hepatitis B; or that the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons. Contraindication requires a dated and signed physician's statement specifying the name of the employee and that the vaccine cannot be given. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-119. - Client files. 
(a)  For each client, proper records of tattoos administered shall be maintained by the studio. 
(b)  Records of each client shall be prepared prior to the procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name and signature, address, phone number, type of positive picture ID, proof of age, date tattooed, design, its location and name of the artist. 
(c)  A statement of informed consent by the individual receiving the tattoo must be maintained on file. 
(d)  A statement by the client attesting that he/she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs shall be on file. 
(e)  A copy of procedures signed by the client advising them of proper subsequent care of the tattoo shall be maintained on file. 
(f)  A copy of instructions signed by the client informing them on the risks involved and possible complications that might result from the tattoo/body piercing procedure must be maintained on file. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-120. - Application for permit. 
(a)  The governing body of each tattoo/body-piercing studio shall submit to the Pierce County Health Department an application for a permit to operate under the rules and regulations. No tattoo studio shall be operated and no tattooing/body piercing performed without such a permit which is current under these rules and regulations. 
(b)  The application for permit shall be made on forms provided by the Pierce County Board of Health. 
(c)  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a floor sketch of the tattoo studio showing windows, doors, room measurements, chairs, tables and equipment placement for clients and/or staff. 
(d)  A listing of the names of all staff including the owner who will be working in the studio shall be included with the application for a permit. This listing shall include the full name of each staff person. 
(e)  The ownership of the studio shall be fully disclosed in its application for a permit. 
(f)  Zoning and other local requirements regarding proper location and establishment of tattoo studios shall be addressed by the applicant with the responsible local officials. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-121. - Permit. 
(a)  The governing body of each tattoo/body-piercing studio shall obtain a valid permit from the Pierce County Board of Health prior to beginning operation. Every year effective January 1 of each year, a permit must be obtained. To be eligible for a permit the studio must be in compliance with these rules and regulations. 
(b)  The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(c)  Permits are not transferable from one studio to another. 
(d)  A permit shall no longer be valid and shall be returned to the Pierce County Board of Health when the studio ceases to operate, is moved to another location, the ownership changes, or the permit is suspended or revoked. 
(e)  A studio which fails to comply with these rules and regulations shall be subject to the sanctions available to the Pierce County Board of Health pursuant to O.C.G.A. ch. 31-5 including but not limited to denial or revocation of its permit by the Pierce County Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-122. - Inspections. 
(a)  The studio and its records shall be available for review and examination by properly identified representatives of the Pierce County Board of Health. 
(b)  A copy of the inspection report shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises and also shall be available for public inspection at the Pierce County Health Department wherein the studio is located. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 46-123. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. ch. 31-5 and this Code. 
(b)  No person shall engage in tattooing/body piercing except in a licensed studio. All tattoo artists must have an operator permit. No tattoo studio shall be operated without a permit. Failure or refusal to file an application for a permit shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(c)  The Pierce County Board of Health may refuse to grant a permit for the operation of any tattoo studio that does not fulfill the minimum requirements of these rules and regulations and may revoke a permit that has been issued and invoke other sanctions if a studio violates any of these rules and regulations. Before any order is entered refusing a permit applied for or revoking a permit the applicant or permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the county board as provided in O.C.G.A. Title 31, Chapter 5, Article 1. The notice of refusal or revocation shall contain directions on how a hearing may be requested. 
(d)  The Pierce County Board of Health is empowered to institute appropriate proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining violation of any applicable provision of O.C.G.A. Title 31 or of the rules and regulations. 
(e)  Any person convicted of a violation under this article by the Municipal Court of the City of Blackshear, Georgia, shall be punished as set forth in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Chapter 49 - IDENTITY THEFT 
ARTICLE I. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 49-1. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-3. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Blackshear. 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-4. - Findings. 
(1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(2)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, and household garbage and yard debris collection. 
(3)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: None. 
(4)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, and have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(5)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(6)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways if any: 
a.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
b.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
c.  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; 
d.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-5. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(1)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such applicant shall also provide any information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(2)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-6. - Access to covered account information. 
(1)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(2)  Such password(s) shall be changed by for example, the director of the department providing the service for which the covered account is created, or by the director of information technology on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(3)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city administrator and the password changed immediately. 
(4)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city administrator and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-7. - Credit card payments. 
(1)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(2)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(3)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-8. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
1.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors. 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-9. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(1)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city administrator. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city administrator, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city administrator in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city administrator: 
a.  Contact the customer; 
b.  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
1.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
2.  Close the account. 
c.  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
d.  Notify a debt collector within 24 business hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
e.  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
f.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(2)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city administrator. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city administrator, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city administrator in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city administrator: 
a.  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
b.  Deny the application for the new account; 
c.  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
d.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-10. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-11. - Program administration. 
The city administrator is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city administrator is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city administrator, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The city administrator will report to the mayor and the city council at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  the city administrator is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city administrator shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-12. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city administrator shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § A, 10-21-08) 
Secs. 49-13—49-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 49-21. - Short title. 
[This article shall be known as] treatment of address discrepancies. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § B, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-22. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § B, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-23. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means City of Blackshear. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § B, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-24. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(l); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § B, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-25. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(1)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
a.  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
b.  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
c.  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(2)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § B, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 49-26. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § B, 10-21-08) 
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; courts, ch. 30; parks and recreation, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

Sec. 50-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to violate any of the following subsections: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, where any person is reasonably placed in fear of safety of his life, limb, or health; 
(2)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, where property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats, and abusive conduct; 
(4)  Any person who shall cause, provoke, or engage in any fight, brawl, or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another; 
(5)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another for the purpose of causing, provoking, or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(6)  Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place; 
(7)  Any person who shall solicit funds in crowds for unlawful purposes; 
(8)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(9)  Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice, or device; 
(10)  Any person who assembles with another for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device, or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the town, or who shall aid or abet such person; 
(11)  Any person who utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets; 
(12)  Any person who frequents any establishment where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is allowed or tolerated; 
(13)  Any person who shall act in such a manner as to cause another person to reasonably be in fear of bodily harm or injury; 
(14)  Any person who shall use "fighting words" directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil; 
(15)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another; 
(16)  Any person who shall, by acts of violence, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(17)  Any person who shall congregate with another in or on any public way, so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and refuses to clear any public way when ordered to do so; 
(18)  Any person who recklessly or knowingly commits any act which may be reasonably expected to prevent or disrupt any meeting or any public or quasi-public agency or religious worship within the city. 
Any person who shall violate any subsection of this section may be charged with the offense of "disorderly conduct", and on conviction thereof, shall be found guilty of disorderly conduct and shall be punished pursuant to section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1987, § 14-1; Ord. No. 2009-13, art. I, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 50-2. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or place in the city, or within any public building. 
(Code 1987, § 3-4) 
Sec. 50-3. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c)  A person committing the offense of loitering or prowling shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1987, § 14-2) 
State Law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 50-4. - Presence of minor persons upon public streets between certain hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or operate a vehicle upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, public buildings, places of public gathering and assembly, vacant lots or other places within the corporate limits of the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply to any person upon an emergency errand or legitimate and legal business. 
(Code 1987, § 14-3) 
Sec. 50-5. - Offenses involving utility services. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to destroy, damage or tamper with any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus owned by the city, or by any company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television, or other public service within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the city, or of a company engaged, in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service, or intentionally to divert any of the services of the city or such company, or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the city or such company, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the city or such company. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly receive the benefit of acts of diversion of or tampering with electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service without the proper charge. 
(d)  Proof that any of the acts hereinbefore specified in this action was done on premises in possession of an accused, or that the accused received the benefit of any such act, shall be prima facie evidence that the accused committed such act or aided and abetted in the commission thereof. 
(Code 1987, § 14-4) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 50-6. - Switchboxes controlling traffic lights. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to tamper with or damage any switchbox for control of traffic lights. 
(Code 1987, § 14-5) 
Sec. 50-7. - Discharging firearms, airguns, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm within 300 yards of any street, alley or building, or at any point upon the land of another person without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof; or to discharge at any time, any airgun, BB gun or toy gun which projects lead or any other missile. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of officer's duty; nor any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(Code 1987, § 14-6) 
Sec. 50-8. - Report of treatment of wounds. 
All physicians and all hospital superintendents in the city are hereby required to report to the police department of the city all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from wounds inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind. Such report may be made in writing or by telephone, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent date requested by the police department. All reports shall be made within 24 hours after treatment by a physician or after admission to the hospital. 
(Code 1987, § 14-7) 
Sec. 50-9. - Throwing of missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to throw any stone, rock, or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Code 1987, § 14-8) 
Sec. 50-10. - Ballplaying. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball by throwing, catching, pitching, or batting a ball on any public street, alley or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1987, § 14-9) 
Sec. 50-11. - Smoking in city buildings prohibited. 
(a)  Smoking is hereby prohibited in all of the buildings owned or occupied by the city. 
(b)  The mayor of the city shall proceed immediately to post each site indicating that smoking is prohibited and that violation of this section shall subject the violator to prosecution. 
(c)  Any city police officer, or other law enforcement officer, shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provision of this section. Such citation shall summon the violator to appear before the municipal court, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the officer who completes and services it. 
(d)  Any person violating this section, or any provision hereof upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: 
First offense, warning 
Second offense, fine of $10.00 
Third offense, fine of $25.00 
All subsequent offenses, $25.00 
(1)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the authority and discretion to suspend or probate any part of the sentence. Further, the judge of the municipal court shall permit the sentenced party to perform community service at the rate of $5.00 per hour. The performance of such community service shall be in compliance with such conditions as the municipal judge shall order. 
(2)  The person accused of violating this section shall be arrested and required to post bond for his future appearance in an amount as set by order of the municipal judge. 
(3)  Violation of this section shall be tried upon citation as described in subsection (c) of this section and may be tried with a prosecuting attorney. The city attorney shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(4)  Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1987, § 14-11; Ord. of 2-11-92, §§ I—V) 
State Law reference— Smoking in public places, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2. 
Sec. 50-12. - Begging. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to beg or solicit money or aid in his own behalf in any place of business, residence (excepting only the persons' personal residence) or upon any of the streets and roads of the city. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine for the first offense of not less than $25.00. For the second offense, the fine shall be now less than $50.00. If a third offense is committed within one year of conviction of a second offense, the minimum fine shall be $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, 1-20-09) 
Chapter 54 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— State parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; Georgia state games commission, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq.; power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

Sec. 54-1. - Development of municipal recreation programs. 
The authority to develop programs of recreational activities and services designed to meet the leisure time interest and needs of all municipal citizens is hereby granted to and vested in the park and recreation board, which board shall have the power to maintain and equip parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, and the buildings associated therewith, and to develop, maintain, and operate all types of recreation facilities. 
(Code 1987, § 15-1) 
Sec. 54-2. - Use of grounds and facilities in general. 
Each person using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1987, § 15-2) 
Sec. 54-3. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person using public parks, grounds, or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, damage, tamper with, or displace or remove, any buildings; bridges; tables; benches; fireplaces; railings; paving or paving material; waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices, or placards, whether temporary or permanent; monuments; stakes, posts, or other boundary markers; or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters. 
(3)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof. 
(4)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, or throw missiles at any animal, reptile, or bird; or remove or have in one's possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest, or young of any wild bird. 
(5)  Bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where such receptacles are provided; and where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the presence of same, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(6)  Disturb the peace, or use any profane or obscene language. 
(7)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act. 
(8)  Commit any assault or battery, or engage in fighting. 
(9)  Carry, possess, or drink any alcoholic beverage in the park. 
(10)  Violate any rule for the use of the park, made or approved by the park and recreation board or by the council. 
(11)  Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and with the rules applicable to such use. 
(12)  Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted. 
(13)  Dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet, or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1987, § 15-3) 
Sec. 54-4. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The public parks shall be open daily to the public during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any person other than city personnel conducting city business therein to occupy or be present in such parks during any other hours. 
(b)  Any section or part of a park, or an entire park, may be declared closed to the public by the superintendent of public works at any time for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. 
(Code 1987, § 15-4) 
Sec. 54-5. - Group activity. 
When members of any group, association, or organization desire to use any park facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties, or theatrical or other entertainment performances, such members will send a representative of such group, association, or organization to first obtain approval from the director of recreation. 
(Code 1987, § 15-5) 
Sec. 54-6. - Games. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take part in or abet the playing of any game involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball, and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts, or areas provided therefor. 
(Code 1987, § 15-6) 
Sec. 54-7. - Camping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, or for any person to leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon, or the like. 
(Code 1987, § 15-7) 
Sec. 54-8. - Fires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the superintendent of public works. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes, or cigars, tobacco paper, or other inflammable material within any park area or on any highway, road, or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(Code 1987, § 15-8) 
Sec. 54-9. - Animals. 
It shall be unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any park. It shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is on a leash not more than five feet long. 
(Code 1987, § 15-9) 
Sec. 54-10. - Motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful to drive or park any motor vehicle except on a street, driveway, or parking lot in any park; or to park, or leave any such vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking. 
(Code 1987, § 15-10) 
Sec. 54-11. - Sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, sell, peddle, or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park, except on special occasions as approved by the council. 
(Code 1987, § 15-11) 
Sec. 54-12. - Alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within any park to have in such person's possession, custody, or control any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever. 
(Code 1987, § 15-12) 
Sec. 54-13. - Signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, or for any person to erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public land or highway or road adjacent to a park, except that these provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any official duty. 
(Code 1987, § 15-13) 
Chapter 58 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Prohibited placement of campaign posters, signs and advertisements, O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1; signs used by retail distilled spirits dealers; signs advertising Georgia lottery, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3; control of signs and signals, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq.; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; outdoor advertising near state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

Sec. 58-1. - General provisions. 
(a)  All types of signs, except outdoor advertising signs, shall be allowed in all zoning districts without a permit. 
(b)  All outdoor advertising signs shall be subject to the same yard and height limitations imposed upon other buildings or structures in the use district in which such sign is located, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(c)  For the purpose of computing sign area, only one side of a "V-Type" or double-faced outdoor advertising sign shall be considered. 
(d)  Rooftop outdoor advertising signs or sign structures shall not extend more than 30 feet above the roof line. Rooftop outdoor advertising signs or sign structures shall not extend beyond or overhang any exterior wall of the building upon which secured. 
(e)  No outdoor advertising sign or sign structure shall be placed upon any street, sidewalk, or highway right-of-way. All signs must have a setback of three feet from property line. 
(f)  No outdoor advertising sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. 
(g)  No portion of any outdoor advertising sign shall be less than ten feet above the level of a sidewalk or other pedestrian thoroughfare, nor be less than 16 feet above the level of a public driveway, alley or street. 
(h)  Any sign not particularly designated above shall be subject to the control and supervision of the city council. 
(Code 1987, § 5-70) 
Sec. 58-2. - Outdoor advertising signs as permitted uses. 
(a)  Residential districts. No outdoor advertising signs are permitted in residential districts in the city. 
(b)  Commercial districts. One outdoor advertising sign for each lot of 100 feet or less or lot frontage with one additional sign for each additional 100 feet or less of lot frontage under single ownership at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, and provided such sign shall not exceed 800 square feet in area per structure facing. Where two signs, each not exceeding 600 square feet in area per structure facing are supported by the same sign structure, one above the other, they shall be considered as a single outdoor advertising sign. 
(c)  Wholesale and industrial districts. One outdoor advertising sign for each lot of 75 feet or less of lot frontage with one additional sign for each additional 75 feet or less of lot frontage under single ownership at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, and provided such sign shall not exceed 800 square feet in area per structure facing. Where signs, each not exceeding 600 feet in area per structure facing are supported by the same sign structure, one above the other, they shall be considered as a single outdoor advertising sign. 
(d)  Mobile business signs. Class 8 mobile business signs, single- or double-faced provided that they: 
(1)  Shall have a maximum size of 15 feet for each side; 
(2)  There is only one sign for each zoning lot on which the sign is located; 
(3)  Shall be set back at least five feet from property line with flashing light; bulbs not to exceed 60 watt, or three feet setback without flashing lights; 
(4)  All electrical hook-ups shall be approved by city building inspector. 
(Code 1987, § 5-71) 
Sec. 58-3. - Signs prohibited in all districts. 
The following signs are prohibited in all use districts: 
(1)  Any sign erected or painted upon a sloping roof, fence, tree, stand-pipe, fire escape or utility pole. 
(2)  Any sign which uses the word "Stop" or "Danger" prominently displayed or which is a copy or imitation of an official traffic control sign. 
(Code 1987, § 5-72) 
Sec. 58-4. - Maintenance and removal of outdoor advertising signs. 
(a)  All outdoor advertising signs and sign structures shall be kept in repair and in proper state preservation. All unsafe signs must adhere to the provisions of the city building code. 
(b)  Outdoor advertising signs which are no longer functional or are abandoned, shall be removed, or relocated, at the owner's expense, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter within 30 days following malfunction. 
(c)  Any legally established nonconforming outdoor advertising signs or sign structure shall be permitted without alteration in size or location, provided that the requirements of this chapter are adhered to and provided that nothing herein shall prevent maintenance, repairing or posting of legally established nonconforming signs. 
(d)  Upon destruction, partial or complete, of an outdoor advertising sign, the owner thereof shall have the right to reconstruct, rebuild, renovate, or repair such sign substantially to the same condition as before such destruction, provided the provisions of this chapter are adhered to. 
(Code 1987, § 5-73) 
Sec. 58-5. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  A temporary sign is a sign or sign structure which is not constructed for permanent use and advertises an event or activity occurring at a specific time or period or time. Examples of temporary signs are political advertisements, open house advertisements, and yard sale advertisements. Temporary signs do not include portable signs which are constructed for permanent use. 
(b)  A political advertisement shall not be permitted for a period longer than 60 days, except that when a candidate wins a primary election, such political advertisement may remain until the general election, but in no case shall the additional time be greater than 90 days. 
(c)  A temporary sign shall be removed by the owner or owner's designee within three days after the final date of the event or activity to which the sign makes reference. Failure of owner or owner's designee to remove a temporary sign within the time period prescribed in this Code section may result in the collection and destruction of the temporary sign by a representative of the city. Any cost associated with such removal and destruction may be administratively assessed by the city against the owner of the sign. 
(d)  All vehicular signs shall adhere to the requirements set forth herein except for those signs not exceeding 40 square feet and attached to vehicles which are used primarily for other purposes than displaying an outdoor advertising sign. 
(e)  Signs which display general advertisements or commercial promotions are prohibited. 
(Code 1987, § 5-74; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 4-9-13) 
Chapter 62 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The city is a participating party in the Tri-County Solid Waste Management Plan dated October 1992. This plan was prepared to assist the counties of Bacon, Pierce and Ware and their municipalities in complying with the requirements of the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. An official copy of the plan is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program; establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 62-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collection means the work of collecting or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting or transporting waste from such person's single-family dwelling unit. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal, including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design, and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location or land area where the final disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludges; and other waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials as provided for in rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources, Chapter 270-5-20, entitled "Radioactive Materials." 
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn, or to otherwise create environmental pollution or nuisance. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, offal, hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use in accordance with an approved plan. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid commercial and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Sanitary landfilling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, food-processing wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in this article. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposing of solid wastes, or any combination thereof. 
Storm debris means waste generated by a natural disaster i.e., hurricane, tropical storm, tornado etc. 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
Yard waste means leaves, pine straw, limbs, grass or cuttings from bushes. 
(Code 1987, § 12-110; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-10-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this article is to provide for the protection of the public health by prescribing the manner of storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of residential and industrial waste, rubbish, garbage, and refuse. 
(Code 1987, § 12-111; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-10-16) 
Sec. 62-33. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In general. The superintendent of public works shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. In the exercise of such solid waste management duties, the superintendent shall: 
(1)  Supervise the collection of solid waste, including the operation and maintenance of equipment and the supervision of personnel; 
(2)  Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(3)  Supervise the operation and maintenance disposal sites or facilities; and 
(4)  Inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors and private transportation and disposal systems to ensure that such operations are in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Limitations of authority. All regulatory actions of the superintendent of public works shall be subject to the review of the council. 
(c)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or a fee charged by, the superintendent of public works shall have the right to appeal to the council, which body may upon hearing, confirm, modify, or revoke such requirement or fee. 
(Code 1987, § 12-112; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-10-16) 
Sec. 62-34. - Precollection. 
(a)  In general. No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the city, except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth herein or under the express prior approval of public works. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared a nuisance and is prohibited. The superintendent of public works by written notice shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such solid waste accumulation to remove same. Failure to remove such accumulation within 14 days of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject to penalties set forth in this Code. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues. 
(b)  Containers. All residential and some small commercial customers will utilize a 96-gallon roll-out container. These containers will be provided to every residence and some small commercial customers on a one-time basis. If a container is removed from the residential or small commercial location the replacement container will be paid for by the occupant or owner of the residential or commercial location. 
(c)  Preparation. 
(1)  Garbage and rubbish shall be drained of excess liquids before being placed for collection. 
(2)  All rubbish shall be placed at the curbside or alleyway for collection, do not place in roadway. 
(3)  Roll-out containers shall be placed at the curbside, or alleyway for collection, do not place in roadway. 
(4)  Yard waste shall be placed at the curbside or alleyway for collection not in roadway. Limbs or cuttings when placed in bundles shall not exceed 35 pounds gross weight per bundle and shall not be over four feet in length and no more than 12 inches in diameter. 
(5)  Trees, large bushes or shrubbery that are trimmed by anyone other than a resident where left for pickup or by commercial trimmers or tree surgeons, are not to be picked up by the city. All persons other than residents trimming or cutting trees, large bushes or shrubbery shall be responsible for disposing of the residue of trees, bushes or shrubbery that are trimmed. 
(6)  Appliances, furniture, and/or white goods (stoves, dishwashers, washers and dryers, etc.) shall not be placed on the curb until the resident has called for a special pickup. Failure to call and request a special pickup shall result in a $25.00 fee for disposal without prior notice. Property owners and/or property management companies that serve dispossessory notice on residents will be responsible for calling for a special pickup the week of the dispossession is to be served on the resident. Failure to comply will result in a fine of $50.00 and a charge for disposal of not less than $75.00 for each pickup when done by the city. 
(d)  Rubbish. Rubbish shall not be placed on the curb until the resident has called for a special pickup. Failure to call and request a special pickup shall result in a $25.00 fee for disposal. The city will provide roll-off dumpsters once per quarter that will allow residents to dispose of rubbish. The actual dates and locations will be published in the legal organ, as well as advertised on the city website. 
(e)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the city, or any employee of a person holding a contract with the city for collection of solid waste, shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storage of solid waste pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any such container from the location where same shall have been placed by the owner thereof, unless permission to do so has been granted by the city. 
(Code 1987, § 12-113; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-10-16) 
Sec. 62-35. - Collection. 
(a)  Frequency. Garbage and yard waste shall be collected from residential premises weekly. 
(b)  Limitations. Industrial waste or waste from construction, demolition, landscaping, or processing operations will not be collected, transported or disposed of by public facilities, but such waste collection, transportation, and disposal shall be by the owners or generators of such waste. It shall be a violation of these regulations to place or to cause to be placed in any container, box or bundle, or otherwise for collection, any hazardous waste of any kind except upon specific prior arrangement with the superintendent of public works. 
(c)  Collection vehicles. Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be kept clean and in good repair. They shall be constructed in such manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked or blown from the vehicle. They shall be readily identifiable by letters, not less than three inches high and easily legible, painted on the door of the vehicle cab or in an equally conspicuous place, showing the owner's name, telephone number, state permit number, truck number, and rated load capacity in cubic yards. The rated load capacity shall be specified by the superintendent of public works following such superintendent's measurement of the load-carrying portion of the truck body. 
(d)  Private contractors. The mayor and council may contract with others to engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of solid waste, provided such persons have applied for and obtained an appropriate solid waste permit in accordance with regulations of the Georgia Code Annotated, tit. 12, Conservation and Natural Resources; ch. 8, Waste Management; art. 2, Solid Waste Management; pt. 1, General Provisions; O.C.G.A. § 12-8-24. Permits for solid waste or special solid waste handling, disposal, or thermal treatment technology facility; inspection of solid waste generators. Persons contracting for solid waste collections shall, before engaging in such business, be licensed by the city, shall conform to all regulations providing for safe and sanitary collection and transportation of waste to a point of disposal. 
(Code 1987, § 12-114; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-10-16) 
Sec. 62-36. - Disposal. 
(a)  All disposal of house hold garbage and rubbish shall be at disposal sites operated in accordance with state laws and with rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources, and at no other place. 
(b)  Yard waste shall be mulched at the city's mulching operation. Mulching will be completed by the city's mulching contractor. The facility will be operated in accordance with state laws and with rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources, and at no other place. 
(c)  Storm debris (debris generated by hurricane, tropical storm, etc.) may be disposed of by utilizing the city's mulching contractor or by open burning provided a variance permit is obtained from the environmental protection division (EPD). Open burning will only be allowed from qualifying storm events as determined by EPD. 
(Code 1987, § 12-115; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-10-16) 
Sec. 62-37. - Frequency of residential pickup. 
Solid waste pickup for residential areas in the city shall be once each week for each household. 
(Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-10-16) 
Sec. 62-38. - Rates—Residential. 
Each household shall pay an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per month for solid waste pickup. 
(Code 1987, § 12-8; Ord. of 12-8-92, § 2; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-10-16) 
Sec. 62-39. - Same—Commercial. 
Solid waste pickup and charges for commercial and other business establishments shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1987, § 12-8; Ord. of 12-8-92, § 3; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-10-16) 
Sec. 62-40. - Same—Billing. 
(a)  Service charges in accordance with the schedule are levied against the occupant of premises served, jointly and severally, but collecting from one shall relieve the other. 
(b)  Charges for solid waste collection and disposal service shall be billed each month in conjunction with the regular water and sewer bill. These charges are due and payable at time the bill is rendered. Payments are due not later than the tenth calendar day of the following month, unless the tenth day shall fall on a Saturday or a Sunday, in which case the bill will be due not later than the close of business on the next business day. Bills are payable at the office of the city treasurer. When such payment has not been made by the 15th day of the month, service shall be discontinued until all arrears, including penalty, have been paid in full. 
(Code 1987, § 12-9; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-10-16) 
Sec. 62-41. - Solid waste collection franchises and fees. 
(a)  All residential, commercial, industrial and institutional establishments within the incorporated limits of the City of Blackshear shall utilize the solid waste collection service of a waste services provider granted a solid waste collection franchise by the city pursuant to the requirements of this section. No waste service provider which has failed to comply with the requirements of this section shall haul away or remove for disposal any solid waste from any residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, or other premises within the incorporated limits of the City of Blackshear. 
(b)  Upon approval of the mayor and council the city may enter into an agreement with a solid waste provider granting an exclusive franchise for solid waste collection and disposal services to residential, commercial, industrial and institutional establishments within the incorporated limits of the city. No exclusive franchise for waste services granted by the city shall include collection of construction or demolition waste collected in roll-off containers from residential, commercial, industrial, or other premises, which shall be authorized by the city through non-exclusive franchises as provided herein. Pursuant to authority of the mayor and council, the City of Blackshear has entered into an exclusive franchise agreement for waste collection services with Republic Services of Georgia, Limited Partnership d/b/a Southland Waste Systems, excluding construction and demolition waste collection. 
(c)  A waste services provider having an exclusive franchise agreement with the city pursuant to this section to provide residential, commercial and industrial solid waste collection services inside the incorporated limits of the City of Blackshear shall be required to pay the city an annual franchise fee of $4,000.00. Unless already paid to the city for the current year, said franchise fee shall be paid to the city within 30 days following official adoption of this section, and annually thereafter on or about the same date. For purposes of this section "residential solid waste" means all solid waste generated by residential premises, and "commercial solid waste" means all solid waste generated by or at any commercial business including any governmental premises and public or private institutional premises. 
(d)  Any waste services provider authorized by the city pursuant to this section to perform solid waste services for collection and disposal of construction and demolition waste collected in roll-off containers from premises located within the incorporated limits of the City of Blackshear shall pay the city an annual franchise fee of $1,000.00. Said franchise fee shall be paid to the city within 30 days following the date of official adoption of this section and annually thereafter on or about the same date. "Construction and demolition waste" shall mean solid waste materials generated by the construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of residential, commercial, industrial, or other premises within the incorporated limits of the City of Blackshear. 
(e)  As used herein a "waste services provider" means a person engaged in the collection and disposal of solid waste in return for a fee paid by the waste generator. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent a construction or demolition contractor from hauling construction or demolition waste for disposal in a truck or trailer belonging to the contractor. 
(f)  Any violation of the solid waste collection franchise requirements of this section shall be subject to enforcement by the city as provided in section 62-33 of this chapter. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § I, 11-9-10; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-10-16) 
Sec. 62-42. - Yard debris pickup. 
All customers of the city water and/or sewer department shall be required to pay a monthly fee with the regular monthly utility bill for the collection of yard debris, in order to protect and guard the health, safety and sanitation of the citizens of the city. The monthly charge shall be established by the city council by resolution from time to time. Upon the refusal of any such customer to pay the monthly fee for yard trash, the city may withhold water and or sewer service and/or sewer service and/or terminate such service. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 1-9-12; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 11-10-16) 
Chapter 66 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; cemeteries, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 54; signs, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Street names—Authority of council generally. 
The city council by resolution may change, rename, or name an existing or newly established street within the city at any time, upon recommendation of the planning commission. 
(Code 1987, § 16-1) 
Sec. 66-2. - Same—Naming unnamed streets; changing names to avoid confusion. 
(a)  In case of streets which bear no names the city council shall be empowered to choose names which they feel are appropriate and which are suitable to the residents of such street. 
(b)  In the case of streets which bear a name in common with another street or if the name is similar enough so as to cause confusion, the city council shall be empowered to rename one of the streets. 
(Code 1987, § 16-2) 
Sec. 66-3. - Streets in subdivisions. 
Every subdivision plat submitted to the council for approval shall bear upon its face the proper names of all streets, avenues, and other public ways dedicated to public use within the jurisdiction of the council, which shall first have been checked and approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1987, § 16-3) 
Sec. 66-4. - Inspections of projections over public streets. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the building inspector to inspect semi-annually all awnings, sheds, coverings, and other projections extending over the public streets, sidewalks and roads within the corporate limits of the city; and to make a written report of such inspections to the city council. 
(b)  Any awning, shed, covering, and other projection extending over the public streets, sidewalks and roads found to be in a defective or dangerous condition, shall be condemned and shall be immediately reported to the owner of such property and if the owner cannot be found, then to the occupant of such property. 
(c)  If such condemned awning, shed, covering, and other projection extending over the public streets, sidewalks and roads are not repaired and placed in a safe condition within 30 days, it shall be the duty of the building inspector, with the aid and assistance of the police department, to remove such condemned awning, shed, covering and other projection. 
(Code 1987, § 16-4) 
Sec. 66-5. - Permit for construction of paved driveway. 
(a)  An application for a permit to construct paved driveways on city rights-of-way shall be obtained from the city superintendent of public works, and that no such construction shall begin until such permit and pertinent specifications have been provided. 
(b)  The fee for the permit shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(c)  Driveways constructed on city rights-of-way, which are out of compliance with city specifications, shall be removed at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1987, § 16-5; Ord. of 2-9-93, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 66-6. - Driveway construction permits. 
(a)  An application for a permit to construct paved driveways on city rights-of-way shall be obtained from the city superintendent of public works. No such construction shall begin until said permit and pertinent specifications have been provided. 
(b)  The fee for the permit shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(c)  Driveways constructed on city rights-of-way, after the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives which are out of compliance with city specifications shall be removed at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. of 2-9-93, §§ 1—3) 
Secs. 66-7—66-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM 

Sec. 66-36. - Uniform system established. 
There is hereby established a uniform system for numbering buildings fronting on all streets, avenues, and other public ways in the city. All houses and other buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 16-20) 
Sec. 66-37. - Base lines; quadrants; diagonal streets. 
(a)  Ware Street to the west of the intersection of Ware Street and U.S. 84 and U.S. 84 to the east of such intersection, shall constitute the base line for numbering buildings along all streets running northerly and southerly and shall be referred to as the east-west base line. Gordon Street, Main Street, (north of College Street) and College Street shall constitute the base line for numbering buildings along all streets running easterly and westerly and shall be referred to as the north-south base line. 
(1)  Each building to the north of the east-west base line and facing a street running in a northerly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location north of such base line. 
(2)  Each building to the south of the east-west base line and facing a street running in a southerly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location south of such base line. 
(3)  Each building to the west of the north-south base line and facing a street running in a westerly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location west of such base line. 
(4)  Each building to the east of the north-south base line and facing a street running in an easterly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location east of such base line. 
(b)  All buildings on diagonal streets shall be numbered the same as buildings on northerly and southerly streets if the diagonal runs more from the north to the south, the same rule shall apply on easterly and westerly streets if the diagonal runs more from east to west. All buildings on diagonal streets having a deviation of exactly 45 degrees shall be numbered the same as buildings on northerly and southerly streets. 
(Code 1987, § 16-21) 
Sec. 66-38. - Commencement and succession of numbers. 
The numbering of buildings on each street shall begin at the base line. All numbers shall be assigned on the basis of one number for each 25 feet except those fronting on the following streets: All buildings fronting on Main Street between U.S. 84 and Park Street or on Taylor Street between Highway Avenue and Central Avenue or on Repparde Street between Highway Avenue and Central Avenue or on Highway Avenue between Main Street and Repparde Street or on Central Avenue between Main Street and Repparde Street shall be assigned numbers on the basis of one number for each 15 feet of frontage. 
(Code 1987, § 16-22) 
Sec. 66-39. - Even-odd number assignment. 
(a)  All buildings on the right side of each street running from the base line bear even numbers. All buildings on the left side of each street running from the base line shall bear odd numbers. 
(b)  All buildings facing streets not extending through the base lines shall be assigned the same relative numbers as if the street extended to the base line. 
(Code 1987, § 16-23) 
Sec. 66-40. - Separate numbers for each entrance. 
Where any building has more than one entrance serving separate occupants, a separate number shall be assigned to each entrance serving a separate occupant. If the building is not located on a lot, parcel or tract which would permit the assignment of one number to each such entrance, letters shall be used, as set forth in section 66-43. 
(Code 1987, § 16-24) 
Sec. 66-41. - Directional prefixes. 
All streets perpendicular to and crossing the east-west base line shall be given a prefix of "north" for the section which lies to the north of the base line and a prefix of "south" for the section which lies to the south of the base line. All streets perpendicular to and crossing the north-south base line shall be given a prefix of "east" for the section which lies to the east of the base line and a prefix of "west" for the section which lies to the west of the base line. 
(Code 1987, § 16-25) 
Sec. 66-42. - Display of numbers. 
(a)  The assigned number shall be displayed within 30 days after receiving the assignment. 
(b)  The numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side of the main entrance so that the number can be seen plainly from the street line. 
(c)  Whenever any building is situated such that the main entrance is more than 50 feet from the street line or such entrance is obscured, then the numbers may be placed upon a gatepost, fence, tree, post or other appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the street. 
(d)  The numerals shall be no less than three inches in height and be made out of a durable and highly visible material. Such numerals shall be placed on a contrasting background. 
(e)  There shall be a penalty incurred of $1.00 for each week which the owner of a building fails to display the assigned number after the assignment of the number. 
(Code 1987, § 16-26) 
Sec. 66-43. - Letter suffixes. 
Where only one number can be assigned to a building, the owner, occupant, or agent of such building who shall desire distinctive numbers for different parts of such building shall use the suffix A, B, C, etc., as may be required. 
(Code 1987, § 16-27) 
Sec. 66-44. - Supplying information of numbers; resolution in case of conflict. 
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to inform any party applying therefor, of the numbers assigned to or embraced within the limits of any lot or property as provided in this article. In case of conflict as to the proper number to be assigned to any building, the superintendent of public works shall determine the number of such building. 
(Code 1987, § 16-28) 
Sec. 66-45. - Obtaining for, and affixing numbers to, new structures. 
(a)  Whenever any house, building, or other structure shall be erected or located in the city, in order to preserve the continuity and uniformity of numbers of the houses, buildings, and other structures, it shall be the duty of the owner to procure the correct numbers as designated from the superintendent of public works for the property and to immediately fasten the numbers so assigned upon such structure or building as provided by this article. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued for any house, building, or other structure until the owner has procured from the superintendent of public works the official number of the premises. Final approval of any structure shall be withheld by the city building inspector until permanent and proper numbers have been affixed to such structure. 
(Code 1987, § 16-29) 
Secs. 66-46—66-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7. 

Sec. 66-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assembly means any group of persons who assemble or congregate on any public street, alley or sidewalk in the city for the purpose of displaying, advertising, promoting, exhibiting, advocating or otherwise attracting public attention or for any cause or thing. 
Parade means any group of persons marching or promenading on and along any public street, alley or sidewalk in the city for the purpose of displaying, advertising, promoting, exhibiting, advocating or otherwise attracting public attention to or for any cause or thing. 
(Code 1987, § 17-12(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-72. - Approval required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to parade, assemble or congregate on any public street, alley or sidewalk in the city for any purpose specified in section 66-71, unless the city council shall have previously approved and authorized such parade or assembly. Any person participating in or attending any parade or assembly which has not been authorized and approved by the city council shall be considered as a part of the group constituting such parade or assembly, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1987, § 17-12(b)) 
Sec. 66-73. - Application. 
Any person desiring to parade or assemble on any of the public streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city for the purposes in this article shall file an application with the mayor, setting forth the time, place and purpose of such parade or assembly, and obtain a permit before conducting such parade or assembly. 
(Code 1987, § 17-12(c)) 
Secs. 66-74—66-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY CLOSING AND/OR ABANDONMENT 

Sec. 66-100. - Intent. 
[The intent of this article is] to establish regulations for the closing and/or abandoning of roads, streets, alleys or public easements in the city; to provide for the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of streets/transportation facilities; to provide for application procedures and data required for consideration; to provide for the enforcement of this article; to provide for fees payable under this article; and for other purposes. 
(Ord. of 7-10-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 66-101. - Application. 
Application for city road, right-of-way or easement closing or abandonment shall be made to the city clerk's office on an application provided by the city. The applicant shall outline the nature of the request and specify the anticipated follow-on use of the road, right-of-way, or easement for which the request is made. The applicant shall provide a plat that shows the right-of-way or easement for which the application is being filed. The plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered by the state in accordance with the Georgia Plat Act, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67. 
(Ord. of 7-10-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 66-102. - Review. 
(a)  The city public works superintendent shall coordinate the review of the request with the community development director, city administrator, city attorney, police chief, fire chief, and utility providers (power, telephone, cable, and gas) and other departments as necessary. All comments made by reviewers shall be written and returned to the city public works superintendent within 30 days of the application filing date. 
(b)  The city public works superintendent shall prepare staff report based upon the written findings that shall be forwarded to the city council. 
(c)  The public works superintendent shall contact the city council clerk to schedule a date for a public hearing with the city council on their next regular meeting date. 
(d)  The city clerk or his/her designee shall advertise a public hearing, giving the nature of the request, the place, date, and time of hearing in the local newspaper at least fifteen days before the hearing. The beginning and ending of the road or easement closing/abandoning shall be posted with the same information by the city clerk. The advertisement shall state the proposed closing/abandonment has "ceased to be used by the public and no longer serves any useful public purpose." 
(e)  The city administrator will place the abandonment request item on the city council official public hearing and meeting agenda as advertised and posted. 
(Ord. of 7-10-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 66-103. - Determination by the city council. 
(a)  If the city council approves the closing and abandonment, the city attorney shall prepare a quitclaim deed and file it for recording with the Pierce County Superior Court if the identity of the grantee for such a deed is clear. The submitted plat may require a revision if the city council placed conditions on the approved abandonment. The applicant shall bear the cost of any required plat modification. The action is final only after the deed is recorded by the city attorney. The original deed (if any) shall be mailed to the applicant(s) by the city clerk. 
(b)  No application for abandonment shall be made, or considered, if any portion of the property sought to be abandoned has been the subject of an abandonment application filed, or considered by the city council, within the immediate preceding one year. 
(Ord. of 7-10-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 66-104. - Fee. 
(a)  Unopened or dirt street or alley. Any request of an unopened, dirt street or alley submitted under the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by a $450.00 non-refundable application fee. The check shall be made payable to the "City of Blackshear." The applicant may withdraw the application or request a postponement of the hearing date once, by submitting a written request to the city administrator, at least seven calendar days, prior to the date set for the public hearing. If a postponement is requested, the applicant will bear the additional administrative charges (advertising and administrative costs) as determined by the city administrator. 
(b)  Paved street. Any request to close and abandon a paved or otherwise improved open street/road under the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of $450.00 and the current department of transportation item mean value of improvements in the right-of-way to reimburse the city for the funds spent on placing improvements in the street. The cost/value shall be determined by the public works superintendent or another office designated by the city council and submitted by written report to the city administrator prior to the public hearing by the city. 
(c)  Cul-de sac required. Any abandonment that results in creating a dead-end road/street shall require the applicant to construct a cul-de-sac at the dead-end road/street. The newly constructed cul-de-sac shall be constructed of the same material as the dead-end road/street. Applicant, in addition to the application fee, shall incur all cost of the cul-de-sac construction, including but not limited to, construction, drainage improvements, right-of-way dedication, etc. 
(Ord. of 7-10-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 66-105. - Definitions. 
The law of the state recognizes three types of roadways: 
(1)  Fee-simple roadway under which complete title is vested in the city. The city actually has a deed to the roadbed and the adjoining right-of-way. If the road is closed, the city has to dispose of the real property at public sale. 
(2)  Easement-type roadway is where the public has no title vested in the city but merely an easement. The adjacent landowners own the ground underneath the road right-of-way. 
(3)  Conditionally owned roadway is where the city owns the road right-of-way, but the right-of-way reverts to the owner if the city ceases using the right-of-way for road purposes. 
(Ord. of 7-10-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 66-106. - Closing and abandoning policies and factors. 
(a)  Policies. In order for a road to be closed, the city council shall determine that all or part of the road has ceased to be used by public so as to no longer serve any substantial useful purpose. This decision is made by the adoption of an ordinance, which is then recorded on the minutes of the city council. Owners of property located on the road shall first be notified of the impending ordinance prior to its passage by the city council. 
(b)  Cul-de-sac. A street/road approved by the city council to be closed/abandoned with a dead-end shall be provided with a cul-de-sac. The cul-de-sac construction should be funded and completed entirely by the applicant before the quit-claim deed(s) are signed by the mayor. The construction shall meet city standards and receive city approval. 
(c)  Considered factors. There are several factors, which should be considered by the city council in deciding whether or not to close a road or street. These factors are hereinafter set out. 
(1)  Source of title. Does the city own fee simple title to the road/street or merely an easement for use by public for road purposes? 
(2)  Present use of road, street or alley. How is the road, street, or alley currently being used? 
a.  General public; 
b.  Limited use by a small group; 
c.  Location of public utilities; or 
d.  Unopened right-of-way. 
(3)  Past history. What use has been made of the road/street in the last 20 years? 
(4)  Potential need for road in the future. What is the potential for development along the proposed closing/abandoning? 
a.  To serve future growth area. 
b.  Transportation plan projects future right-of-way needed. 
c.  Volume to capacity ration shows need to retain street. 
(5)  Cost involved in closing/abandoning or opening road/street. 
a.  Obstructions in or along right-of-way or at ends of road/street. 
b.  Attorneys fees and court costs projected to exceed value of road/street. 
c.  Other. 
(6)  Availability of other means of travel to take place of vehicular traffic using roadway. 
a.  Public transportation. 
b.  Adjoining landowners' assistance. 
c.  Neighborhood. 
d.  Emergency vehicles. 
e.  Garbage pickup. 
f.  Other. 
(7)  Benefit to public in continuing public usage of roadway. 
a.  Serves adjoining landowners. 
b.  Serves neighborhood traffic needs. 
c.  Provides access for emergency vehicles. 
d.  Allows garbage pick-up and other services. 
e.  Other. 
(8)  Benefit to public in closing road. 
a.  Eliminates road grading expense. 
b.  Eliminates traffic movement hazards. 
c.  Allows better land use plan for development of adjoining land. 
d.  Other. 
(9)  Adverse impact to public in closing road. 
a.  Prevents landowner(s) from accessing public road. 
b.  Interrupts comprehensive transportation plan project. 
c.  Interrupts neighborhood to neighborhood transportation connection. 
d.  Other. 
(Ord. of 7-10-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 66-107. - Enforcement. 
The enforcement of requirements of this article shall be through city attorney or other official designated by the city council. 
(1)  The owner, or agent of the owner, of any land adjoining a road proposed to be closed and/or abandoned and located within the jurisdiction of this article or any other person who closes any road or records in Pierce County Superior Court clerk's office any deed or plat or map abandoning a road before such road closing and/or abandoning proposal has been approved by the city council shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(2)  Any person, firm, corporation or agent of the owner of any land who shall violate a provision of this article, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, or continued and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by sentence of not less than five days nor more than ten days in jail and/or fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each and every day or portion thereof in violation. 
(3)  No plat, map, or plan of road closing or abandoning, adjoining land owned by any person, firm, corporation or agent of the owner of any land within jurisdiction of this article shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Pierce County until it has been approved by the city council and such approval entered in writing on the plat/map by the city clerk. Any such person who files or records a plat of road closing or abandoning without such approval is guilty of violating this article and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in subsection (2). 
(4)  The clerk of superior court shall not file or record a plat of a road closing or abandoning which does not have the written approval of the city council, thereon. 
(Ord. of 7-10-07(2), § 1) 
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 54; vehicles for hire, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

Sec. 70-1. - Uniform Rules of the Road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Code 1987, § 17-1) 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 70-2. - Authority to designate crosswalks, safety zones, and mark traffic lanes. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections, where in such officer's opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as such officer may deem necessary. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as such officer may deem necessary, for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as such officer may deem advisable, consistent with other traffic ordinances of this city and the laws of the state; to indicate by white lines on street pavements parking spaces for vehicles. 
(Code 1987, § 17-2) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 
Sec. 70-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2012, repealed § 70-3, which pertained to city decals and derived from the Code of 1987, § 17-3. 
_____
Sec. 70-4. - Speed limits—Street vehicles. 
(a)  Where no special hazard exists the following speeds shall be lawful but any speed in excess of such limits shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and is unlawful. 
ON-SYSTEM ROADWAYS 

 
*School Zones are Effective* 
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time—School Days Only. 
P.M. from 30 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time—School Days Only. 
OFF-SYSTEM ROADWAYS 

 
(b)  School zones. A speed limit of 25 miles per hour shall be enforced in the school zones of the city. Such limits shall be enforced only on school days during the time indicated. 

 
(Code 1987, § 17-4; Ord. No. 061099, 5-21-99; Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 10-11-11) 
_____
Sec. 70-5. - Same—Railroad trains. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any railroad train or engine to operate within the city at a speed greater than 50 miles per hour, between 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and 40 miles per hour from 8:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  The engineer or the conductor or both or any other person in charge and authority on such railroad train or engine may be held liable and responsible for the operation of such railroad train or engine within the city. 
(Code 1987, § 17-5) 
Sec. 70-6. - Railroad car, train, engine blocking or standing upon city streets. 
(a)  Prohibited; time limits. It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, whose trains operate in the city or for any employee of such railroad company, to permit any car, train or engine to stand upon or block any street in the city for a time longer than ten minutes in the daytime and 15 minutes in the nighttime, such nighttime period to commence at 7:00 p.m. and end at 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  Violation; penalty. 
(1)  The punishment for such unlawful behavior shall be a fine of $500.00. 
(2)  For each additional ten minutes in the daytime, the fine will be an additional $500.00. For each additional 15 minutes in the nighttime, the fine will be an additional $500.00. 
(3)  If the railroad brakes the train at the Main Street crossing within ten minutes in the daytime and 15 minutes at nighttime, so that the crossing can be used by traffic on State Highway No. 121, the fine will be reduced to zero. 
(c)  Assistance by police department. Whenever possible, the city police department will assist any train crew to find the reason for any train breakdown and get it on its way. 
(Code 1987, § 17-5.1) 
State Law reference— Responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197. 
Sec. 70-7. - Weight restrictions on certain streets. 
(a)  The chief of police and superintendent of public works shall determine and designate city streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of motor vehicles with a gross weight in excess of five tons (6,000 pounds) and shall erect the appropriate street signs giving notice of such weight restriction. 
(b)  The chief of police shall maintain a written list of the city streets subject to such weight restrictions. 
(c)  When street signs are so erected giving notice to persons of such vehicle weight restrictions, no person shall operate a vehicle upon any such street in violation of the weight restrictions, subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  The driver of a truck or other commercial vehicle shall have the right to use such portion of such streets as may be necessary, and no more, in receiving or making commercial deliveries of articles to or from any point along the line of the street; 
(2)  The driver of such a vehicle shall have the right to use such portion of such streets as may be necessary, and no more, in commuting only from his place of business to his residence located on such street. 
(d)  Any violation of this Code section shall be punished as a misdemeanor pursuant to the general penalty provisions found under section 1-2. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in the case of an emergency as determined by the chief of police, fire chief, or superintendent of public works or their designees, said individuals may temporarily allow a motor vehicle, the aggregate weight which is five tons or more, to operate on and over any of the above designated streets. 
(Code 1987, § 17-6; Ord. of 1-10-95; Ord. No. 2013-05, §§ 1—4, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 2016-02, § 1, 2-9-16) 
Sec. 70-8. - U-turns. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street within a block, or at any intersection where a "no U-turn" sign is posted. 
(Code 1987, § 17-7) 
Sec. 70-9. - No passing zone. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction upon Highway Avenue. 
(Code 1987, § 17-8) 
Sec. 70-10. - No parking zones. 
No person shall park any motor vehicle of any type or description on those certain streets located in the corporate limits of the city, known as: 
(1)  Hendry Street from Strickland Avenue to U.S. 84 (GA 38); 
(2)  Allen Avenue; 
(3)  Cherry Street; 
(4)  Lee Street; 
(5)  State Route 38, south side, as follows: 
a.  Beginning at Purdom Street and continuing along the south side of State Route 38 in a westerly direction, approximately 55 feet to the first driveway. 
b.  Beginning at Purdom Street and continuing along the south side of State Route 38 in an easterly direction, approximately 75 feet to the first driveway. 
(Code 1987, § 17-9; Ord. of 2-11-92, § I) 
Sec. 70-11. - Driving through funerals or processions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized processions while they are in motion. 
(Code 1987, § 17-10) 
State Law reference— Funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76. 
Sec. 70-12. - Funeral processions identified. 
A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant of a type designated by the chief of police, or by burning lights. 
(Code 1987, § 17-11) 
Sec. 70-13. - Abandonment of motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or to leave unattended for a period in excess of ten days any motor vehicle on any street, road, alley, or other public way in the city. 
(Code 1987, § 17-13) 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; removal of improperly parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
Sec. 70-14. - Right-of-way of fire apparatus. 
The fire department personnel, vehicles and apparatus, when going to any fire in the city or returning therefrom, shall have the right-of-way over the streets, lanes, and ways of the city to the exclusion of all persons and vehicles. 
(Code 1987, § 17-14) 
State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1. 
Sec. 70-15. - Intoximeter. 
For the purpose of determining the amount of alcohol in a person's blood, the city shall use the Intoximeter. 
(Code 1987, § 17-15) 
Sec. 70-16. - Bicycles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle on any sidewalk in the downtown business area at any time. The downtown business area is defined as Main Street from U.S. Highway 84 to Park Street and Central Avenue (both sides of the railroad tracks) from Taylor Street to Main Street. 
(b)  When riding bicycles on sidewalks in other than the downtown area, bicyclists shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians utilizing such sidewalks. When a question of doubt arises as to who has right-of-way, bicyclists shall yield such right-of-way to pedestrians as well as to all motor vehicles. When in doubt, yield. 
(Code 1987, § 17-16) 
Sec. 70-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-01, § 2, adopted May 11, 2010, repealed § 70-17 which pertained to skateboarding, roller skating, etc. prohibited and derived from Ord. No. 2005-10, §§ 1, 2, 9-13-05. 
Sec. 70-18. - Skateboarding self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades. 
(1)  Riding skateboards in the downtown business district. 
a.  It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades upon a public sidewalk, parking lot or roadway in the downtown business district. 
b.  "Downtown business district" as used in this chapter, means the area designated by the city, as now or hereafter amended. 
(2)  Penalties. 
a.  Violation of any of the provisions of subsection (1) of this section is a traffic offense, whether or not the act at issue occurred upon a roadway, and shall be punished as follows: 
1.  First offense. It is a traffic infraction for any person to violate subsection (1) of this section, and shall be punished by a fine of $25.00. This fine shall not be suspended or deferred, but the court may authorize community service in lieu of all or part of this fine. 
2.  Second offense. 
i.  Every person who violates subsection (1) of this section a second time within a five-year period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00. Fifty dollars of the fine shall not be suspended or deferred, but the court may authorize community service in lieu of all or part of this fine. 
ii.  Upon conviction of a second violation of subsection (1) of this section within a five-year period, the court may order forfeiture of the skateboards, self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades which were ridden in violation of subsection (1) of this section, unless it is proven to the court by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant is not the owner of the skateboard, self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades and the owner did not or could not have reasonably known that the skateboard would be ridden in violation of subsection (1) of this section. 
3.  Third or subsequent offense. 
i.  Every person who violates subsection (1) of this section a third or more times within a five-year period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $150.00. One hundred dollars of the fine shall not be suspended or deferred, but the court may authorize community service in lieu of all or part of the fine. 
ii.  Upon conviction of a third or subsequent violation of subsection (1) of this section within a five-year period, the court may order forfeiture of the skateboards which were ridden in violation of subsection (1) of this section, unless it is proven to the court by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant is not the owner of the skateboard, self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades and the owner did not or could not have reasonably known that the skateboard would be ridden in violation of subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Negligent skateboarding, self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades. 
a.  It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades in a negligent manner upon any publicly owned property or way open to the public in the city. For purposes of this section, "to ride in a negligent manner" means the riding or propelling of a skateboard in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property: Provided, however, that any person riding a skateboard, self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades on private property with the consent of the owner in a manner consistent with the owner's consent shall not be guilty of negligent skateboarding. 
b.  Negligent skateboarding, self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades is a traffic misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $250.00. Twenty-five dollars of the fine shall not be suspended or deferred, but the court may authorize community service in lieu of all or part of the fine. 
c.  Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the court may order forfeiture of the skateboards, self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades which were ridden in violation of this section, unless it is proven to the court by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant is not the owner of the skateboard and the owner did not or could not have reasonably known that the skateboard would be ridden in violation of this section. 
(4)  Seizure of skateboards, self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades. Whenever a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe skateboards, self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades were used or are being used in violation of this chapter, such skateboards, self propelled or motorized scooter, roller skates or roller blades may be seized as evidence and held until the disposition of the charge. An observation by a law enforcement officer that a skateboard is in motion upon the ground or pavement in the downtown business district, whether or not such skateboard is accompanied by a person, shall be sufficient to establish probable cause of a violation of subsection (1) of this section. 
(5)  Third party liability. It is expressly the purpose of this section to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this section. 
It is the specific intent of this section that no provisions nor any term used in this section is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the city or any of its officers or employees, for whom the implementation and enforcement of this section shall be discretionary and not mandatory. 
Nothing contained in this section is intended nor shall be construed to create or form the basis of any liability on the part of the city, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any action or inaction on the part of the city related in any manner to the enforcement of this section by its officers, employees or agents. 
(6)  Saving. The enactments for this section shall not affect any case, proceeding, appeal or other matter currently pending in any court or in any way modify any right or liability, civil or criminal, which may be in existence on the effective date of this section. 
(Ord. No.2010-01, § 1, 5-11-10) 
Sec. 70-19. - Motorized carts. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to protect, maintain, and enhance health, safety and general welfare of present and future citizens of the City of Blackshear. 
It has come to the attention of mayor and council that the use of motorized carts on city streets creates a potential traffic hazard for other vehicular traffic as well as a danger for the safety to the occupants of motorized carts. 
Therefore, the intent of this section is to regulate the use of motorized carts within the corporate limits of the City of Blackshear as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-331 and other provisions of applicable law. 
(b)  Operations and limitations. 
(1)  Motorized carts may be operated within the corporate limits of the city by those persons who are 16 years of age and older and have a valid motor vehicle drivers license; or 
(2)  Motorized carts may be operated within the corporate limits of the city by those persons who are 15 years of age, but not yet 16 years of age, and possess a valid instructional drivers permit (Georgia Class "CP") and accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 21 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle drivers license. 
(3)  All operators of motorized carts shall abide by all applicable traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic as set forth in Georgia Law and the this Code. 
(4)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks or in city parks other than in designated parking areas. 
(5)  Motorized carts operated on the streets of the city one half hour before sunset until one-half hour after sunrise must be equipped with fully functional headlights, taillights and turn signal lights. 
(6)  Motorized carts may cross streets and highways that are part of the state highway system. However, motorized carts may cross such streets only at crossings or intersections designated for that purpose by the department of transportation. 
(7)  Motorized carts may cross streets and highways that are part of the city street system and used by other types of motor vehicles only at crossings or intersections designated for that purpose by the city council. 
(8)  Motorized carts must be equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem pursuant to O.C.G.A § 40-8-4. Said emblem must be affixed to the rear of said motorized cart in a conspicuous place on the motorized cart, clearly visible to other operators of motor vehicles. 
(9)  Each motorized cart must not have a number of passengers on it which exceeds the manufacturer's recommended occupancy. It shall be the responsibility of the operator of the motorized cart to know the correct number of passengers allowed. Each motorized cart passengers must be securely seated in the motorized cart at all times when the motorized cart is in motion. 
(10)  No motorized cart may be operated on a street within the corporate limits of the city where the posted speed limit on such street is in excess of 35 miles per hour. 
(11)  Notwithstanding any other terms and conditions set forth in this section a person who is otherwise lawfully authorized to operate a motorized cart within the corporate limits of the city, may operate a motorized cart on the right-of-way from Lakeview Drive to Golf Course Road. 
(12)  No motorized cart shall be operated on a street within the city unless it has securely affixed thereto a fully functional rear view mirror. 
(c)  Registration. Before any motorized cart may be operated within the corporate limits of the city, the cart must be registered and receive a decal from the city police department signifying its registration. A person desiring to register a motorized cart shall bring documentation setting forth a description of said cart to the city police department and complete an application for registration and licensing of said motorized cart. Upon registration, and licensing the police department shall issue a decal bearing a three digit number to be applied to the rear of such cart so as to be plainly visible. There shall be a fee of $15.00 dollars for such registration. The decal issued shall be non-transferable from the cart for which it is issued. The registration shall be effective until the motorized cart is sold or the title thereto is transferred. If a cart is sold or title is transferred the registration becomes null and void upon the sale or title transfer. 
Before any motorized cart may be operated within the corporate limits the city, the cart must have affixed thereto an emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. The emblem shall conform with those standards and specifications adopted for slow-moving vehicles by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers in December 1966, and contained within such Society's standard ASAE S276.1, or shall be an emblem of the same shape and size painted on such vehicle in a bright and conspicuous retro-reflective red-orange paint. Such emblem shall be mounted on the rear of such vehicles, in the approximate horizontal geometric center of the vehicle, at a height of three to five feet above the roadway, and shall be maintained at all times in a clean and reflective condition. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Restrictions. No motorized carts shall be operated on any state or federal route within the city limits, except as set forth in other subparts of this section. 
(f)  Liability insurance coverage. Each person owning or operating a motorized cart that is operated within the City of Blackshear is responsible and liable for his or her own actions or failure to act. Liability insurance coverage varies and each person operating a motorized cart shall provide and verify his or her insurance coverage. 
(g)  Exception. 
(1)  This section shall not apply to any self-propelled, two-wheeled vehicle. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to motorized carts operated by employees of the city. 
(h)  Enforcement. This section shall not apply to motorized carts owned by golf courses, country clubs, or other such organized entities which own such carts and make them available to members or the public on a rental basis, provided that such motorized carts are used only on the premises of such golf courses, country clubs, or other such organized entities. 
The city police department shall be charged with enforcement of this section. 
(i)  Penalty. Except as set forth in [subsection (c)] of this section. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine for the first offense of not less than $25.00 and not more than $49.00. For the second offense, the fine shall be $50.00. If a third offense is committed within one year of conviction of a second offense, the minimum fine shall be $100.00 and the owner's registration shall be revoked. The registered owner or family member cannot thereafter register a motorized cart for use in the city for a period of two years following a third conviction. If a registration is revoked, the owner shall pay a re-registration fee of $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § A, 4-14-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-07, § A, adopted Apr. 14, 2009, enacted provisions intended for codification as § 70-17. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as § 70-19. 
Chapter 74 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Waterwell standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide for the development, storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Application for water and sewer service; deposit for water service. 
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service in person at the city hall, and at the same time shall make a cash security deposit as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges for water service and/or sewer service. 
(Code 1987, § 12-1; Ord. of 9-8-87) 
Sec. 74-2. - Water and sewer connection charges—Generally. 
Each consumer subscribing to use the water and sewer service of the city shall pay a connection (tap) fee in an amount not to exceed the actual cost of materials and labor required to complete the connection. Connection fees shall be amended by resolution of the city council, from time to time. 
Existing utility customers of the city shall have the option to have the connection/tap fee charged to their utility account and must be paid in full in two months of being charged to their account. This provision only applies to existing utility customers of the city requesting additional connections at their permanent residence or property owned by the customer. If the customer fails to pay said fee promptly and when due, said service shall be subject to immediate disconnection by the city. 
(Code 1987, § 12-2; Ord. of 7-10-07(3), § 1) 
Sec. 74-3. - Same—Size of water service tap; charges for larger tap. 
No water service tap shall be less than three-fourths inch in diameter, and larger taps may be authorized by the superintendent of public works where the water supply and service facilities are sufficient to permit such taps. The fee for all connections in this regard shall be in an amount not to exceed the actual cost of materials and labor required to complete the connection. 
(Code 1987, § 12-3) 
Sec. 74-4. - Monthly water and sewer rates. 
The monthly rates for water and sewer service shall be as set by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1987, § 12-4; Amd. of 1-14-92) 
Sec. 74-5. - Single-user per connection; no free water. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedules shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Code 1987, § 12-5) 
Sec. 74-6. - Industrial discharges. 
In addition to the ordinary sewer use charges, it is hereby determined necessary to fix and collect sewer service charges from industrial discharge customers. Such charges shall be published separate from this chapter. The revenue received shall be used for operation, maintenance, debt retirement, and other authorized expenses. 
(Code 1987, § 12-6) 
Sec. 74-7. - EPA sewer user charge system. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as PL 92-500, as amended. 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
Domestic strength wastes means any wastes which have an average daily concentration not exceeding 350 mg/l BOD or 250 mg/l of SS. 
EPA user charge means that portion of the total sewer bill which is attributable to the implementation of the EPA user charge system. Such rates include collection of operation, maintenance, and replacement expenses. 
Operation, maintenance, and replacement costs means the treatment works in good repair and at design specifications. This includes labor, supplies, utilities, chemicals, billing, administration, and general expenses including installation and/or repair of equipment, accessories, or appurtenances necessary during the service life of the treatment works. 
Over-strength wastes means any wastewater discharged into the treatment works which exceeds a BOD of 350 mg/l or a SS of 250 mg/l. 
SS (suspended solids) means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Toxic pollutant means any discharge into the treatment works which interferes with the normal biological process of the treatment works or in some way reduces the efficiency of the treatment works or causes special procedures to be necessary to properly dispose of either effluent or sludge produced by the treatment works so that the cost of such disposal is increased. 
User means any person who discharges wastes into the treatment works whether continuously or occasionally. A wastewater customer is a user, but a user does not necessarily have to be a wastewater customer. 
Wastewater customer means any residence, business, industry, school, or other building tied into and receiving services from the treatment works and receiving periodic billings thereof. 
(b)  Calculation. The EPA user charge system shall result in the calculation of three unit charges: 
(1)  An administrative charge to be calculated based on the administration costs and the number of wastewater customers to be assessed on a per meter basis; 
(2)  An operation, maintenance, and replacement fee calculated based on the volume of water used by wastewater customers and the total operation, maintenance, and replacement costs incurred by the city to be assessed on a per 1,000 gallons of water used basis; and, 
(3)  A surcharge rate to be applied to all overstrength wastes to be based on the strength and volume of such wastes and the cost of treatment. 
The calculation procedures for these charges are more particularly described in "Guidance For Developing EPA User Charge Systems For Small Municipalities" prepared by the Georgia Institute of Technology Engineering Experiment Station, dated May 1980. 
(c)  Toxic pollutants. Any user discharging any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the aforementioned treatment works shall be required to pay for such increased cost. 
(d)  Biennial review. The city shall review not less often than every two years the wastewater contribution of users, the total costs of operation and maintenance of the treatment works, and the approved user charge system. The city shall revise the charges for users to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users; 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary to proper operation and maintenance (including minor replacement) of the treatment works; and 
(3)  Apply excess revenues collected to adjust future rates accordingly. 
(e)  Notification. The city will notify each user at least annually in conjunction with a regular bill or other mailing, of the rate attributable to the user charge. 
(f)  Effect on agreements. The user charge system shall take precedence over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between the city and users which are inconsistent with the requirements of section 204(b)(1)(A) of the Act and 40 CFR 35, dated September 27, 1978. 
(g)  EPA user charge unit rates. The EPA user charge, which includes charges for operations, maintenance, and replacement expenses, will be assessed for all contributors to the treatment works and shall be as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges. 
(Code 1987, § 12-7) 
Sec. 74-8. - Meter reading; billings; collecting. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such days of each month as may be determined to be desirable by the city. The failure of water or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment by the tenth of month following month of reading will be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the delinquent account. 
(2)  Nonpayment by the 16th day of the month will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 60 days after original date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate the agreement, and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply, any water under this agreement. 
(b)  Water and sewer service shall not be reconnected until customer's delinquent bill, including penalty and disconnection charges, have been paid in full. Should such customer thereafter desire to be reconnected to the water and sewer system, a reconnection charge as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges shall be collected. Bills shall be paid at the city hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent, nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. 
(Code 1987, § 12-10) 
Sec. 74-9. - City's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The city shall run a water service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 74-2, will be made for a five-eighths inch by three-fourths inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee above will be made as provided in section 74-3 for a meter of larger dimensions. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Code 1987, § 12-11) 
Sec. 74-10. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of the consumer's household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use such water. Water shall not be used for irrigation or fire protection, or other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Where meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state board of health. 
(e)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Code 1987, § 12-12) 
Sec. 74-11. - Suspension of service. 
When water and sewer service is disconnected and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(1)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(2)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the council is made, and a service charge as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges paid for each meter reconnected. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
a.  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
b.  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
c.  Emergency repairs. 
d.  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
e.  Legal processes. 
f.  Direction of public authorities. 
g.  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1987, § 12-13) 
Sec. 74-12. - Complaints; adjustments. 
If the consumer believes the bill to be in error, such consumer shall present such claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice the claim. 
(1)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer without a fee; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was overread, no charge will be made. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to overregister beyond three percent of the correct value, no charge will be made. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of such consumer's previous bills or from proper data. 
(Code 1987, § 12-14) 
Sec. 74-13. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water or sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make such person liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Code 1987, § 12-15) 
Sec. 74-14. - Water service line regulations. 
Not more than one building shall be permitted to use a water service line. Each service line shall contain a stop and waste cock where the water may be turned off. 
(Code 1987, § 12-16) 
Sec. 74-15. - City ownership of waterlines, etc.; performance of work by plumber. 
(a)  The city shall own and maintain the waterline from the main to the curb box and the property owner shall own and maintain the service line from the curb box to the premises served. 
(b)  All work upon the service line shall be performed by a licensed plumber. 
(Code 1987, § 12-17) 
Sec. 74-16. - Access to premises and extensions of water and sewer systems. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Code 1987, § 12-18) 
Sec. 74-17. - Water waste prohibition. 
Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water outlets closed when not in actual use. Hydrants, urinals, water closets, bathtubs, and other fixtures must not be left running for any purpose other than the use for which they were intended. When any such waste occurs, water service may be terminated. 
(Code 1987, § 12-19) 
Sec. 74-18. - Sprinkling restrictions. 
In case of water shortage or scarcity, the council may by resolution place any restrictions upon the use of water for irrigation or sprinkling purposes which such body deems necessary. 
(Code 1987, § 12-20) 
Sec. 74-19. - Use during fire alarms. 
During all fire alarms and thereafter while fires are being fought, the use by persons other than municipal firefighters, of outside water hoses and other apparatus using city water, is forbidden in order to maintain a constant flow of water for firefighting. 
(Code 1987, § 12-21) 
Sec. 74-20. - Wells prohibited except as authorized. 
(a)  Except for the purposes set forth in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person or entity located within the city where city water service is provided, to utilize any type of well for the purpose of obtaining drinking water. 
(b)  It shall be permissible for city residents to maintain and utilize wells for irrigation purposes only. Any resident wishing to utilize a well for irrigation purposes shall notify the city clerk of this fact. 
(c)  With written permission of the city, it shall be permissible to utilize industrial/commercial wells to entities which need water in quantities which the city is not able to provide. Any such wells shall be utilized only for industrial/commercial purposes and not for human consumption or irrigation purposes. 
(d)  Any person, business or entity requesting permission to utilize a well for the purposes stated herein shall pay to the city an initial application fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, which shall be a one-time fee and shall not be chargeable for the renewal of any permit which has been previously granted by the city. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to connect any type of well to the water system of the city for any purpose whatsoever. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not affect any wells being utilized by city residents as of the effective date of this section. 
(g)  Any violation of the terms of this section shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  First offense, warning. 
(2)  Second offense, fine of $50.00 or five days in jail, or both. 
(3)  Third offense, fine of $75.00 or ten days in jail, or both. 
(4)  Fourth and subsequent offense, fine of $100.00 or 15 days in jail, or both. 
(h)  Upon any application for a permit to utilize a well for any of the purposes stated herein, the city council (or the appropriate committee of the city council) shall review such application and, upon verification of the purposes stated in such application, shall grant permission for such use unless it is determined that the applicant will not comply with the written request as set forth in this section. 
(Code 1987, § 12-22; Ord. of 5-10-94, §§ 1, 2, 4—9) 
Secs. 74-21—74-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Customer means any person who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having, or using sewer connections with, or sewer taps to, the sewer system of the city and in obtaining, having, or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through such system. Such terms shall include the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. The wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
Health officer means the director of the county board of health or other person designated by the county board of commissioners, and such officer's or other person's duly appointed assistants. 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Infiltration/inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes, or other openings. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Normal wastewater means wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 350 milligrams per liter (mg/l), BOD is not more than 300 mg/l, total phosphorus is not more than 15 mg/l, total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 20 mg/l, and the total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
Pit privy means shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with flytight slab on which is securely located a flytight riser covered with hinged flytight seat and lid. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewer, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater, and surface water that are not intentionally admitted. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Service area means the area served by the city water and sewer systems. 
Sewage means the spent water of a community. The equivalent term is wastewater (see Wastewater). 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed as storm sewer ) means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source and excluding sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of public works of the city or such superintendent's authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present (see Sewage). 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1987, § 12-30) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-47. - Powers and authority of inspectors; right-of-entry; safety. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the public sewerage in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to herein, the authorized employees and agents of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by such employees or agents and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company, except such as may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required by this article. 
(c)  Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1987, § 12-31) 
Sec. 74-48. - Compliance with regulatory requirements. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. Specific user charge and industrial cost recovery requirements, promulgated pursuant to Public Law 92-500, shall be considered as a part of this article upon official adoption. All nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403. 
(b)  If a wastewater discharge is made to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) under the jurisdiction of an approved sewer use ordinance for another governing authority, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. 
(Code 1987, § 12-32) 
Sec. 74-49. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the public sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(b)  Notification processes for discontinuance of service are provided in section 74-113. 
(Code 1987, § 12-33) 
Sec. 74-50. - Toilets required. 
All premises shall be provided, by the owner thereof, with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. 
(Code 1987, § 12-34) 
Sec. 74-51. - Sewage disposal in toilets only. 
No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. 
(Code 1987, § 12-35) 
Sec. 74-52. - Prohibited discharges without treatment to natural outlets. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the county, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 12-36) 
Secs. 74-53—74-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF SEWER GENERALLY; BUILDING SEWERS 

Sec. 74-71. - Required connection to sewer. 
(a)  The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer is hereby required at the owners' expense to install suitable facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 30 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that such public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(b)  All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer; provided, that where no sewer is available septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health officer may be used. 
(Code 1987, § 12-40) 
Sec. 74-72. - Permit to connect—Required. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1987, § 12-41) 
Sec. 74-73. - Same—Application. 
The owner or the owner's agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the approving authority. A permit and inspection fee as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1987, § 12-42) 
Sec. 74-74. - Same—Defining costs. 
The superintendent will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(Code 1987, § 12-43) 
Sec. 74-75. - Responsibility for installation of building sewer. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1987, § 12-44) 
Sec. 74-76. - Separate building sewers. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(Code 1987, § 12-45) 
Sec. 74-77. - Use of old building sewer. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the approving authority, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 12-46) 
Sec. 74-78. - Size, slope, etc., of building sewer. 
(a)  The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in construction shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(b)  Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city's supervision: 
(1)  The building sewer shall be cast iron solid pipe, ASTM Specification A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe, ASTM Specification D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe of ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints. Cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints may be required by the superintendent where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
(2)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) shall be followed. 
(3)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(4)  All excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(5)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Push-on joints for cast iron pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C-564. Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber "O"-ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including oils), and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. Installation of gasket shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the superintendent. 
(6)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45-degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1987, § 12-47) 
Sec. 74-79. - Position of building sewer. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1987, § 12-48) 
Sec. 74-80. - Downspouts, etc., not to be connected. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, area drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(Code 1987, § 12-49) 
Sec. 74-81. - Notice of readiness of building sewer for inspection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection with the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or such official's representative. 
(Code 1987, § 12-50) 
Sec. 74-82. - Excavations. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1987, § 12-51) 
Sec. 74-83. - Conformance of building sewer connection; testing. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(Code 1987, § 12-52) 
Sec. 74-84. - Prevention of infiltration or inflow entrance to house sewer. 
If the house sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the house sewer. 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property. 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect such owner's sewer from the city's sewer system. 
(Code 1987, § 12-53) 
Secs. 74-85—74-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESTRICTED USE OF PUBLIC SEWER 

Sec. 74-101. - Discharge of unpolluted waters to public sewers. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1987, § 12-60) 
Sec. 74-102. - Discharge of sanitary waste to storm sewer. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into storm sewer system. 
(Code 1987, § 12-61) 
Sec. 74-103. - Prohibited discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singularly or by interaction with other wastes, to damage or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than 9, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 1987, § 12-62) 
Sec. 74-104. - Limits on quality of discharges. 
(a)  The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The approving authority may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if in the opinion of the approving authority such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In the forming of that opinion as to the acceptability, the approving authority will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewaters having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65° C) or wastewater which will elevate the temperature of the influent to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) to 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40° C) or higher. 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Wastewaters containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of oils, fat, grease, or wax, whether emulsified or not, containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0° C) and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65° C). 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable, toxic, or poisonous substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the treatment plant exceeds the limits established by the city for such materials or which may constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to interfere with any wastewater treatment process, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing taste-producing or odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the city. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Quantities of flow, concentration, or both which constitute a slug. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(11)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Any unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD (above 300 mg/l), chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine demand in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
(b)  The limits established herein may be used as a guide in design and plant control, but may be altered by the approving authority, upon a cumulative overload on a sewer line segment or the wastewater treatment plant. 
(c)  Specific criteria may be established at more restrictive levels than what is shown in table 1 following where wastes are determined to be harmful or destructive to the facilities of the wastewater collection or treatment system, or to create a public nuisance, or to cause the discharge of the wastewater treatment plant to violate effluent or stream quality standards, or to exceed industrial pretreatment standards for discharge to a publicly owned treatment works as imposed or as may be imposed by the state department of natural resources or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
TABLE 1 
MAXIMUM EFFLUENT LIMITS FOR  DISCHARGE OF WASTES INTO THE  PUBLIC SEWERAGE SYSTEM 

 
*Based on 24-hour, flow-proportionate composite sampler. 
(Code 1987, § 12-63) 
Sec. 74-105. - Options of city as to restricted discharges. 
(a)  If any water or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated above and which in the judgment of the mayor, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require surcharge payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  When considering the above alternatives, the approving authority shall give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. If pretreatment or equalization of waste flows is permitted, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the approving authority. 
(Code 1987, § 12-64) 
Sec. 74-106. - Interceptors. 
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintenance of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the approving authority. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Code 1987, § 12-65) 
Sec. 74-107. - Sampling facilities. 
When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans. The structure shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. This requirement will be on a case-by-case basis. 
(Code 1987, § 12-66) 
Sec. 74-108. - Requirements imposed on industrial user. 
The industrial users may be required to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters; 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)  A plot of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the public sewer. 
(Code 1987, § 12-67) 
Sec. 74-109. - Special agreements. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the county and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the county for treatment. 
(Code 1987, § 12-68) 
Sec. 74-110. - Standard methods or measurements, tests and analyses. 
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the superintendent. 
(Code 1987, § 12-69) 
Sec. 74-111. - Pretreatment of wastes. 
(a)  Persons discharging industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system may be required to pretreat such wastes. Plans for all pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the superintendent of the state department of natural resources prior to construction. At the time written plans are submitted for approval, written maintenance plans shall also be submitted and approved by the superintendent. The facilities shall be allowed to operate only as long as they are maintained in accordance with the approved maintenance plans. Pretreatment requirements shall be determined on a case-by-case basis and shall include the following facilities as a minimum: 
(1)  Neutralization. If plans are submitted for the neutralization of strong acid or alkaline wastes, the plans shall include the necessary instrumentation and controls to assure compliance with the above regulations at all times. 
(2)  Equalization. Holding tanks or equalization basins shall be required ahead of the receiving manhole of the city sanitary sewer system when deemed necessary by the superintendent to prevent peak flows that exceed the capacity of the system or that result in operational problems. 
(b)  All pretreatment facilities shall be operated and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1987, § 12-70) 
Sec. 74-112. - Waiver of requirements. 
(a)  There shall be no provision for the granting of variances for discharge of incompatible wastes. If a user begins to violate any provisions of this division, it shall be the user's responsibility to apply to the approving authority, who can issue a temporary permit along with a compliance schedule for planning and construction of necessary treatment or pretreatment works. Each case will be carefully evaluated with respect to its effect on the wastewater treatment system and the environment prior to issuance of a temporary permit and compliance schedule. 
(b)  Any dilution of the wastewater by the user for the purpose of decreasing the concentrations of toxic materials shall be considered as a violation of this division. 
(Code 1987, § 12-71) 
Sec. 74-113. - Discontinuance of service for failure to comply. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this division shall be cause for the discontinuance of sewer or water service to the offending person. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  A written notice, signed by the approving authority, shall be delivered personally to the person then responsible for the offending use, outlining the conditions of the wastes which violate the city ordinance. 
(2)  If the person in charge will not accept the notice, it shall be conveyed by registered or certified mail to the responsible person. 
(3)  The person notified shall have 24 hours from the time of receipt of the notice, either personally delivered or received by registered or certified mail, to correct the offending conditions. 
(4)  If correction is not made or a request for extension is not received by the approving authority within 24 hours, it shall be mandatory that water or sewer service shall be discontinued to the offending person without further notice. 
(5)  If a request for an extension of time is received by the approving authority within 24 hours of the above notice and if the circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the approving authority, the best interest of the city would be served by extending the time for correction of the offending condition, then such authority may grant an extension of time up to a maximum limit of 30 days. 
(Code 1987, § 12-72) 
Sec. 74-114. - Responsibilities of the person discharging waste. 
It shall be the responsibility of the person discharging industrial waste into the city sewer system to: 
(1)  Build a control structure in the discharge line from such person's premises, immediately prior to the entrance of the discharge line into the city's sanitary sewer system, suitable for the sampling and measuring of wastes. Plans for this structure must be approved by the city and the state department of natural resources. This requirement may be waived if deemed unnecessary by the approving authority. If no special manhole is required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(2)  Contact the city prior to operation changes which will materially alter the characteristics of the waste from the last prior sampling. 
(3)  Make timely, periodic payments to the city surcharges for excessive loadings as detailed in the city's user charge system. 
(Code 1987, § 12-73) 
Secs. 74-115—74-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE SYSTEMS 

Sec. 74-131. - Privies, etc., prohibited except as authorized. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Code 1987, § 12-80) 
Sec. 74-132. - Required connection to private system. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of this article, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of the county health department and the state department of human resources. 
(Code 1987, § 12-81) 
Sec. 74-133. - Connection to private system to public system prohibited. 
Premises with private systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. 
(Code 1987, § 12-82) 
Sec. 74-134. - Septic tank construction and maintenance; permit. 
(a)  Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged, and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health officer. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(b)  No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tank unless such person shall hold a valid permit for such work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of such a permit pending the inspection and approval by the health officer of the site and location of the proposed work. Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered, or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer. 
(Code 1987, § 12-83) 
Sec. 74-135. - Compliance with recommendations; minimum lot size for soil absorption. 
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of human resources. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. 
(Code 1987, § 12-84) 
Sec. 74-136. - Circumstances wherein subsurface facility prohibited. 
(a)  No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved, nor in any place where the health officer deems the use of same to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(b)  No subsurface disposal facilities shall be installed in any place where the health officer deems the use of such facilities to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(Code 1987, § 12-85) 
Sec. 74-137. - Discontinuance of use of private facility. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days after notice. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1987, § 12-86) 
Sec. 74-138. - Maintenance of system by owner. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1987, § 12-87) 
Sec. 74-139. - Flush toilets required. 
Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer where available or to a septic tank. Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(Code 1987, § 12-88) 
Sec. 74-140. - Locations at which privies prohibited. 
No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved; 
(2)  In areas where the health officer deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; 
(3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or 
(4)  Where the use of pit privies is not keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(Code 1987, § 12-89) 
Sec. 74-141. - Septic tanks prohibited in areas with sewage service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to maintain or utilize a septic tank in any area in which the city provides sewage service. 
(Code 1987, § 12-89.1; Ord. of 5-10-94, § 3) 
Sec. 74-142. - Discharge of septic tanks into sewer system. 
(a)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge, into any manhole, catchbasin or other opening, into the city's sewer system, or any system connected with and discharging into the sewer system, the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewage, or other similar matter or material, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Permits. The approving authority is hereby authorized to grant permits to discharge the contents of septic tanks at locations specified by the superintendent and under the superintendent's supervision. Such permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the approving authority, continued dumping of such matter into the sewers will be damaging to the sewer system or treatment processes. 
(c)  Charges. A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping contents of septic tanks, as provided in separate rules. A record shall be kept of such dumpings and statements rendered at the first of each month; the amount of such statements shall be payable within ten days after rendition. Failure to pay the amounts due within such ten-day period shall be cause for revoking the permit. 
(Code 1987, § 12-90) 
Sec. 74-143. - Connection of nonfunctioning system. 
Any premises that has a septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system, located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within 30 days from the receipt of written notification from the health officer that such system is not functioning in a sanitary manner, and order that such system be corrected. 
(Code 1987, § 12-91) 
Sec. 74-144. - Additional requirements authorized. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Code 1987, § 12-92) 
Secs. 74-145—74-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES 

Sec. 74-161. - Violation constitutes misdemeanor; liability for damage. 
Violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable under the laws of the state and city. Each day of continuing violation shall be considered a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of violation. 
(Code 1987, § 12-100) 
Sec. 74-162. - Injunction. 
The violation of any provision of this article may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Any public nuisance which is injurious to the public health, safety, or comfort may be abated by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the court of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding the fact that such violation also constitutes a crime, and notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city council. 
(Code 1987, § 12-101) 
Sec. 74-163. - Notice to correct violation. 
(a)  Upon violation of this article, the health officer or authorized employees may verbally instruct the owner as to the necessary corrective action. If the owner fails to carry out verbal instructions in a timely manner or if a serious violation or hazard to public health exists, the health officer or city council may issue to the owner a written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective action, and the time limit for completing the corrective action. The record of the mailing of such notice or order shall be prima facie evidence thereof and failure of such owner to receive same shall in no way affect the validity of any proceedings conducted pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Failure to comply with any written order duly issued by the health officer or city council pursuant to this article will constitute a separate misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided by the laws of the state and the city; provided further, that compliance with this article is required notwithstanding the fact that a written order might not have been issued. 
(Code 1987, § 12-102) 
Sec. 74-164. - Hearing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a notice of a violation of this article or an order of the city's authorities requiring an act or thing to be done or to cease, the owners of any premises then in question may, in writing, demand a hearing before the city council to present the evidence challenging the validity of the city council's order. The owner may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. Such demand must be filed with the city clerk and be made within five days from the receipt of the order being challenged. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a demand for a hearing, the city council will set a date, time and place for such hearing to be not less than 21 days from the date of filing of such demand. 
(c)  The hearing shall apply to any customer's complaint, dispute, or challenge of the city council's rules, regulations, resolutions, ordinances, or policies. Upon a customer's written complaint filed with the clerk, the city council shall set a hearing at a time agreed upon by the parties. 
(d)  Evidence before the city council of any hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be admitted in accordance with the rules of evidence of the superior courts of the state; provided, however, the city council may take official notice of any order, rule, regulation, or any other document, record, or entry contained in its official records or minutes for evidentiary purposes. 
(Code 1987, § 12-103) 
Sec. 74-165. - Council decisions prevail. 
For the purposes of this article, the decisions of the city council will prevail in any instance in which there is a conflict between it and the health officer on any issue of sanitation, or the lack of it, and its effect on human health or well being. 
(Code 1987, § 12-104) 
Sec. 74-166. - Malicious damage. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1987, § 12-105) 
Chapter 78 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

Sec. 78-1. - Passenger vehicle license and permit—Required. 
All persons operating or driving taxicabs or other vehicles for carrying passengers for hire in the city shall be licensed and have a permit for the operation of vehicles for transportation of passengers for hire within the city. 
(Code 1987, § 18-1) 
Sec. 78-2. - Same—Application; issuance or denial. 
Every person seeking to operate a taxicab or other vehicle for transportation of passengers for hire within the city shall file with the city clerk an application for license and permit. The application must positively show that the applicant is 18 years of age or older; free of all contagious and infectious diseases, evidenced by a certificate from a reputable physician; and that the applicant has not been convicted of any offense or crime involving moral turpitude. The city shall have the right to grant or refuse to grant the license and permit sought by the applicant. 
(Code 1987, § 18-2) 
Sec. 78-3. - Same—Period. 
All permits and licenses so granted and issued shall be for the same period of time as other licenses issued by the city, and a new application shall be required for each permit and license. 
(Code 1987, § 18-3) 
Sec. 78-4. - Registration of passenger vehicles for hire—Required. 
All vehicles operating for hire for the transportation of passengers within the city shall be registered with the city clerk and the applicant for said registration must affirmatively show that the vehicle offered for registration is a safe and suitable vehicle for the transportation of passengers, as well as the make, model, body type and state license number of the vehicle. 
(Code 1987, § 18-4) 
Sec. 78-5. - Fees. 
Each application under this chapter shall be accompanied by a registration fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Such fees shall be retained by the city. 
(Code 1987, § 18-5) 
Sec. 78-6. - Passenger vehicle insurance. 
Each operator of a taxicab or other vehicle for hire for the transportation of passengers within the city shall have insurance as protection for the passengers from personal injury received while a fare-paying passenger. The minimum amount and kind of insurance shall be for bodily injury liability $10,000.00/$20,000.00 and for property damage liability $5,000.00, and the insurance carrier shall be registered with the insurance commission of the state. The name of the insurance company, policy number and premium paid shall be filed with the city clerk before the operation of any taxicab or vehicle for hire. 
(Code 1987, § 18-6) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1987 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1987 Code, as updated through March 1988, which are included herein. Sections of the 1987 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1987 Code, as updated through March 1988, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1987 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since March 1988, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 