SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in subpart A is the Atlanta City Charter, as adopted by 1996 Ga. Laws, page 4469. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. The location in session laws, when known, of ordinance amendments to the Charter is indicated in tables following amended provisions. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes and session laws has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

BILL OF RIGHTS 
The council, mayor and all departments of government of the City of Atlanta shall be guided by the provisions of this Bill of Rights: 
1.  Religion and Conscience. The City of Atlanta shall not interfere with the freedom of each person in the city to follow the dictates of his or her own conscience concerning religious worship, nor shall the city support any religion. 
2.  Speech, Assembly and Press. The City of Atlanta shall not interfere with the rights of freedom of speech, of freedom of the press, to petition the government, or of peaceable assembly. 
3.  Unreasonable Searches and Seizures. The City of Atlanta shall not authorize any unreasonable search or seizure. 
4.  Nondiscrimination. The City of Atlanta shall not, directly or indirectly, discriminate among persons because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, gender identity or racial profiling. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Atlanta from remedying present discrimination or the present effects of past discrimination by a race-conscious affirmative action program which is in compliance with the Constitution and laws of the United States of America and the State of Georgia. 
5.  Environmental Protection. The City of Atlanta shall promote the right of the people to clean air, pure water, freedom from excessive and unnecessary noise, and the natural, scenic, historic and aesthetic qualities of the environment. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2001-13, § 1, 2-13-01) 
ARTICLE 1. - NAME, POWERS, AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1-101. - Name. 
The name of the city shall be the "City of Atlanta" which shall be a municipal corporation of the State of Georgia with perpetual duration. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 1-102. - Powers. 
(a)  The City of Atlanta (hereinafter at times referred to as "city") shall be the legal continuation of and successor to said city as heretofore incorporated; and may contract and be contracted with; may sue and be sued, and plead and be impleaded in all courts of law and equity and in all action whatsoever, and do all other acts relating to its corporate capacity; may purchase, lease or otherwise acquire such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, lease, sell or dispose of any such property; and shall have and use an official seal. 
(b)  The city shall have all powers necessary and proper to promote the safety, health, peace, and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
(c)  The city shall have all powers now vested in the city and now or hereafter granted to municipal corporations by the laws of Georgia and shall have the power to do the following: 
(1)  To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(2)  To levy and provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions, not in conflict with the general law of this state, and to license and regulate such privileges, occupations, trades, and professions and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; 
(3)  To assess, charge, and collect rentals, interests, fees, penalties, fines, and costs; to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer and water services under such rules and regulations prescribed by ordinance; to levy and collect garbage, trash, refuse, and rubbish collection service charges and sanitary taxes under such rules and regulations as prescribed by ordinance; to collect income on investments and to accept funds, services, or property from other political subdivisions and public agencies, either local, state, or national, and from private persons, firms, or corporations; 
(4)  To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city, to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(5)  To appropriate and borrow money to provide for payment of the debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of the state; provided, however, such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing the issuance of bonds by municipalities; 
(6)  To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, or any interest therein, inside or outside the corporate boundaries of the city and to dispose of said property or any interest therein by sale, lease, or easement; 
(7)  To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(8)  To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate boundaries of the city, for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the council, under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended, including but not limited to an Act approved Feb. 20, 1945 (Ga. L. 1945, p. 690), granting to the city a fee simple title to property condemned upon payment of the condemnation of money, or under other applicable state Acts, including but not limited to an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved March 2, 1953 (Ga. L. 1953, Jan.-Feb. Sess., p. 360), as now or hereafter amended, and Section 6 of an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved March 7, 1955 (Ga. L. 1955, p. 3025, Sec. 6). The city may also condemn any real property or interest therein necessary for the collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of sewage, and other sanitary purposes both inside and outside the city, including but not limited to the waters known as Tanyard Branch and adjacent land. In addition, the city shall be authorized to construct water and sewer utility lines through private property by condemnation or agreement; provided, however, that the condemnation of an existing public use shall be denied unless it can be shown that the specific property to be condemned is absolutely essential to the condemning authority and the use to be condemned does not materially impair the existing public use; 
(9)  To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, regulate, control, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, natural gas systems, electrical power systems, transportation facilities, airports, and any other public utility inside and outside the corporate limits; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and liens, penalties, and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced, provided liens shall be enforced in the same manner and with the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes; to assess the cost or a portion of the cost of such facilities and services against abutting property under such rules, procedures, terms, and conditions of payment and enforcement thereof as provided by ordinance. 
(10)  To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services as provided by law. The council may prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with such regulations by the Public Service Commission, and may grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities; the council may extend, renew, or amend a franchise at any time by mutual agreement of the parties and by adoption thereof by the council at two consecutive meetings. In all other cases, the council shall have no authority or power to grant, consent to, or permit the extension, removal, or change of the term for which franchises have been or may be granted or in any way to extend or renew the time for which permission has been or may be given to occupy the streets and public places, except and only during the 12 months immediately preceding the expiration of the term of such franchises and permit; and all extensions and renewals made in violation of this section shall be void; 
(11)  To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, vacate, abandon, or close, construct, pave, repave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light streets, alleys, sidewalks, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to acquire land for such improvements and to assess the cost or a portion of the cost of payment and enforcement thereof against abutting property under such rules, procedures, terms, and conditions as provided by ordinance; 
(12)  To undertake and expend tax or nontax funds to foster mutual understanding, tolerance, respect, and improvement of human relations among all citizens of the city; 
(13)  To establish and fix a system of grading and draining of the streets of the city; and to cause the owners of lots or cellars to drain or fill the same to the level of the streets or alleys upon which said lots or cellars are located. After reasonable notice, the city shall be authorized to have said lots or cellars so drained or filled and the amount so expended collected by executions against the owner or occupant thereof; 
(14)  To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, regulate, control, sell, and dispose of public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, and market houses, public buildings, libraries, airports, auditoriums, and charitable, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended, or other applicable public Acts, or under any power or procedure of eminent domain now or hereafter provided by the General Assembly of Georgia; 
(15)  To require estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the term and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(16)  To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes and to regulate all housing, building, and building trades; to license all building trades; and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures; 
(17)  To regulate or prohibit junk dealers; to regulate and control billiard rooms; to regulate and control pawnshops; to regulate the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors; to regulate the use and sale of firearms; and to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; 
(18)  To regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, or shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; 
(19)  To license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling or palmistry; 
(20)  To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(21)  To prescribe standards of safety and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(22)  To regulate emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(23)  To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(24)  To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(25)  To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; and to establish and operate incinerators for the purpose of disposal of garbage and other refuse of the city; 
(26)  To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges, provided that any such charges, taxes, or fees, if unpaid, shall constitute a debt which shall be subject to a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner, and under the same remedies, as a lien for city property taxes; 
(27)  To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewage system and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a sewer service charge, fee, or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; 
(28)  To charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees and to change the same from time to time; such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; 
(29)  To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(30)  To define a nuisance in the city and to provide for its abatement; to cause nuisances which are likely to endanger the health of the city or any neighborhood therein to be abated in an summary manner at the expense of the party whose act or negligence caused such nuisance, or of the owner of the property upon which the same may be located, as the council shall elect. The council may provide by ordinance for any building, structure, or condition maintained in violation of any valid law of this state or any valid ordinance of the city to be adjudged a nuisance and for its abatement at the owner's expense upon failure or refusal to abate the same within ten days after written notice and hearing from the city to do so, said expense to be a lien upon the property for which execution may issue as for property taxes; 
(31)  To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(32)  To establish minimum standards for, and to regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing, and housing for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; to require adequate fire escapes on buildings; and to regulate or restrict smoking in public places, dangerous substances, and weapons; 
(33)  To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court shall work out such sentences in any public works or on the public streets of the city as provided by ordinance; or the council may provide for the commitment of city prisoners to any county or other correctional institution, to jail, or to any other government agency, by agreement with the appropriate county officers or any other government agencies; or the council may provide programs of conditional leave or furlough persons given sentences by any court prior to completion of such sentences; 
(34)  To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention and punishment of disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, and disturbing the peace in the corporate limits of the city and to prohibit the playing of lotteries, except as otherwise authorized under the Constitution and general laws of this state, and to prohibit and regulate by ordinance such other conduct and activities within said city which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this state, is deemed by the council to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the city or to the welfare of the citizens thereof; 
(35)  To regulate and license, or prohibit, the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same in violation of any ordinance or lawful orders; also to provide for their disposition, by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; to provide for the location, use, and cleanliness of private stables; to forbid the erection of such stables when they are likely to be injurious to the health of citizens; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(36)  To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in amounts prescribed by ordinance; to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; to regulate transportation lines and terminals, pedestrian and vehicle traffic, parking, and common carriers; 
(37)  To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(38)  To provide that upon the conviction of the violation of any ordinance, rule, regulation, or order such person shall be punished as provided by ordinance but not exceeding any limitations now or hereafter prescribed by the Charter; 
(39)  To develop for park or recreational purposes land adjacent to the banks of rivers, creeks, and other streams in counties of which the city is a part, which is now owned by the city or which may be dedicated or otherwise acquired by it for such purposes; and to solicit and accept grants of land adjacent to said banks and use the same for such purpose; and to abate in any manner provided by law any pollution of said rivers, creeks, or other streams caused by deleterious substances such as sewage of any kind, brush, logs, or other deleterious matter or things; and any of such pollution shall constitute a nuisance; 
(40)  To levy taxes and to make appropriations for the purpose of advertising the city, its advantages, and resources, so as to bring new capital, commercial, manufacturing, and other enterprises into the city, and also to levy taxes and to make payment from the general revenues and funds of the city for the support of libraries; 
(41)  To regulate and control streets, public alleys, and ways and the uses thereof; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right-of-way of any public street, public alley, or way or portion thereof for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such locations; and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; 
(42)  To regulate land use by the adoption of zoning ordinances, planning ordinances, and other regulatory ordinances. This power to regulate land use shall include authority to identify, nominate, designate, and regulate historic zones or areas, whether such zones or areas are individual buildings, structures, or sites, or are combinations of buildings, structures, or sites, so as to promote the public health, safety, and morality, and the educational, aesthetic, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the city, by preserving and protecting historic buildings, structures, and sites and combinations thereof. It shall also include authority to empower the Atlanta Urban Design Commission to: prepare inventories and conduct studies and surveys; prepare and promulgate administrative design criteria for historic zones or areas; apply for and use public or private funds; hold public hearings; review urban design aspects, including works of art, of public projects and private projects impacting public property; identify, nominate, and make recommendations regarding historic zones or areas; prohibit or authorize, conditionally or otherwise, construction, demolition or alteration within or of designated historic zones or areas and issue permits relative thereto; and in connection therewith, may form a three-person panel of real estate and economic experts to render decisions and advice regarding economic hardships affecting historic properties; administer Atlanta's historic preservation regulations; promulgate administrative rules governing the commission's operating procedures; and perform other similar historic preservation and urban design functions. It shall also include authority to provide for appeals of final decisions of the urban design commission to the Superior Court of Fulton County; 
(43)  To engage the necessary personnel to administer and enforce ordinances, rules, and regulations adopted by the council; 
(44)  To inspect, weigh, measure, and otherwise regulate any products grown, mined, manufactured, or otherwise produced or acquired; 
(45)  To regulate by licenses, bonds, permits, or otherwise, or restrict, the manufacture, sale, lease, rental, use, or solicitation of any real or personal property and the presentation of any services or spectator activities; 
(46)  To regulate or restrict through permits, fees, codes, review boards, or otherwise the construction, use, and maintenance of real or personal property and the emission and disposal thereon or therefrom of any substance that tends to pollute land, water, or air; 
(47)  To enforce city ordinances outside the city limits along and for 50 feet on all sides of transportation lines in unincorporated Fulton County and to the end of transportation lines, except as to railroads, along and for 300 feet on all sides of city water mains and along and for ten feet on all sides of the city sewer lines and sewage treatment property; 
(48)  To make contracts for and to accept grants-in-aid and loans from the federal, state, city, and county governments and their authorities and other agencies for constructing, expanding, examining, and operating any project or facility or performing any function, which the city may be authorized by law to provide or perform; 
(49)  To provide for post entry training, blanket surety bonds, federal social security, and other employee services; 
(50)  To establish a civil defense plan for the continuity of city government in the event of any enemy attack or other emergency; 
(51)  To grant to city police officers the same power in the unincorporated areas of Fulton County to make arrests, to execute and return all criminal warrants and processes, and exercise other powers as peace officers as sheriffs have; 
(52)  To build, repair, or put in a safe condition a bridge or the approaches thereto across tracks and roadbeds at the expense, with interest and cost, of a railroad or railroad company in the case of the latter's failure after reasonable notice to do so when the council shall have declared the same necessary for the protection of human life. Execution may issue therefor, as other executions are issued by the city, and be levied on any property of such railroad or railroad company; and such execution shall bear interest at the rate of 7 percent per annum; provided, however, that nothing in this paragraph shall require railroads or railroad companies to build bridges otherwise than is required by the general laws of this state, or the Charter of such railroad companies, respectively, except in all cases in which a public street was in existence before the tracks of any such railroad or railroad companies were laid or placed across any such public streets; 
(53)  Group life insurance for all officers and employees of the City of Atlanta and the Atlanta Board of Education shall be managed by a board of trustees consisting of 18 trustees, whose initial terms of office shall commence on the third Thursday in March, 1978. Twelve trustees shall be elected for staggered terms of four years as follows: Two by employees of the City of Atlanta's Department of Public Works, two by employees of the City of Atlanta's Department of Public Safety, six by officers and employees of the Atlanta Board of Education and two by officers and employees of the City of Atlanta outside the departments, bureaus, and offices set forth above. In February, 1980, and February of each even-numbered year thereafter, an election shall be held to fill the vacancies of those trustees whose terms expire on the third Thursday of March of each such year. For the initial election of said trustees, that trustee of the two trustees elected by employees of the department of public works who receives the larger number of votes from said employees shall serve for a term of four years, with the trustee who receives the fewer number of votes from said employees serving for a term of two years. That trustee of the two trustees elected by employees of the department of public safety who receives the larger number of votes from said employees shall serve for a term of four years, with the trustee who receives the fewer number of votes from said employees serving for a term of two years. Those three trustees of the six trustees elected by officers and employees of the Atlanta Board of Education who receive the largest number of votes from said officers and employees shall serve for terms of four years, with those three trustees who receive the fewest votes from said officers and employees serving for terms of two years. That trustee of the two trustees elected by officers and employees of other departments, bureaus, and offices who receives the larger number of votes from said officers and employees shall serve for a term of four years, with the trustee who receives the fewer number of votes from said officers and employees serving for a term of two years. One trustee shall be elected as chairperson of the board, and one trustee shall be elected as vice-chairperson of the board for terms of two years by the 12 elected members of the board of trustees from among their number, provided that said chairpersonship and vice-chairpersonship shall be held by a representative of City of Atlanta officers and employees and a representative of the Atlanta Board of Education officers and employees on an alternating basis. If said chairperson or vice-chairperson is a licensed insurance agent or counselor, he or she shall not be affiliated with any insurance company with which the board of trustees shall maintain insurance coverage for its officers and employees. The remaining six trustee positions shall be ex officio, nonvoting positions and shall be filled by the city's chief financial officer, who also shall serve as secretary-treasurer of said board, director of purchasing and real estate, and commissioner of the department of personnel and human resources, and the Atlanta Board of Education's comptroller, purchasing agent, and director of the department of personnel and human resources. Said board shall be required to meet at least twice each year. A majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum for meeting purposes. Said board shall have the power to adopt bylaws putting into effect these provisions and other provisions relating to meetings of the board, the filling of vacancies occurring on said board, and such other matters pertaining to the management of group insurance as may properly come under its supervision. Said board, exclusive of those trustees representing officers and employees of the Atlanta Board of Education, shall also manage the hospitalization and major medical insurance for the officers and employees of the City of Atlanta, including the power to adopt bylaws relating to meetings, election of officers, and such other matters relating to the management of group hospitalization and major medical insurance as may properly come under its supervision; 
(54)  To make, ordain, and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules, and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(55)  To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(56)  To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, morals, and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter, as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal government under the Constitution and general laws of the State of Georgia, and to do, perform, and render (or refrain therefrom) all things necessary or convenient to the carrying out of the objects of the powers, duties, and requirements set forth anywhere in this Charter. No enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to cities under the Constitution or applicable public laws; 
(57)  To appropriate moneys from the general fund for the purchase of evidence and the purchase of information by law enforcement officers of the city in the performance of their official duties; 
(58)  To exercise the power and to provide services in the area of public housing; to make appropriations and to authorize the expenditure of funds for such purposes; and to provide a definition of public housing; 
(59)  To cooperate or join, by contract or otherwise, with other cities, with the state or nation, or other governmental bodies, singly or jointly, or in districts or associations, for promoting or carrying out any of the powers of the city for the sharing of tax base or revenue with other governments, for agreements concerning allocation of taxes among other governments to the extent such allocation is or becomes authorized under the Constitution of Georgia, or for the acquisition, construction, or operation of any works, plants, or structures convenient or necessary for carrying out any of the purposes or objects authorized by this Charter; 
(60)  To transfer or consolidate functions of the city government to or with appropriate functions of the state, county, or other municipal government, or to make use of such functions of the state, county, or other municipal government and, in the case of any such transfer or consolidation, the provisions of this Charter and code of ordinances providing for the function of the city government so transferred or consolidated shall be deemed suspended during the continuation of such transfer or consolidation to the extent that such suspension is made necessary or convenient by said transfer or consolidation and is set forth in the contract or other document establishing such transfer or consolidation. 
(61)  To establish one or more special districts within which commercial and residential property owners may voluntarily consent to the installation of energy and water conservation improvements and to the imposition of a fee, tax or assessment which may be assigned through contract with the city's development authority or downtown development authority in order to provide financing for the installation or modification of improvements that reduce energy or water consumption or provide improvements that produce energy from renewable resources; to provide for the imposition of liens and penalties for failure to pay the fee, tax or assessment, provided that such liens shall be enforced in the same manner and with the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes and shall be co-equal and on a parity basis with other municipal taxes. Any fee, tax or assessment shall be collected by Fulton County or Dekalb County in the same manner, and on the same dates as other taxes, fees and assessments levied by the City of Atlanta. 
(62)  For the protection of public health, welfare, and convenience of the city, and for the adequate provision of police, fire, and other emergency services, to fix and collect a public safety access assessment within the city. The collection of such public safety access assessment due the city shall be enforced by ordinance or resolution in the same manner as authorized by law for the enforcement of the collection and payment of state taxes, fees, or assessments. The public safety access assessment shall be deemed an additional source of municipal funding under subsection (j) of Code Section 46-5-134 of the O.C.G.A. and shall be expended by the city for the purposes of Part 4 of Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 46 of the O.C.G.A. The amount of the public safety access assessment shall be recommended annually by the city's chief financial officer, subject to the approval of the city council, to provide sufficient revenue for operation of the city's 9-1-1 communications section. In no event shall the amount of the public safety access assessment per residential parcel exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). In no event shall the total public safety access assessment, combined with the funds received by the city under Part 4 of Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 46 of the O.C.G.A., exceed the total reserve, capital, and operating costs of the city's 9-1-1 communications section. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1996-54, § 1, 7-8-96; Ord. No. 2012-52(12-O-1615), § 1, 12-12-12; Ord. No. 2016-10(16-O-1141), § 1, 5-11-16 ; Ord. No. 2016-43(16-O-1431) , § 1, 11-30-16) 
Section 1-103. - Legislative powers. 
(a)  All legislative powers of the city are hereby vested in the council (hereinafter at times referred to as the "governing body"), except those powers specifically reserved in this Charter to the electors of the city. The power to levy, assess, and provide for the collection of all taxes and fees authorized to be levied, assessed, and collected by the city by general law and this Charter shall be vested in the council. 
(b)  The council shall adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions and rules, not inconsistent with this Charter as shall be necessary or proper for the purpose of carrying into effect the powers and duties conferred by this Charter and may enforce all ordinances by imposing penalties and fines for the violation thereof not to exceed a $1000 fine or six months' imprisonment, or both. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 1-104. - Executive powers. 
All executive and administrative powers of the city are hereby vested in the mayor and such other administrative officers, departments and agencies created or continued by this Charter or now or hereafter established by ordinance. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 1-105. - Boundaries. 
The corporate boundaries of the city shall be the same as those of the City of Atlanta as provided by law and existing on the effective date of this Charter, or as hereafter lawfully changed. The municipal clerk shall maintain a current map and written legal description indicating the boundaries and council districts of the city. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
ARTICLE 2. - LEGISLATIVE 
CHAPTER 1. - THE COUNCIL 

Section 2-101. - Composition; term of office. 
Effective with the regular municipal elections of November, 1997, the qualified electors of the city shall elect 15 representatives, in accordance with the provisions of this Charter, to serve as a city council. Twelve representatives shall be elected from 12 individual council districts apportioned in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. Three representatives shall be elected at-large and shall represent residency posts as follows: Post 1 which shall consist of contiguous Council Districts 1 through 4; Post 2 which shall consist of contiguous Council Districts 5 through 8; and Post 3 which shall consist of contiguous Council Districts 9 through 12. At-large representatives must be residents of the residency posts from which they are elected. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-102. - Qualifications. 
(a)  To qualify for election as a councilmember, a person: 
(1)  Must be at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Must be a resident of the city and of the council district from which he or she seeks to qualify for at least one year immediately preceding the date of his or her filing of notice of candidacy to seek office; 
(3)  Must be a qualified elector of the city; and 
(4)  Must not be an employee of the city. 
(b)  To hold office as a councilmember, a person: 
(1)  Must continue to possess the qualifications prescribed in subsection (a) of this section; 
(2)  Must, if elected from one council district or residency post, continue to reside in the same council district or post from which elected; and 
(3)  Must not hold any other elective public office. 
(c)  The one-year residency requirement as provided in subparagraph (a)(2) herein shall not be applicable to persons seeking election to the council if this Charter is amended by the General Assembly reapportioning council districts of the city. Under such circumstances, persons seeking election to the council must have been a resident of the city and the council district from which he or she seeks to qualify for at least six months. 
(d)  The council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its members. 
(e)  Whenever the terms "reside", "residence", or "residency" appear in this section, the same shall be interpreted to mean his or her domicile. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2000-14, § 1, 3-15-00) 
CHAPTER 2. - PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL 

Section 2-201. - Election; term. 
The president of the council shall be elected from the city at-large for a term of four years commencing on the first Monday in January after each regular municipal election as provided in this Charter and shall serve until his or her successor has taken office. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-202. - Qualifications. 
(a)  To qualify for election as president of the council, a person: 
(1)  Must be at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Must be a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of his or her filing of notice of candidacy to seek office; 
(3)  Must be a qualified elector of the city; and 
(4)  Must not be an employee of the city. 
(b)  To hold office as president of the council, a person: 
(1)  Must continue to possess the qualifications prescribed in section 2-202(a); and 
(2)  Must not hold any elective public office. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-203. - Powers and duties; limitations. 
(a)  The president of the council: 
(1)  Shall preside at meetings of the council but shall not be a member of that body; 
(2)  Shall vote only in the case of a tie vote of the council; 
(3)  Shall appoint the members and chairpersons of such committees as may be established by the council pursuant to its rules, and fill vacancies therein, provided any such appointments shall be subject to rejection by a majority vote of the total membership of the council; and the president of the council shall not be a member of any said committees; 
(4)  Shall exercise all powers and discharge all duties of the mayor in the case of a vacancy in the office of mayor or during the disability of the mayor; 
(5)  Shall be authorized to compel the attendance of councilmembers by subpoena, subject to the rules of council; 
(6)  Shall have such further powers and perform such other duties consistent with law as may be provided by ordinance or resolution of council; and 
(7)  May speak to any pending matter before the council but shall not introduce ordinances or resolutions. 
(b)  If the president speaks to a matter pending before the council, the president shall temporarily relinquish his or her role as presiding officer to the president pro tempore while speaking to such matter. 
(c)  If the president of the council exercises the powers and discharges the duties of the mayor as provided in subsection (a) herein, he or she shall note exercise any of the powers and duties enumerated herein. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
CHAPTER 3. - ORGANIZATION, RULES, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Section 2-301. - Organizational meeting; oath of office; mandatory training. 
(a)  Organizational meeting. The council shall meet for organization in the council chamber, or any other designated public place, on the first Monday in January following each regular election, or, if such Monday is a legal holiday, then on the next following day not a legal holiday. 
(b)  Oath of office. At such organizational meeting, the mayor, president of the council, and councilmembers shall take and subscribe before a judge of the superior court, or any official authorized to administer oaths, the following oath of office: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the [mayor, president of the council, councilmember] City Council of the City of Atlanta, Georgia. I will not knowingly permit my vote to be influenced by fear, favor, affection, or reward, and in all things pertaining to my office. I will be governed by the public good and the interests of the City. I will observe the provisions of the Charter, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Atlanta, and I will support and defend the Constitutions of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I am prohibited from holding by the laws of the State of Georgia; I am not the holder of any unaccounted-for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof; I have been a resident of the City of Atlanta [and Council District] and am otherwise qualified to hold this office by the Constitution and laws of this State and the Charter and ordinances of the City of Atlanta, so help me God." 
(c)  Mandatory training. The mayor, president of the council, and councilmembers shall, following each regular Municipal General Election or such election held in place thereof, attend a mandatory training session that shall include, but not be limited to, matters of campaign and financial disclosure requirements, standards of conduct, ethics code and the legislative process. 
(1)  The Municipal Clerk, shall hold, or cause to be held, a training session for all current and newly elected city of Atlanta officials that shall include, but not be limited to, matters of campaign and financial disclosure requirements, standards of conduct, ethics code, and the legislative process. Said training session shall be offered on two separate dates, but no later than July 1 of the year following each municipal general election or no later that 60 days following any election held in lieu thereof, and no later than 60 days following a Special Election held to fill a vacancy in office. Persons required to attend shall be present at the entirety of a session, or at a combination of the offered sessions whereby all training modules designated for the particular office held are covered. Attendance as noted shall be mandatory. Each official shall be required to sign an affidavit stating that he/she has completed training, with said affidavit to be certified by the Clerk or the Clerk's designee. 
(2)  Any official required to attend who has not completed the mandatory training by the end of the second available training session, shall be deemed non-compliant and shall be immediately fined $50.00. An additional $100.00 fine shall continuously be assessed each non-compliant official, every 30 days after the date of non-compliance in which an official has not paid the assessed fine or received a waiver and completed a makeup training session as outlined in subsections (c)(5) and (6) of this section. 
(3)  All payments of fines shall be paid to the City of Atlanta and shall be submitted to the Municipal Clerk, or designee who shall then record that the fine has been received and forward each payment to the Chief Financial Officer. 
(4)  Immediately following the second offered training session, and if necessary upon the assessment of further fines, the Municipal Clerk shall notify, by certified mail, each official who has not completed mandatory training that he or she is in non-compliance of the law and of the penalty thereby imposed. The Clerk shall simultaneously notify the Chief Financial Officer of the City, the President of Council and the Chairperson of the Committee on Council of any official's non-compliance. However, failure of receipt of such notification does not relieve the official of the obligation to attend the mandatory training and to pay the assessed fine. 
(5)  Any non-compliant official may submit, through the Chair of the Committee on Council, a written appeal to the Council requesting a waiver of the assessed fine. Supporting evidence of the reason(s) of his/her non-compliance must be presented in the appeal. If due cause is shown, the Council may adopt a resolution, by majority vote, to waive the fine. 
(6)  In all such cases, whether the assessed fine is paid or waived, any non-compliant official shall be required to attend a make-up training session scheduled by appointment with the Municipal Clerk. Such session may be provided through a videotaped session, but shall cover in its entirety all required training modules. The non-compliant official's signed affidavit of completion of training and the Clerk's or the Clerk's designee's certification of same, shall be required to avoid further assessments of fines. There shall be no waiver of training attendance granted under any circumstances. 
(7)  The Municipal Clerk shall develop, or cause to be developed, a manual detailing all of the above. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2002-55, §§ 1, 2, 6-20-02; Ord. No. 2005-86, § 1, 11-30-05; Ord. No. 2010-08(10-O-0313), §§ 1, 2, 3-9-10) 
Section 2-302. - Rules; quorum; voting. 
(a)  The council shall by ordinance adopt and publish rules to govern its proceedings and transaction of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter. 
(b)  A majority of the councilmembers, excluding the president, shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent members. The council may by ordinance provide methods to compel the attendance of its members and to punish for the violation thereof. 
(c)  The affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers shall be required for the transaction of business and the passage of ordinances and resolutions, except as otherwise provided by law. Where no quorum can be assembled except by the filling of vacancies, a smaller number of members may transact business by a majority vote of members present to the extent necessary to fill such vacancies in the membership of the council as provided in this Charter and by law. Should the number of vacancies in the membership of the council be one-half or greater than its total membership, the remaining members of the council shall cause to be called a special election to fill such vacancies. 
(d)  No member of the council, or the president of the council, shall vote on matters involving the consideration of his or her own conduct, which would inure to his or her financial or personal interests, or which would be a conflict of interest as provided in Chapter 4 of Article 5 herein or by ordinance. Prior to the vote being taken, such member of council shall publicly state the nature of his or her interest in the matter from which he or she is abstaining from voting. Additionally, such member of the council shall disclose such interest in writing, via the submission of an electronic form prescribed by the board of ethics upon his or her recognition of said conflicts. 
(e)  No councilmember present at a meeting of a quorum of the city council shall abstain from voting for any reason other than those provided herein; this requirement shall not apply to meetings of council committees. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 3-9-99; Ord. No. 2006-60, § 1, 9-13-06) 
Section 2-303. - Meetings. 
(a)  The rules of the council shall provide for the time and place of holding regular meetings, which shall be held at least twice each month on the first and third Monday with the exception of April, July and December. If such Monday is a legal holiday, then the meeting shall be held on the next day not a legal holiday. For good cause shown, the council may reschedule a regular Monday council meeting to another day, provided that notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 is given. The council shall be in recess during the first cycle of committee and council meetings in April and the second cycle of committee and council meetings in July and December of each year. 
(b)  Special meetings of the council may be called by the president of the council or mayor and shall be called by the president upon the written demand of at least seven members of the council. Notice of any special meeting shall be made as provided by Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended. No business may be transacted at such special meeting other than that specified in the call and notice of such meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the council and of the committees and of every agency, board, commission and authority, or similar body of the city, shall be public in the same manner and to the same extent as required by the Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., relating to open and public meetings, as now or hereafter amended. Any person shall have access to the minutes and records thereof at reasonable times in the same manner and to the same extent as required by Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., relating to inspection of public records, as now or hereafter amended. 
(d)  The council and its committees shall provide a reasonable opportunity for the public to be heard during its meetings. The council shall prescribe rules and regulations for the receipt of such comments from the public. 
(e)  The council shall hold one public hearing in conjunction with an annual budget hearing to receive comments from citizens concerning city services, notice of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least seven days prior to the date set therefor. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1999-66, § 1, 9-30-99; Ord. No. 2001-38, § 1, 5-25-01; Ord. No. 2002-59, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2006-18, § 1, 5-18-06; Ord. No. 2018-18(18-O-1278), § 1, 6-13-18 ) 
Section 2-304. - Election of president pro tempore. 
At its first regular meeting in January of each year, the council shall elect one of its members as president pro tempore who shall act as the presiding officer in the absence of the president of the council and, in case of disability of the president of the council or of vacancy in the office of the president of the council, shall exercise the powers and duties which remain in the president of the council under the provisions of this article. The president pro tempore shall not lose his or her rights as a member of the council during any temporary absence or disability of the president of the council. When the president pro tempore is serving during the temporary absence or disability of the president, he or she cannot also vote as the president of the council. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-305. - Succession to offices of mayor and president of council. 
The council shall by ordinance establish a line of succession to the offices of mayor and president of council beyond that specified in this Charter. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-306. - Compensation and expenses of elected officials. 
(a)  The council may by ordinance change the annual salary of the mayor, the president of the council, or councilmembers, subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  Such action shall take into consideration any recommendation made by the Elected Officials Compensation Commission as provided in Chapter 7 of this article; 
(2)  No action to increase such salaries shall be taken until notice of intent to take the action has been published in a newspaper of general circulation designated as the legal organ in the county and in the city at least once a week for three consecutive weeks immediately preceding the week during which the action is taken; 
(3)  Any action to change such salaries shall not become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of the mayor, president of the council, and councilmembers elected at the next regular municipal election following such action; 
(4)  Such action shall not be taken during the period between the date when the candidates for election to the positions of mayor, president of the council, and councilmembers may first qualify as candidates and the date when the mayor, president of the council, and councilmembers take office following their election; and 
(5)  The amount established for each councilmember shall be the same. 
(b)  As used in this section, the words "salary or compensation" shall include any expense allowance or any form of payment or reimbursement of expenses, except reimbursement of expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the mayor, president of the council, or councilmember in carrying out his or her official duties. The council is authorized to provide by ordinance for the reimbursement of such actual and necessary expenses. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-307. - Municipal clerk. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal clerk, who shall be appointed by the council and who shall not be a member thereof. To be eligible to occupy this position, the municipal clerk must be designated a certified municipal clerk by the Georgia Municipal Clerks and Finance Officers Association, or by an equivalent certifying agency from another state, or must receive such certification within one year following his or her appointment. The municipal clerk shall be appointed and removed at the pleasure of the council upon a majority vote of its membership. The municipal clerk need not be a resident of the city at the time of his or her appointment but shall establish residence in the city at the time of appointment and continue to reside in the city throughout such appointment. 
(b)  The municipal clerk shall be the custodian of the official seal and of all records and documents of the city which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer. The clerk, or his or her designee, shall keep the rules of the council and the minutes of the proceedings of the council, maintain a current and comprehensive index of all ordinances and resolutions, publish notice of ordinances proposed for adoption under rules prescribed by council or required by this Charter or law, and perform such other duties as may be assigned by this Charter or by ordinance. 
(c)  The municipal clerk shall be responsible to the council and shall perform the duties of his or her office under the direction and supervision of the president of the council and the committee designated by the council, acting through its chairperson. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1, 5-18-06) 
Section 2-308. - Staff of council and president of the council. 
(a)  Staff of council. The council shall be authorized to employ such employees as may be necessary for the proper discharge of its functions. Adequate facilities and office space for such staff shall be provided for by the council. 
(b)  Staff of president of the council. The president of the council shall be authorized to employ such employees as may be necessary for the proper discharge of the functions of the office of president of the council. Adequate facilities and office space for such staff shall be provided. 
(i)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City council assistant means any employee of the President other than a special or senior city council assistant and who is thereby not entitled to participate in the city's health and life insurance program, pension benefits or any other benefits. City council assistants shall be required to execute a release to the city acknowledging that any such employee is ineligible to participate in the life and health insurance program. 
Senior city council assistant means an employee whose position has been created in section 114-476 and who thereby receives the same benefits afforded to regular city employees. 
Special city council assistant means an employee designated as such by the President and who is thereby entitled to participate in the city's health and life insurance program on the same terms and conditions as other city employees. 
(ii)  Number of assistants; salaries. The President shall be entitled to employ up to three (3) senior city council assistants or up to three (3) special city council assistants and such other city council assistants as deemed necessary. Each such employee shall be paid on an hourly or salary basis, as determined by the President, provided the aggregate compensation on behalf all such employees, including the cost of any benefits provided by the city, shall not exceed the total of the amount appropriated for such purpose plus any amount carried over from previous years in accordance with subsection (e). No more than three (3) employees of whatever category of each shall be entitled to benefits. 
(iii)  Responsibilities of the president. The president shall be responsible to certify that funds expended for employee service in accordance with this section are expended for public purposes, such public purposes not to include any campaign-connected costs, and shall be responsible for establishing the professional standards, work program, wage rate, supervision, hiring and firing and work location of any employee. 
(iv)  Nepotism. No person shall be employed in such position where such person directly supervises or is directly supervised by a member of such person's immediate family. The term "immediate family" includes the spouse, domestic partner registered under section 94-133, mother, father, sister, brother, and natural or adopted children of an official or employee. 
(v)  Annual appropriations for salaries and benefits. The total amount of $195,973.00 shall be appropriated annually for the salaries and benefits of the assistants authorized in this section. The amount of annual appropriation shall be increased by the appropriate pro rata amount necessary to equal the average amount of any salary and associated benefit increases given to city employees in any given year. 
(c)  Director of council staff. 
(1)  The council shall appoint a director of council staff who shall not be a member thereof. The director of council staff shall be appointed and removed at the pleasure of the council upon a majority vote of its membership. The director of council staff need not be a resident of the city at the time of his or her appointment but shall establish residence in the city at the time of appointment and continue to reside in the city throughout such appointment. 
(2)  The director of council staff shall supervise all research undertaken on behalf of the council and shall further supervise the provision of administrative support to hearings and meetings of committees and subcommittees of the council and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by this Charter or by ordinance. 
(3)  The director of council staff shall be responsible to the council, and shall perform the duties of his or her office under the direction and supervision of the president of the council and the committee designated by the council, acting through its chairperson. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2002-47, § 1, 6-12-02; Ord. No. 2004-40, §§ 1, 2, 6-30-04; Ord. No. 2006-20, § 1, 5-18-06; Ord. No. 2006-54, § 1, 8-29-06; Ord. No. 2018-33(18-O-1411), § 1, 8-29-18 ) 
CHAPTER 4. - PROCEDURES OF COUNCIL 

Section 2-401. - Form of legislation. 
Every official act of the council having the force and effect of law shall be by ordinance and shall begin with the words: "The City Council of the City of Atlanta, Georgia, hereby ordains..." All other actions shall be by resolution or shall take such other form as prescribed by rules of the council. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-402. - Introduction, consideration, passage, and publication of legislation. 
(a)  All proposed legislation must meet minimum standards to ensure that the public is able to adequately review and understand the intent and effect of the legislation. The minimum standards include a caption, at least one whereas clause, and at least one section which indicates the action proposed in said legislation. 
(b)  Every proposed ordinance and every amendment shall embrace one subject which shall be clearly expressed in its caption. 
(c)  No ordinance shall be passed and adopted until it has been read by title at two regular meetings not less than one week apart, except for emergency ordinances as provided in subsection (d) herein. 
(d)  To meet a public emergency threatening life, health, property, or public safety, the requirement herein for ordinances may be dispensed with, and the emergency ordinance may be passed and adopted on the same day of its introduction. The emergency ordinance shall be in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and contain a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment, or it may be rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of the city council shall be required for adoption. Any emergency ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as specified within the ordinance. Every emergency ordinance shall be automatically repealed on the sixteenth day following the date on which it was adopted; however, should the emergency still persist, this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section. An emergency ordinance also may be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for the adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(e)  The passage of all ordinances shall be contingent upon the recording in the minutes of council proceedings of the "ayes" and "nays" of each councilmember and the names of the members voting for and against each proposed ordinance or amendment, those abstaining, and those absent. 
(f)  Pursuant to Section 2-101 of this Charter, the membership of the Atlanta City Council shall consist of fifteen (15) representatives. The affirmative vote of a quorum of the City Council's total membership, which is eight (8) votes, shall be required for the passage of any ordinance, resolution, communication, or other city council legislation, or for action on any matter of parliamentary procedure, with the following exceptions: (i) where this Charter or Code of Ordinances requires a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the City Council, ten (10) votes shall be required to effectuate any such action; and (ii) in the event the total number of Councilmembers is reduced to less than eight (8) members, a quorum of the number of members remaining shall be required for the passage of the above-referenced legislative actions until such time as the total membership of the City Council is restored. 
(g)  Within seven days after any ordinance has been introduced, excluding emergency ordinances, the caption or title of every such ordinance, showing its general contents, shall be published and disseminated at least once in the following places and forums: 
(1)  At least one printed legible copy of such caption or title shall be made available for inspection by the public in the office of the municipal clerk; 
(2)  At least one electronic legible copy of such caption or title shall be published in readable form on the official city of Atlanta web site. 
Copies of all ordinances shall be available for inspection and/or purchase by members of the public in the office of the municipal clerk in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act, as amended. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1996-45, § 1, 7-8-96; Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-18-06; Ord. No. 2009-02(08-O-2158), § 1, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2017-03(16-O-1660) , § 1, 1-12-17) 
Section 2-403. - Submission to mayor; mayor's veto. 
Every ordinance or resolution adopted by the council shall be signed by the president of the council, certified by the municipal clerk, and presented to the mayor's office within two calendar days following its adoption. The mayor shall approve or veto the ordinance or resolution within eight calendar days after adoption, and no ordinance or resolution shall become effective without the mayor's approval except as herein provided. If the mayor vetoes an ordinance or resolution, he or she shall within two business days of such veto return it to the council via the municipal clerk, accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for the veto. If the council shall pass the ordinance or resolution by a vote of two-thirds of its total membership at the regular meeting next held after the ordinance or resolution has been returned with the mayor's veto, it shall become law without his or her approval; provided however, that if the mayor vetoes any ordinance or resolution adopted at the last council meeting in December of a year in which the City of Atlanta general election is held, the council shall call a special meeting to be held prior to December 31 of that year, to consider any such vetoed legislation. In the event the mayor does not approve or veto the ordinance or resolution within the time required, it shall become law without such approval. The mayor may veto any item or items of any ordinance or resolution making appropriations; the part or parts of any ordinance or resolution making an appropriation which is not vetoed shall become law, and the part or parts vetoed shall not become law unless passed by the council over the mayor's veto as provided herein with respect to the passage of a vetoed ordinance or resolution. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 1, 5-18-06; Ord. No. 2009-72(09-O-1920), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Section 2-404. - Codes of technical regulations. 
The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the municipal clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-405. - Codification and printing. 
The council shall provide for the continuous updating, revision, codification, and printing of all ordinances of general application, copies of which shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost. The municipal clerk shall file any ordinances amending or revising the Charter as required by Code Section 36-35-3 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-406. - Hearings and investigations. 
(a)  The council, or any committee composed entirely of councilmembers to which such power is specifically granted by the council, shall be authorized to conduct hearings and investigations of the operations and affairs of the city or of any office, department, or agency thereof, and for such purpose the council or said designated committee thereof shall have power to compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of documents and other evidence at any meeting thereof. The conduct of such proceedings shall be subject to such rules and regulations as the council may prescribe. 
(b)  If any person duly subpoenaed as a witness shall fail to appear or appearing refuse to testify or produce such books and papers, the council shall report such failure to any court of record or judge thereof, who may make such order as shall be proper as to the future appearance of the witness for the purpose of giving testimony and for the production of any such books and papers and who may, after due notice and opportunity to be heard, punish him or her for failure to comply therewith. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-407. - Annual relegation of pending legislation. 
All pending legislation held in committee will be automatically terminated at the end of the last city council meeting of each year, without any action by the city council and that the Municipal Clerk shall be authorized to file any legislation subject to this provision. Any action required by legislation accomplished prior to December 31 of that year shall be preserved, including but not limited to the completion of required city applications, surveys, or recorded appearances before City boards, commissions, or other committees; and that the same actions shall be accepted in satisfaction of applicable law, when any similar legislation is considered in subsequent years and where the legislation shall incorporate by reference those actions taken in accordance with this provision. Legislation regarding amendments to the Charter or zoning matters held in committee are exempt from the annual termination. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2005-87, § 1, 11-30-05; Ord. No. 2018-64(18-O-1670), § 2, 12-12-18 ) 
CHAPTER 5. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 

Section 2-501. - Initiative and referendum. 
(a)  The council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures to govern the initiation, adoption, and repeal of ordinances by the electorate, and the council shall authorize an initiative or referendum election on petition of at least 15 percent of the registered voters qualified to vote in the preceding general municipal election. 
(b)  The council shall be authorized to submit to the qualified voters of the city at any election not called only for the purpose of putting said ordinance or resolution before the voters any ordinance or resolution which it may deem proper; and in the event a majority of voters shall vote for this ordinance or resolution, it shall be adopted. If a majority of the votes so cast are against the resolution or ordinance, it shall be defeated and shall not thereafter be adopted by the council until resubmitted to and adopted by the qualified voters of the city. If it receives a majority vote of the people and becomes effective, then it can only be repealed by a majority vote of the qualified voters voting at an election for such purpose. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
CHAPTER 6. - CITY AUDITOR 

Section 2-601. - Selection; removal. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of city auditor. The city auditor must be a certified internal auditor or a certified public accountant, demonstrating at least ten (10) years' experience in public financial and fiscal practices, performance and financial auditing, and municipal accounting. The city auditor shall be appointed by a majority of the members of the audit committee for a period of five (5) years, subject to confirmation by a majority of the council. Removal of the city auditor from office before the expiration of the designated term shall be for cause by a vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of city council. 
(b)  The city auditor need not be a resident of the city at the time of his or her appointment, but he or she shall reside in the city within six months of such appointment and continue to reside therein throughout such appointment. 
(c)  The city auditor shall not be involved in partisan political activities or the political affairs of the city. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2011-53(11-O-1494), § 1, 11-30-11; Ord. No. 2013-64(13-O-1298), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Section 2-602. - Appointment of assistance and employees. 
(a)  Pursuant to Chapter 114 of the Code of Ordinances and within the budget approval process and established personnel policies for all departments, the city auditor shall have the power to appoint, employ, and remove such assistants, employees, and personnel as he or she may deem necessary for the efficient and effective administration of the office. Neither the members of the council, the president of the council, nor the mayor shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any such officer or employee whom the auditor is empowered to appoint. 
(b)  Neither the members of the council, the president of the council, nor the mayor shall in any manner attempt to influence or dictate the appointment or removal of any such officer or employee whom the auditor is empowered to appoint. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2013-64(13-O-1298), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Section 2-603. - Powers and duties. 
The city auditor and city auditor's office shall be charged with the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  The conduct performance and financial audits of all departments, offices, boards, activities, and agencies of the city in order to independently determine whether: 
a.  Activities and programs being implemented have been authorized by the council, state law, or applicable federal law or regulations and are being conducted and funds expended in compliance with applicable laws; 
b.  The department, office, or agency is acquiring, managing, protecting, and using its resources, including public funds, personnel, property, equipment, and space, economically, efficiently, and effectively and in a manner consistent with the objectives intended by the authorizing entity or enabling legislation: 
c.  The organization, programs, activities, functions, or policies are effective, including the identification of any causes of inefficiencies or uneconomical practices, such as inadequacies in management information systems, internal and administrative procedures, organization structure, use of resources, allocation of personnel, purchasing policies, and equipment; 
d.  The desired result or benefits are being achieved; 
e.  Financial and other reports are being provided that disclose fairly, accurately, and fully all information that is required by law, that is necessary to ascertain the nature and scope of programs and activities, and that is necessary to establish a proper basis for evaluating the results of programs and activities including the collection of, accounting for, and depositing of revenues and other resources; 
f.  Management has established adequate operating and administrative procedures and practices, systems, or accounting internal control systems and internal management controls: and 
g.  Indications of fraud, or abuse or illegal acts are present. 
(2)  To submit at the beginning of each fiscal year an audit schedule to the audit committee for review and comment. The schedule shall include the departments, offices, boards, activities, subcontractors, and agencies subject to audit for the period. This schedule may be amended during the period after review by the audit committee. Additionally, the city auditor may initiate and conduct any other audits deemed necessary; 
(3)  To submit an annual report to the council and mayor indicating audits completed, major findings, corrective actions taken by administrative managers, and significant findings which have not been fully addressed by management: 
(4)  To perform such other duties and responsibilities as provided for by this Charter or ordinance. 
(5)  To create the function of the Independent Procurement Review Office within the city auditor's office. The Office shall not opine regarding the procurement process, but shall provide an Independent Procurement Review Report to the council that the contract file is complete, or note areas of perceived deficiencies. 
a.  General Responsibilities and Authorities of the Independent Procurement Review Office 
(i)  Independent Procurement Review Officers shall perform independent reviews on solicitations of any value including retroactive procurements and emergency procurements. 
(ii)  Independent Procurement Review Officers shall have the authority to observe all stages of the procurement process as provided in this Charter and the code. 
(iii)  Independent Procurement Review Officers shall be provided all documents and resources by the chief procurement officer, or their designee, needed to complete any independent review. 
(iv)  Independent Procurement Review Officers shall provide notice to Council of any extensions or cancellations of solicitations or discretionary reviews that they conduct. 
b.  Review of Contracts with an Aggregate Value of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) or Greater 
(i)  For solicitations with an aggregate value of $1,000,000.00 or greater seeking council authorization pursuant to sections 2-1188, 2-1189, 2-1191, 2-1191.1, or 2-1193, an Independent Procurement Review Officer will be assigned to review all procurement records, as provided in section 2-1108, and conduct a conflict verification of each proponent responding to solicitations. 
(ii)  The complete Independent Procurement Review Report shall include the tracking of procurement procedures, based on known risks, from the inception of the solicitation to the end. 
(iii)  The Independent Procurement Review Report shall be included with all authorizing legislation recommending the awarding of a contract for all contracts seeking council authorization. The council shall not approve legislation for contracts as described in this subsection without first having received the complete Independent Procurement Review Report. 
(iv)  No contract shall be awarded unless the review process set forth in this section has been fully completed. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2013-64(13-O-1298), § 1, 11-27-13 ; 2018-21(18-O-1189), § 1, 6-27-18 ; Ord. No. 2019-17(18-O-1769), § 1, 2-27-19 ) 
Section 2-604. - Audit committee; established: powers and duties generally; compensation. 
(a)  To ensure independence of the audit function, an audit committee is hereby established. The audit committee is an independent management committee and not a public board, commission, or committee as specified in article 3 herein. The audit committee shall comprise five voting members who shall include the mayor's appointee, the president of council's appointee, and three at-large members appointed by the entire city council. Members shall be residents of the city and shall possess the independence, experience and collective technical expertise necessary to carry out the duties of the Audit Committee. This expertise includes but is not limited to knowledge of financial auditing, performance auditing, financial reporting and accounting. The minimum professional standards for all members shall include at least ten years of experience as a certified public accountant or as a certified internal auditor, or ten years of professional management experience in audit, finance, or law. At all times, at least one member shall be a certified public accountant. Members shall be appointed for four year terms and until their successors have been appointed and qualified. The three at-large members of the Audit Committee arc limited to two full consecutive terms, with one term intervening before they become eligible for reappointment. Appointments shall be made so that not more than one term of office shall expire in any one year. Members of the committee shall select a chairperson from among its members yearly. 
(b)  The audit committee shall consult with the city auditor regarding technical issues and work to assure maximum coordination between the work of the city auditor's office and the needs of the council, the mayor, and departments and the coordination of external audit efforts. 
(c)  The audit committee shall meet as needed to perform its duties but shall not meet less than once quarterly and shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Providing general direction to the audit function by reviewing the auditor's annual audit plan and any proposed amendments thereto and submitting the plan and the committee's recommendations to the council; 
(2)  Reviewing and approving audit reports before the final audit report is issued: 
(3)  Sending copies of final audit reports to the mayor, president of the council, and members of the council; 
(4)  Performing an evaluation of the city auditor annually and reporting the results of the evaluation and effectiveness of the audit function annually to the council; 
(5)  Providing oversight of the external audit efforts and coverage, pursuant to Section 2-604(d); and 
(6)  Performing such other duties as provided for by an ordinance of the council. 
(d)  To assist the City Council in fulfilling the requirements of Charter section 6-308(a) and to the extent that services of an external auditor are otherwise necessary, the city shall employ such outside audit services according to the procedure set forth below: 
(1)  Every five years or at such regular intervals as determined by City Council, an independent public accounting and audit firm must be engaged by the City to conduct the City's annual external audit for a contractual period of up to five years. 
(2)  At the beginning of each competitive selection process, the Audit Committee is authorized to oversee the establishment of a written policy detailing the selection criteria for the financial auditor. 
(3)  The selection of the auditor must be through the use of a competitive process with a comprehensive request for proposals document. The audit committee shall provide guidance to the Department of Procurement in the preparation of the request for proposals, including criteria for selection. 
(4)  The written request for proposals to prospective financial auditors must include the criteria and weightings for the selection. 
(5)  The Audit Committee shall appoint an evaluation committee to review proposals in response to the financial auditor RFP. The evaluation committee shall be composed of at least three (3) members including the mayor's appointee, on the Audit Committee, the president of council's appointee on the audit committee, and one at-large appointee on the audit committee appointed by the City Council. At all times, at least one member shall be a certified public accountant. 
(6)  Each member of the evaluation committee shall assign points to each of the proponents based on a rating scale established by the audit committee. The evaluation committee shall recommend no more than three proponents to the audit committee based on the ratings of each member. 
(7)  The audit committee shall review the recommendations of the evaluation committee and make a final recommendation for selection of the City's financial auditor to the Finance/Executive Committee for consideration. 
(8)  Once the final recommendation for selection has been made to the Finance Executive Committee, for consideration, the selection is to be presented to the City Council for approval. 
(e)  Each member of the audit committee as established by section 2-604 of the Charter of the City of Atlanta who is not an elected official or employee of the City of Atlanta shall be paid $100.00 as compensation for each meeting of the board the member attends, but in no event shall the total amount paid to any member exceed the sum of $1000.00 in any one calendar year. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1999-40, § 1, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 2013-64(13-O-1298), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Section 2-605. - Access to records and property. 
(a)  All city officers and employees shall allow the city auditor immediate access to any and all books, records, documents, personnel, processes (including meetings) and other requested information, including automated data, pertaining to the business of the city and within their custody regarding powers, duties, activities, organization, property, financial transactions, contracts, and methods of business required to conduct an audit or other official duties. In addition, such officers and employees shall provide access for the auditor to inspect all property, equipment, and facilities within their custody. Further, all contracts with outside contractors, vendors and agencies shall include an audit clause to provide for the city auditor's access to all records, and those of their subcontractors, needed to verify compliance with the terms specified in the contract. The City Auditor shall not participate in any activity, decision or meeting that would impair independence of such auditor or violate applicable government auditing standards. 
(b)  The City Auditor shall not publicly disclose any information received during an audit that is considered confidential by nature by any local, state, or federal law or regulation. 
(c)  Any reports issued by the City Auditor shall be made available for public inspection or copying pursuant to the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(d)  In the event any city officer or employee shall fail to allow access to any requested information as required in this section, the City Council shall have the power to compel the production of said information by subpoena. If any person duly subpoenaed shall fail to allow access to said information, the City Council shall report such failure to any court of record or judge thereof, who may make such order as shall be proper as to the future production of any such information and who may, after due notice and opportunity to be heard, punish him or her for failure to comply therewith. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2007-27(07-O-0680), § 1, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 2013-64(13-O-1298), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Section 2-606. - Quality assurance reviews. 
(a)  The audit activities of the city auditor's office shall comply with the U.S. Comptroller General's Government Auditing Standards, including requirements for periodic external quality assurance reviews ("peer reviews"). A copy of the written report of the independent review shall be furnished to the council, president of the council, mayor, and members of the audit committee and made available to the public. 
(b)  The city shall provide for the cost of peer reviews from funds appropriated to the city auditor's budget or other in-kind support as appropriate. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2013-64(13-O-1298), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Section 2-607. - Funding of auditor's office. 
The council shall provide funds necessary for the facilities, equipment, and staffing of the city auditor's office to carry out the responsibilities specified herein and by ordinance. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2013-64(13-O-1298), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Section 2-608. - Special audits. 
The president of the council or members of council may request the city auditor to perform special audits or assignments of a limited scope intended to determine the accuracy of information provided to council, costs and consequences of recommendations made to the council, and other information concerning the performance of departments, offices, or agencies of the city. After consultation with the audit committee, a special audit requested by the president of the council or members of the council may become an amendment to the annual audit schedule. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2013-64(13-O-1298), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
CHAPTER 7. - ELECTED OFFICIALS COMPENSATION COMMISSION 

Section 2-701. - Created. 
There is hereby created an elected officials compensation commission which shall make recommendations regarding the salaries of the mayor, president of the council, councilmembers, and members of the Atlanta Board of Education. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-702. - Composition; appointment; term of office; vacancies. 
(a)  Composition; appointment. The elected officials compensation commission shall consist of seven members with one member appointed by the mayor, one member appointed by the president of the council, two members appointed by the council, two members appointed by the board of education, and one member appointed by the Atlanta Planning and Advisory Board. Each member must be a qualified elector of the city at the time of his or her appointment and all times during the term of office. No member or employee of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the city or family members of any member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the commission. 
(b)  Term of office. Except as provided herein, the term of office of each member shall be four years. The initial members shall be appointed within 30 days after the effective date of this Charter and shall serve until the regular municipal elections of November, 1997. Thereafter, each member shall be appointed to serve with a term of office expiring with the regular municipal elections. 
(c)  Vacancies. If a vacancy occurs before the expiration of a member's term, the vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed for the original appointment. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-703. - Powers and duties. 
At least one year prior to a regular municipal election, the commission shall recommend to the council and board of education the amount of compensation which it deems appropriate for the mayor, president of council, members of council, and members of the board of education. The amount recommended for each member of council or the board of education shall be the same; however, the amount recommended for the president of the council or the president of the board of education may exceed that of the members of the council or board of education. Any amount recommended shall be an amount which takes into account the nature of the office and which is commensurate with salaries then being paid for other public positions having similar duties, responsibilities, or obligations. No recommendations shall be made except upon the affirmative vote of four members of the commission. Recommendations, with supporting rationale, shall be made in writing. Prior to the submission of any recommendation to the council or board of education, the commission shall conduct at least one public hearing on the matter. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-704. - Meetings; quorum; election of chairperson; compensation of members. 
The elected officials compensation commission shall meet as needed every four years. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. The commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members. The members of the commission shall receive no compensation but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 2-705. - Assistance to commission. 
The council shall provide such assistance as the commission shall reasonably require. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
ARTICLE 3. - EXECUTIVE 
CHAPTER 1. - THE MAYOR 

Section 3-101. - Election; term; limitation of term. 
The mayor shall be elected from the city at-large for a term of four years commencing on the first Monday in January after each regular municipal election, and he or she shall serve until his or her successor has taken office. Any mayor who has been elected for two consecutive four-year terms under the provisions of this Charter shall not be eligible to be elected for the succeeding term. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-102. - Qualifications. 
(a)  To qualify for election as mayor, a person: 
(1)  Must be at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Must be a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of his or her filing of notice of candidacy to seek office; 
(3)  Must be a qualified elector of the city; and 
(4)  Must not be an employee of the city. 
(b)  To hold office as mayor, a person: 
(1)  Must continue to possess the qualifications prescribed in section 3-102(a); and 
(2)  Must not hold any other elective public office or hold any position of employment with the State of Georgia, any county thereof, or with the city. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-103. - Oath of office. 
Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the mayor shall take and subscribe to the oath as provided in section 2-301 of this Charter. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-104. - Powers and duties. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and he or she shall have the power and it shall be his or her duty to: 
(1)  Execute and enforce the provisions of this Charter, the ordinances of this city, and all other laws; 
(2)  Exercise supervision over all the administration of all departments of the city and delegate all or part of such supervision to the chief operating officer; 
(3)  Prepare periodically, but not less than annually, and submit to the council for approval a comprehensive development policy which shall consider the city's physical, economic and social aspects and state the goals and objectives of Atlanta and its citizens and the necessary recommendations, policies, plans, programs, and priorities for attaining them; 
(4)  Submit to council the recommended annual budget prepared by the appropriations committee as provided in section 6-302 in this Charter; 
(5)  Approve or veto proposed ordinances and resolutions as provided in this Charter; 
(6)  Convene special meetings of the council at his or her discretion; 
(7)  At his or her discretion, conduct studies and make investigations and reports to the council concerning the operations of departments, offices, and agencies of the city and require any department, board, commission, or agency under his or her jurisdiction to submit written reports and information; 
(8)  Prescribe, require, publish, and implement standards of administrative, management, and operating practices and procedures to be followed and adhered to by all offices, departments, boards, commissions, authorities, and other agencies of the city subject to his or her supervision and jurisdiction or delegate all or part of such responsibilities to the chief operating officer; 
(9)  Advise the council as to the financial condition, future needs, and general welfare of the city and make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the city as he or she deems desirable; 
(10)  When authorized by the council, negotiate deeds, bonds, contracts, and other instruments and documents on behalf of the city and execute same after final approval by the council; 
(11)  Represent the city in affairs of intergovernmental relations, promote and improve the government of the city, encourage the growth of the city, and promote and develop the prosperity and social well-being of its people; 
(12)  At his or her discretion, initiate such administrative reorganization within city government as he or she may deem desirable and as provided in section 3-302(b); 
(13)  Perform such duties as may be required by law, and in his or her discretion perform such other duties as may be authorized by law; 
(14)  Purchase supplies, material, equipment and personal property of every type and description, and services for the rental, repair, or maintenance of equipment, machinery, and other city-owned property; provided, however, the purchase amount does not exceed $100,000.00, such purchases conform with the provisions within Chapter 4 of Article 6 herein and any purchasing and procurement ordinances of the city, and a duly enacted appropriation by the council authorizes expenditures for such purposes. Any award of contract not competitively procured in accordance with the Charter or ordinances of the city, or not awarded to the lowest bidder or offeror, shall be approved by the city council prior to an award; 
(15)  Prepare annually a plan for increasing the efficiency of city services based upon the findings and recommendations of the citizen's service planning review commission as provided in Chapter 7 of this article. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2007-01, § 1, 1-9-07; Ord. No. 2008-36(08-O-0818), § 1, 6-2-08) 
Charter reference— Purchasing procedures, § 6-402(e). 
Cross reference— Signing contracts on behalf of the mayor, § 2-1140. 
Section 3-105. - Delegation of powers and duties; prohibition. 
In no event shall the mayor delegate to the chief operating officer or any other appointed officer or employee the power to approve or veto ordinances or resolutions, convene meetings of the council, serve as acting mayor, remove the city attorney, chief financial officer, or chief operating officer, or amend budgets. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-106. - Mayor's staff. 
(a)  The mayor may appoint such staff to aid in the discharge of the mayor's duties, including a chief of staff, as authorized by the council. The chief of staff shall have such duties as assigned by the mayor but shall not be assigned any supervisory or management duties outside of the mayor's office or duties which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter. Such persons shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(b)  Any person appointed chief of staff need not be a resident of the city at the time of his or her appointment but shall be a city resident during his or her appointment. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-107. - Investigations of departments. 
The mayor may conduct an investigation of any city department or office within the executive branch, hear and determine all charges affecting the work of the department under investigation or any of its employees, and administer oaths and affirmations at such hearings. For furtherance of such investigations, the mayor may issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, vouchers, and other written instruments. If any person duly subpoenaed as a witness shall fail to appear or appearing refuse to testify or to produce such books and papers, the mayor shall report the failure of the witness to appear or refusal to testify or to produce books and papers to any court of record or judge thereof, who may make such order as shall be proper as to the future appearance of the witness for the purpose of giving testimony and for the production of any such books and papers and who may, after due notice and opportunity to be heard, punish him or her for failure to comply therewith. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
CHAPTER 2. - CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER 

Section 3-201. - Appointment; qualifications; residency; compensation; removal. 
(a)  Appointment. The mayor shall appoint, subject to the confirmation by a majority vote of the entire council, an officer whose title shall be "chief operating officer." 
(b)  Qualifications. The chief operating officer shall have a graduate or professional degree plus a minimum of ten years, or an undergraduate degree plus a minimum of 15 years, of progressively responsible administrative experience in the public or private section which has included responsibility for supervising a large scale service delivery program with a substantial budget. The qualifications herein may be waived by the city council upon a three-fourths' vote of its membership. 
(c)  Residency. The chief operating officer need not be a resident of the city or of the State of Georgia at the time of his or her appointment but shall reside in the city throughout his or her appointment. 
(d)  Compensation. The chief operating officer shall receive such compensation as fixed by the council. 
(e)  Removal. The chief operating office [officer] shall hold office at the pleasure of the mayor and may be dismissed by the mayor without the approval of the council. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-202. - Powers and duties. 
The chief operating officer shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To the extent delegated by the mayor, to exercise supervision over all activities of city departments and the boards and commissions connected with such departments and be the contact officer between the mayor and such departments, boards, and commissions; 
(2)  To make periodic reports with such recommendations to the mayor regarding the activities of the various departments, bureaus, boards, commissions, authorities, and other agencies of the city under his or her jurisdiction and make or cause to be made investigations and studies of the organization and procedures thereof and to require such reports therefrom as deemed necessary; 
(3)  To provide liaison, coordination, and communications between and among city departments and agencies and the various agencies of the federal, state, and local governments and other public and private agencies concerning the affairs of the city; 
(4)  To provide direction on participation in federal and state grant-in-aid programs, monitoring and evaluation of grant contract programs, and communication of program policies and priorities; 
(5)  To conduct research and make information available to the mayor, council, and the various departments, offices, and agencies of the city; 
(6)  To attend meetings of the council and its committees and to make available such information as may be requested; and 
(7)  To perform all other duties as required by this Charter or lawfully delegated to him or her by the mayor. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
CHAPTER 3. - CITY DEPARTMENTS 

Section 3-301. - General. 
(a)  Except where another meaning is clearly intended, the word "department" in this Charter shall mean any agency in the executive and administrative branch of the city government. The departments of the city shall be created and established by ordinance, and the departments shall be responsible for the performance of the functions and services enumerated therein. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of such departments shall be distributed accordingly: that the first degree of organization shall be department; that the second degree of organization shall be office; that the third degree of organization shall be division, that the fourth degree of organization shall be bureau. The assignment of organizational structure shall be accomplished by the administrative branch of government and shall be published to the governing body through a communication that shall set forth the organizational structure of each department. The departments shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be authorized by ordinance. 
(c)  There shall be a commissioner of each department who shall be the principal officer thereof. Each commissioner shall be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his or her department and shall exercise general management and control thereof. 
(d)  Vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed by this Charter for original appointments. 
(e)  The commissioners of departments and other appointed officers shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective executive, administrative, and professional qualifications which shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(f)  The compensation of appointed officers and directors of departments shall be fixed by the council. 
(g)  The mayor may initiate or create additional departments, or propose the abolishment of departments, subject to the provisions of this Charter and approval by the council. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1998-6, § 1, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 2005-83, § 1, 11-22-05) 
Section 3-302. - Administrative reorganization. 
(a)  The mayor, as chief executive of the city, is hereby empowered, subject to any limitations of this Charter, to initiate, direct, and implement the reorganization of any department. 
(b)  The mayor shall prepare and sign a plan of reorganization of any department or departments and shall submit such plan to the council. Any plan presented shall be in the form of a proposed ordinance and the council shall by majority vote approve, modify, or reject any such plan within 60 days of its submission to the council. No reorganization shall become effective until the council has acted or 60 days have elapsed from the date of submission, whichever first occurs. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-303. - City attorney. 
(a)  Appointment; removal. There shall be a city attorney who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the city council. The city attorney may be removed at the pleasure of the mayor or the city council by a three-fourths' vote of its membership. 
(b)  Qualifications. The city attorney shall be an active member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing and shall have at least ten years' experience in the active practice of law immediately preceding his or her appointment. The number of years' experience herein may be waived by the city council upon a three-fourths' vote of its membership. 
(c)  Residency. During his or her appointment, the city attorney shall be a resident of the City of Atlanta. 
(d)  Duties. The city attorney shall serve as the chief legal advisor of the city and shall be the director of the department of law. He or she shall perform such duties as prescribed by this Charter, ordinance, or law. 
(e)  Prohibited activities. The city attorney and all full-time assistants shall not engage in the private practice of law. 
(f)  The city attorney shall be responsible to the mayor and to the city council. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1996-53, § 1, 7-10-96) 
Section 3-304. - Chief financial officer. 
(a)  Appointment; removal. There shall be a chief financial officer who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the confirmation by a majority vote of the city council. The chief financial officer may be removed at the pleasure of the mayor or by the city council upon a three-fourths' vote of its membership. 
(b)  Qualifications. The chief financial officer shall have at least ten years' experience in the management of fiscal operations or public finance and proven administrative ability or have served at least ten years as a comptroller or financial head of a business with a substantial budget. The number of years' experience herein may be waived by the city council upon a three-fourths' vote of its membership. 
(c)  Residency. During his or her appointment, the chief financial officer shall be a resident of the city. 
(d)  Duties. The chief financial officer shall be the director of the department of finance and shall perform such duties as shall be provided by this Charter or by ordinance or resolution or required by law. 
(e)  The chief financial officer shall be responsible to the mayor and to the city council. 
(f)  Quarterly report. The chief financial officer shall prepare a quarterly report on the budget status and economic trends in conjunction with the budget office. In addition, the third quarter report shall include revenue and expenditure projections through the end of the fiscal year so that projected overruns and underruns can be considered for use in the subsequent budget year. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1996-53, §2, 7-10-96; Ord. No. 2009-43(09-O-1105), § 1, 7-29-09) 
Section 3-305. - Commissioners of departments—Appointment; removal; residency; appointment of other city employees. 
(a)  Appointment; removal. The mayor shall appoint all commissioners of departments, subject to confirmation by a majority of the city council. As used in this section, "commissioner" means the administrative head of each department regardless of the title of a particular department head. Commissioners may be removed at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(b)  Residency. A commissioner, deputy commissioner, or bureau administrator of a department need not be a resident of the city at the time of his or her appointment but shall reside in the city throughout such appointment. 
(c)  Appointment and removal of other employees. Commissioners of departments shall have the power and duty to appoint and remove deputy commissioners and bureau administrators. A deputy commissioner or bureau administrator may be removed by a commissioner. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1998-6, § 1, 2-23-98) 
CHAPTER 4. - BOARDS, AUTHORITIES, COMMISSIONS, AND OTHER SIMILAR BODIES 

Section 3-401. - General. 
I.  Purpose and definitions. As related to corporate, municipal, governmental, or public purposes and for the security, peace, health, and good government of the city, boards, authorities, commissions, committees, or other similar bodies may be created in the City to perform duties including, but not limited to, making studies, conducting research and investigations, holding hearings, and preparing recommendations as to City functions or needed ordinances and resolutions. 
The City, by action of the Mayor, Council President or City Council, may also appoint individuals to serve on other government(s)' behalf of the City. 
All boards, authorities, commissions, etc. having City representation, whether created or appointed to by the City, are collectively and colloquially called BACEs and are defined as follows: 
•  Agency: An organization created and established to provide a particular service, typically one that involves organizing transactions on behalf of or between the City and other parties. 
•  Authority: An organization, having lawful delegation of power, that may exercise legal actions in a particular political or administration sphere. Powers are granted or authorized by federal or state laws or acts. Authorities are created and established by federal or state law, ordinance, or resolution of the City Council, pursuant to federal or state directives and/or requirements. 
•  Board: A group of persons having advisory, investigative, or managerial powers. Boards are created and established by ordinance of the City Council. 
•  Commission: A group of persons brought together to provide investigative and decision-making functions to perform certain acts and duties; to report results to the City Council or to exercise quasi-judicial authority and making rulings on behalf of the City. Commissions are created and established by ordinance of the City Council. 
•  Community Improvement District: An association of property owners in a defined, geographical area identified as a "Community Improvement District" (CID) that provides for taxes, fees, assessments, and debt of the CID in order to fund improvements within the district's boundaries. Powers are granted by state acts. CIDs are created and established by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, pursuant to directives and/or requirements of the state act. 
•  Committee: A group of persons having investigative, review, and advisory roles regarding City ordinances or specific functions. Committees are created and established by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
•  Task Force: A group of persons that study a particular subject or work on an issue, such as determining ways to honor someone, and make resulting recommendations to the City Council regarding further actions by Council to achieve a definitive objective. Task Forces are created and established by resolution of the City Council and are often temporary in nature and will cease to exist upon completion of its charge as given by the City Council. 
•  Hearing Officers: Individual(s) appointed to serve in a quasi-judicial role regarding specific review matters and having independent responsibility to exercise quasi-judicial authority and make rulings on behalf of the city. 
II.  Creation, termination, and the establishment of a quorum. 
(a)  As it relates to the creation of BACEs: 
(1)  The City Council shall have the authority to create and provide for the composition and functions of such boards, authorities, commissions, etc. (BACEs) their periods of existence, and for the compensation or non-compensation of their members and employees, in whole or in part. The council shall have the authority to annually appropriate and donate money, derived from taxation, contributions, or otherwise, for and to such BACEs to provide for their operation, either in whole or in part. 
(2)  The Mayor may initiate the creation of BACEs subject to the approval of the council. 
(3)  Federal or State laws or acts may create by general law or authorize the creation of a BACE by the City Council via ordinance or resolution. Any BACE which derives its powers from general law shall continue to exercise such powers. 
(4)  All ordinances or resolutions which create a BACE shall contain the following criteria for its establishment: its purpose and type as defined in I. Purpose and Definitions; what City department shall provide staffing, administrative support, and/or City advisement and connectivity; its composition; whether appointments will require confirmation by the City Council or not; its duration; the frequency in which the BACE shall meet; and its anticipated termination (sunset) date. 
(b)  As it relates to the termination (sunset) of BACEs: 
(1)  Any BACE, not codified within the Atlanta City Charter and Related Laws, and Code of Ordinances, that fails to establish a quorum within 90 days after adoption of authorizing ordinance or resolution, or who fails to meet within 60 days of establishing a quorum of members, shall be terminated (sunset) by the Municipal Clerk without authorization from the City Council; but with notice of such terminations being provided by the Clerk to the Mayor, Council President, all members of Council, any other identified appointing entities, and any appointees to the BACE whose appointment was made within the 90 day period. 
Prior to termination (sunset), the Municipal Clerk shall provide a thirty (30) day notice to the sponsor of the legislation to establish the BACE and the BACE chair or designated BACE contact person to inform them of the potential termination (sunset). The BACE will then be terminated (sunset) upon inaction of the sponsor of the legislation to establish the BACE following the 30-day notification. 
(2)  The Council Staff Director, or his or her designee within the Council's Office of Research and Policy, shall periodically review all BACEs to determine if the purpose for which the BACE was created has been fulfilled and whether termination (sunsetting) is necessary. If so determined, an ordinance or resolution shall be drafted by the Council Staff Director, or his or her designee, for presentation to City Council via the committee of purview over said BACE. 
(3)  BACEs that terminate (sunset) as provided in this subsection shall be reestablished only by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
(c)  As it relates to the establishment of a quorum: 
(1)  Unless otherwise specified, 50%-plus-one members of the BACE shall constitute a quorum required to convene a meeting. However, in the event that multiple positions are vacant, a quorum shall consist of 50%-plus-one of the existing members until the vacancy(ies) has been filled. 
(2)  Whenever a quorum is not achieved, the BACE may receive reports, information, and/or presentations, but cannot take official action. When a quorum is achieved, the minimum requirement for BACE action shall be the affirmative vote of the majority of the number of members constituting a quorum. Such number of votes shall be considered a "majority vote" of the BACE. Official action by the BACE shall only be by majority vote of the trustees once a quorum is achieved. 
III.  Membership. 
(a)  Upon appointment to a BACE and confirmation by the City Council, each new member shall be informed of the confirmation of his or her appointment by the Municipal Clerk via e-mail to the address provided by the appointee within his/her completed and signed BACE information form; with a copy of such communication sent by the Clerk to the BACE chair and/or designated BACE contact person. 
(b)  No new member of any BACE shall assume office, nor any existing member continue in office until he or she has executed and filed with the municipal clerk an oath or affirmation obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his or her office, with such oath or affirmation being as prescribed by Section 2-1851 of the City Code of Ordinances and administered by the mayor or the municipal clerk. 
(c)  Each new member of a BACE shall be contacted and invited to his or her first meeting by the BACE chair or designated BACE contact person, and be provided copies of bylaws, governing structures and/or mission statements by same. 
(d)  Any member of a BACE serving an expired term may continue to serve until he or she is re-appointed or until a successor is appointed. 
(e)  Any member of a BACE created by the City Council may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of the Council. 
(f)  For ethics disclosure requirements for BACE members, see Chapter 2, Article VIII, Division 2, Section 2-814, (b), 21 and 22. 
IV.  Responsibilities, duties and procedures. 
(a)  The BACE. 
(1)  Designated BACEs shall establish bylaws or governing structures not inconsistent with any applicable federal or state law, this City's Charter, this City's Code of Ordinances, nor any ordinance or resolution of the City Council, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs. Any such bylaws must be written in the form of the City template on file with the Municipal Clerk and shall be vetted by the City Attorney, or designee, prior to filing with the Municipal Clerk. Bylaws must be completed and filed within 90 days of the BACE establishing a quorum. 
BACEs required to establish bylaws or governing structures generally are: 
•  Any BACE created and established pursuant to federal or state law and authority; and 
•  Any BACE with an expected long-term duration. 
(2)  BACEs not required to establish bylaws or governing structures must prepare a mission statement, copies of which shall be filed with the municipal clerk. Such mission statement must be written in the form of the City template on file with the Municipal Clerk and shall be vetted by the City Attorney or designee prior to filing with the Municipal Clerk. Mission statements must be completed and filed within 60 days of establishing a quorum. 
BACEs required to prepare a mission statement generally are: 
•  Any BACE to honor a person; 
•  Any BACE with an expected short-term duration; and 
•  All Task Forces. 
(3)  The Municipal Clerk shall be notified of any changes to bylaws, governing structures, or mission statements. Revised bylaws, governing structures, or mission statements shall be vetted by the City Attorney, or designee, and filed Municipal Clerk. 
(4)  BACEs having financial responsibilities (and their members and employees) shall comply with the budgetary procedures of the City as provided in this Charter. 
(b)  Appointing Authorities. 
(1)  Any vacancy in office of any member of a BACE shall be filled according to the appointing requirements for that now vacant seat. 
(2)  Each appointing authority is to provide, to all nominated appointees, any pertinent information regarding the BACE to be appointed to and a BACE information form to be completed, signed, and returned to the appointing authority by the nominee. 
(3)  Each appointing authority is to submit to the Municipal Clerk an appointment letter for each new appointee addressed to the City Council President and all Members, whether requiring Council confirmation or being submitted for information purposes only. A copy of the appointee's resume or bio and the appointee's completed and signed BACE information form should be attached to the appointment letter. 
(4)  Each appointing authority is to submit to the Municipal Clerk each re-appointment letter to City Council, whether requiring Council confirmation or being submitted for information purposes only, an updated copy of the appointee's resume or bio, an appointee completed and signed BACE information form, and a copy of the appointee's attendance record during his or her term(s) of office. 
(c)  Chairs or Designated Contact Persons. 
(1)  For each BACE, there shall be a City Department identified by City Council resolution or ordinance which shall provide City staffing, administrative support, and/or City advisement and connectivity. Said Department shall provide to the Municipal Clerk all necessary recordkeeping information regarding the BACE's purpose; the membership list; any existing by-laws, governing structures or mission statements. It shall be the responsibility of the BACE chair or designated BACE contact person to update the Municipal Clerk of changes to any of these by December 1 annually. 
(2)  The BACE chair or designated BACE contact person shall prepare and provide to the Municipal Clerk an annual report outlining activities and accomplishments via annual submission no later than December 1. 
(3)  The BACE chair or designated BACE contact person shall keep an attendance record of every meeting for each member and submit to the Municipal Clerk following each meeting. A comprehensive attendance report of every meeting for each member should be submitted to the Municipal Clerk by December 1 annually. 
(4)  The BACE chair or designated BACE contact person shall provide to the municipal clerk a newly completed and signed BACE information form, or a signed statement indicating that there are no changes to the form currently on file in the Office of the Municipal Clerk for each member by December 1 annually. 
(5)  The chair or designated BACE contact person shall promptly notify the Municipal Clerk of any membership vacancies, resignations, excessive absences, no-shows, tardiness, or failure to perform. The Clerk, shall then accordingly notify the designated appointing authority. 
(d)  Recordkeeping. 
(1)  The Municipal Clerk shall serve as the point of contact between each BACEs chair or designated contact person for purposes of receiving, managing, storing and retrieving BACE records. 
(2)  The Municipal Clerk shall maintain a record of all BACEs and appointees thereto. 
(e)  Employees. 
(1)  All regular, full-time employees of BACEs which have been previously created or hereafter created by the City Council shall be considered to be employees of the City. Such employees shall be entitled to all of the benefits and privileges as are other employees of the City and shall be subject to all laws, ordinances and resolutions governing employees of the City except as otherwise specifically prescribed in the City's Code of Ordinances. Such employees shall be within the unclassified service of the civil service unless the council shall provide by ordinance for other terms and conditions of employment and personnel matters relating to such employees. No member of a BACE shall be deemed an employee of the City under the provisions of this subsection. 
Employees of any BACE having financial responsibilities shall comply with the budgetary procedures of the City as provided in this Charter. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2001-51, § 1, 7-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-46, § 1, 6-10-02; Ord. No. 2017-18(16-O-1547) , § 1, 4-26-17; Ord. No. 2018-23(18-O-1308), § 1, 6-27-18 ) 
Section 3-402. - Charter review commission authorized. 
The council shall by ordinance establish a charter review commission so that a review of the city Charter may be accomplished every 20 years, to make recommendations, and to hold hearings with respect to amendments to the Charter. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
[CHAPTER 5. - CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM] 

Section 3-501. - Civil service. 
(a)  The council shall establish by ordinance a system of civil service of the city, which shall be divided into a classified and an unclassified service. The classified and unclassified service shall cover the positions presently in the classified or unclassified service respectively on the effective date of this Charter, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. The civil service system of the city shall not include employees of the Atlanta school system. 
(b)  The council shall adopt by ordinance civil service rules and regulations to govern the classification of positions, the manner and method of publicizing vacancies, employing and appointing, and dismissing personnel, the qualifications of employees, the terms, conditions, and benefits of employment, retirement policy, grievance procedures, and any other measures that promote the hiring and retaining of capable, diligent, honest career employees. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-502. - Discrimination prohibited. 
It shall be the policy of the city, its departments, and boards that all personnel matters shall be determined solely on the basis of merit and qualification, without respect to race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, gender identity or racial profiling. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2001-14, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Section 3-503. - Residency of employees. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the council may by ordinance provide from time to time for employees to reside within the city during their continuance in such office or employment with the city. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-504. - Credit preference. 
The council may provide by ordinance for a credit preference to be given to residents of the city on their employment examination scores. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-505. - Temporary engagement by contract, reemployment or election of persons retired under municipal laws. 
(a)  The mayor and council may authorize the engagement of any person who has retired under any of the pension laws, notwithstanding the age of such person, to render any special or particular service as an independent contractor, provided that such contract shall be for a period not exceeding 520 business days, whether continuously or in several separate engagements. Such employees shall be entitled to receive their regular pension payments but shall acquire no further pension or civil service rights by virtue of such temporary contractual arrangement. No contractual engagement shall commence pursuant to this subsection until such time as the department head or chief judge of the court, as applicable, and chief financial officer shall confer with the mayor to confirm the exigency of retaining such particularized expertise within city government. 
(b)  The mayor and council may authorize the engagement of sworn public safety personnel retired under any of the pension laws, notwithstanding the age of such person, to render public safety services either as an independent contractor or as an employee. Such contracts, or employment, shall not be subject to the aforementioned 520 business day limitation. Such sworn employees shall be entitled to receive their regular pension payments but shall acquire no further pension or civil service rights by virtue of such temporary contractual arrangement, or employment. No contractual engagement, or employment shall commence pursuant to this subsection until such time as the department head or chief judge of the court, as applicable, and chief financial officer shall confer with the mayor to confirm the exigency of retaining such particularized expertise within city government. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, in the event the particularized services required by the city are not amenable to an independent contractor agreement with a retiree, the City of Atlanta may reemploy a retiree for the purpose of availing the city of some particularized skill possessed by said retiree under the following circumstances. 
(1)  The reemployment for any single period of time, or any several periods of time, shall not exceed 520 business days, whether continuously or in separate days of employment. 
(2)  With the reemployment request, the reemploying department provides a plan, including a timetable for the permanent provision of the services which are temporarily being provided by the reemployed retiree. 
(3)  Single or concurrent multiple reemployment periods shall not exceed 120 business days without reauthorization by city council. 
(d)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent any retiree from holding any office which is filled by an election by the people. No additional pension or civil service rights or privileges shall accrue to such officer or employee during such period and said retiree shall be entitled to continue to receive his or her regular pension payments. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1998-37, § 1, 5-27-98; Ord. No. 2002-68, § 1, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 2002-82, § 1, 11-8-02; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 1, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2008-28(08-O-0820), § 1, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 2009-64(09-O-1714), § 1, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 2017-17(17-O-1077) , § 1, 4-20-17) 
Section 3-506. - Compulsory retirement; waiver of penalties. 
(a)  No employee of the city shall be required to retire from employment with the city based upon the age of any such employee. 
(b)  Any employee of the city who has completed at least five years of service with the city and who retires under any pension plan covering city employees shall be entitled to retire upon attaining 65 years of age without the application of any vesting penalties which may be set forth under any such pension plan. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-507. - Modification of pension plans. 
As authorized by the provisions of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph III(a)(14), the Acts, approved February 15, 1933, August 13, 1927, and August 20, 1974 (found respectively at Ga. L. 1933, p. 213, et seq.; Ga. L. 1927, p. 265, et seq.; Ga. L. 1924, p. 167, et seq., all as amended), providing for pensions for officials and employees of cities having a population of 300,000 or more according to the United States Census of 1920 or any subsequent census thereof, shall be modified, insofar as they appertain to employees and officials of the City of Atlanta and its board of education in accordance with the following rules and procedures: 
(1)  Any other provisions in the Charter notwithstanding, any pension law modification shall be effected only by ordinance adopted by at least two-thirds of the total membership of the council and duly approved by the mayor; 
(2)  Any such ordinance shall be considered for final action by the council only after receipt of: 
a.  An investigation by an independent actuary of any such proposed modification, evidenced by a written report from such actuary which shall include, but not be limited to, such actuary's analysis of the funding requirements relating to any such modification and the opinion of such actuary as to the propriety of any such modification. Any such opinion must state that such modification is in conformity with applicable state laws governing the funding requirements for modifications to such pension plans. Such opinion shall be accompanied by the written recommendations of the city attorney and chief financial officer; 
b.  A written communication to the board of trustees of each of the respective pension funds affected by such modification to provide notice of the proposed modification of a provision of the pension plan and to request their non-binding recommendation in favor or against the proposed modification within 45 days from the date of introduction of the legislation, unless extended by Ordinance; 
c.  Any such ordinance modifying the Act approved August 13, 1927 (Ga. L. 1927, p. 265 et seq., as amended) and affecting employees of the Atlanta Board of Education shall become effective as to such employees only after such modification is adopted by a majority of the total membership of the Atlanta Board of Education. 
(3)  No substitute or amendment to any ordinances presented to the council hereunder shall be considered without a subsequent investigation of such proposed substitute or amendment by an independent actuary and recommendations of the city attorney and chief financial officer as provided in (2)(a), hereinabove, and the communication providing notice and requesting a recommendation from the boards of trustees of the respective pension fund affected by such modification as set forth in (2)(b), hereinabove; 
(4)  No ordinance which modifies any of the aforesaid pension laws and has a fiscal impact on the pension systems established by such laws shall be adopted by the council or approved by the mayor until adequate provision for funding such modification has been made to defray the fiscal impact of such modification. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2010-73(10-O-1892), § 1, 12-15-10; Ord. No. 2011-33(11-O-0673), § 1, 7-27-11) 
Section 3-508. - Regulation of complaints, fraud, waste, and abuse; definitions. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Municipal employee" means classified and unclassified employees of the City of Atlanta, and individuals who perform services for the City of Atlanta on a contract or fee basis, but does not include elected officials. 
(2)  "Municipal employer" means any department, board, bureau, commission, authority, or other agency of the city which employs or appoints any municipal employee, except the mayor and members of the city council. 
(b)  A municipal employer may receive and investigate complaints or information from any municipal employee concerning the possible existence of any activity constituting fraud, waste, and abuse in or relating to any municipal programs and operations under the jurisdiction of such municipal employer. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other local law or ordinance to the contrary, such municipal employer shall not, after receipt of a complaint or information from a municipal employee, disclose the identity of the municipal employee without the written consent of such municipal employee, unless the municipal employer determines such disclosure is necessary and unavoidable during the course of the investigation. In such event, the municipal employee shall be notified in writing at least seven days prior to such disclosure. 
(d)  No action against any municipal employee shall be taken or threatened by any municipal employer who has authority to take, direct others to take, recommend, or approve any personnel action as a reprisal for making a complaint or disclosing information to the municipal employer unless the complaint was made or the information was disclosed with the knowledge that it was false or with willful disregard for its truth or falsity. 
(e)  Any action taken in violation of subsection (d) of this section shall give the municipal employee a right to have such action set aside by the personnel board after a hearing. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; S.B. 498/2004, § 1, 5-17-04) 
CHAPTER 6. - PLANNING 

Sec. 3-601. - Atlanta City Design. 
The mayor shall have a design for Atlanta to enable a sufficiently growing city so that people of all income ranges, generations, races, and educational levels can thrive as city residents. The design shall be based upon goals for population and employment growth for the City of Atlanta in the context of regional projections provided by the Atlanta Regional Commission. As a design, the Atlanta City Design is primarily a concept for the physical growth of the city to accommodate the desired population and employment. It is to be based upon the unique physical attributes of Atlanta and should accentuate these qualities for a growing city. Atlanta City Design is a concept for design of Atlanta that provides a framework for policies and plans including those outlined in Section 3-602, 3-603, and 3-604. 
( Ord. No. 2017-83(17-O-1706), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
Sec. 3-602. - Comprehensive development plan. 
The mayor shall have a comprehensive development plan of the City of Atlanta prepared and maintained to be used as a guide for the growth and development of the city and which will identify its present and planned physical, social, and economic development. This plan shall: (1) set forth the comprehensive development goals, policies, and objectives for both the entire city and for individual geographic areas and communities within the city and (2) in conformance with such development goals, objectives, and policies, identify the general location, character, and extent of streets and thoroughfares, parks, recreation facilities, sites for public buildings and structures, city and privately owned utilities, transportation systems and facilities, housing, community facilities, future land use for all classifications, and such other elements, features, and policies as will provide for the improvement of the city over the next 15 years. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2017-83(17-O-1706), § 2, 12-13-17 ) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 3-601. 
Sec. 3-603. - Five-year development plans. 
The mayor shall have a comprehensive five and 15-year development plait prepared which shall: (1) present a recommended generalized land use development pattern to guide the growth of the city over a succeeding five-year period and (2) include the city's specific development goals and objectives based upon existing and projected demographic and socioeconomic factors and public and private community facilities for the entire city and individual geographic areas and communities within the city, as related to the comprehensive development plan and to regional plans. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 1, 2-10-04; Ord. No. 2017-83(17-O-1706), § 3, 12-13-17 ) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 3-602. 
Sec. 3-604. - Implementation; updating and revision. 
(a)  Prior to the preparation of each comprehensive development plan, the mayor shall have hearings held in such manner, as the council shall prescribe by ordinance. The mayor shall submit to the council such plans that will include a 15-year and five-year comprehensive development plan, along with a comprehensive land use plan for all property within the city limits. These plans updated each five years, shall be submitted to the council not later than its first regular meeting in May of the year in which the plan is updated. Beginning with the transmittal date of said plans to council, the general public shall be afforded a period of 45 consecutive days in which to review said plans. Subsequent to the expiration of the aforementioned 45-day period, the council shall conduct public hearings concerning such plans. Thereafter, the council shall adopt the comprehensive development plans, after making any amendments or revisions thereto that the council considers appropriate, but not later than the last regular council meeting in July of the year in which the plan is updated. Such plans shall become effective immediately upon adoption and approval of the authorizing legislation. 
(b)  The approved comprehensive development plans shall be used as a guide for the preparation of the city's capital improvement program and capital budget. 
(c)  The mayor shall maintain an up-to-date zoning map for all properties within the city limits. 
(d)  Following the updating and adoption of the city's development plans, the council shall amend the city's zoning ordinance to conform with the updated development plans in accordance with procedures prescribed by general law. 
(e)  Approved comprehensive development plans distributed to the public shall include a brochure or similar document containing the names, addresses, telephones numbers and facsimile numbers of appropriate city and county officers, as an appendix to the document, and such comprehensive development plans and appendices shall be provided to all neighborhood planning units of the city within 30 days of the adoption of such comprehensive development plans. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 2, 2-10-04; Ord. No. 2017-83(17-O-1706), § 4, 12-13-17 ) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 3-603. 
Sec. 3-605. - Program for human and economic development. 
Within one year after the effective date of this Charter, the mayor and city council shall provide an administrative mechanism with appropriate status and adequate budget to develop and implement a comprehensive program of human and economic development. The program shall be responsible for identifying and securing resources needed to address these problems and needs effectively. The program shall encourage efforts to enable, empower, and involve the disadvantaged; address the causes of crime; work to enhance the quality of life of all citizens; and help to ensure that the city government will be responsive to the needs of all citizens. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2017-83(17-O-1706), § 5, 12-13-17 ) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 3-604. 
CHAPTER 7. - CITIZEN'S SERVICE PLANNING REVIEW COMMISSION 

Section 3-701. - Creation; composition. 
There is hereby created and established the citizen's service planning review commission which shall consist of nine members. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-702. - Appointments; terms; vacancies. 
(a)  Members shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the council. The mayor shall appoint six members, one each from the six neighborhood planning unit study areas, based on recommendations from the city's 24 neighborhood planning units. Any person so appointed shall be a resident of the city at the time of appointment and during the term of office. Of the initial members appointed to the commission, three of the members shall be appointed for a term expiring on December 31, 1998; three members shall be appointed for a term expiring on December 31, 1999; and three members shall be appointed for a term expiring on December 31, 2000. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for three-year terms. Members of the commission shall select one of its members as chairperson. 
(b)  If said appointments are not made by the first council meeting in July, the appointments shall be made by the Atlanta City Council, and the person filling the vacancy shall have all the qualifications prescribed for membership. 
(c)  Any vacancy on the commission, however created, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the position was originally filled, and the person filling the vacancy shall have and retain all the qualifications prescribed for membership. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1996-52, § 1, 7-10-96; Ord. No. 2000-39, §§ 1, 2, 6-28-00) 
Section 3-703. - Powers and duties. 
Each year the commission shall study such city services as agreed upon by a majority of its members and prepare a report to be presented to the mayor and chief operating officer by September 1 of each year. The report shall contain the findings of the commission and present actions that the city may implement to increase the efficiency and reduce the cost of service provision. For each service area reviewed and investigated by the commission, the report shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  The level of expenditures for each service; 
(2)  The quality of the service provided; 
(3)  The cost of providing the service; 
(4)  Available competitive contracting for such service; 
(5)  Consolidation of service delivery with other jurisdictions; and 
(6)  Ways to improve the efficiency of service provision. 
The commission shall also conduct an evaluation of any previously determined service delivery plans and actions taken by the administration in order to improve delivery of the service. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-704. - Mayor's action. 
The mayor shall hold at least one public hearing on the report. After the public hearing and prior to the submission of the budget each year, the mayor shall present an annual plan and actions the city may implement to the president of the council and members of the council. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 3-705. - Assistance to the commission. 
The mayor's office shall provide the necessary staff and assistance to the commission as required for the completion of its tasks. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
ARTICLE 4. - COURTS 

Section 4-101. - Establishment; designation. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Article VI, Section I, of the Constitution of Georgia, and Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., as amended, there shall be in the city a court to be known as the Municipal Court of Atlanta, which shall have a minute book and a seal of appropriate design prescribed by council. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 4-102. - Jurisdiction, authority, and powers generally. 
The municipal court and each judge thereof shall have jurisdiction and power coextensive with the territorial limits of the City of Atlanta, Georgia, to: 
(1)  Try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law; 
(2)  Try, hear, and abate nuisances as provided by the laws of this state; 
(3)  Hear, try, and determine as a committing court all warrants for the violation of any state law and, while acting under the authority of the laws of the State of Georgia, to bind over such persons to an appropriate higher court for the eventual trial of said case; 
(4)  Punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail or both; 
(5)  Punish for violations within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law; 
(6)  Establish bail and recognizance to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court; 
(7)  Probate, revoke, amend, remit, modify, alter, or suspend sentences imposed, provided that the mayor may grant reprieves and pardons, commute penalties, and remit any part of a sentence following defendant's request therefor to the court; 
(8)  Compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence in the possession of any party with the same authority as magistrates of the state; 
(9)  Compel the presence of witnesses or all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by issuance of summonses, subpoenas, warrants, orders, and all other process in cases within its jurisdiction arising under the laws of the State of Georgia or this Charter or ordinances of the city with full power to enforce the same; 
(10)  Enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences with the same authority as magistrates of the state; 
(11)  Administer all oaths as are necessary with the same authority as magistrates of the state and take affidavits and attest other papers; 
(12)  Issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the authority as magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city; and 
(13)  Such other powers and duties as shall be provided by law or ordinance. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; S.B. 498/2004, § 2, 5-17-04) 
Section 4-102A. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Senate Bill 498/2004, adopted May 17, 2004, repealed § 4-102A in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to the Victims and witnesses assistance programs. 
Section 4-103. - Appellate review. 
The orders, verdicts, judgments, and sentences of the court shall be subject to appellate review by writ of certiorari in the appropriate superior court or as otherwise provided by general law. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 4-104. - Judges; qualifications; term of office; appointment; oath; vacancies; compensation. 
(a)  Number of judges. The municipal court shall be presided over by such number of municipal court judges as shall be authorized by the city council. 
(b)  Qualifications. To qualify for appointment as a judge of the municipal court, a person shall be at least 25 years of age, a resident of the city for at least one year, a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and a practicing attorney with a minimum of five years' experience. To hold office as a judge after such appointment, a person shall continue to possess said qualifications and shall not hold or qualify for any other public office. 
(c)  Appointment. The mayor shall appoint a person to the position of municipal court judge in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Term of office. A judge of the municipal court shall be appointed for a term of four years and, upon completion of such term, such judge shall continue to serve until not retained by a vote of city electors as provided herein. 
(e)  Oath. Before assuming office, each judge shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation, before some officer authorized to administer oaths, faithfully to discharge the duties of the office. The oath shall be filed with the municipal clerk. 
(f)  Vacancies. In the event of any vacancy in the office of a municipal court judge for any cause, whether by death, resignation, lack of retention, or removal, the mayor shall appoint some qualified person to fill such vacancy in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any judge appointed to fill a vacancy shall not be required to run against his or her record until he or she has held office at least 12 months, and in such event his or her term shall be extended until the end of the calendar year of the second general municipal election following the date of his or her appointment. 
(g)  Compensation. The municipal court judges shall be paid an annual salary no less than 90 percent of the total annual compensation of the judges of the Superior Court within the territorial jurisdiction of said court. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2007-33(07-O-0695), § 1, 6-12-07) 
Section 4-105. - Chief judge. 
(a)  Selection. The municipal court judges shall by a majority vote select a chief judge to serve at their pleasure. 
(b)  Duties. The chief judge shall be responsible for the general supervision of the municipal court and shall promulgate all rules necessary for the supervision, conduct, and administration of the court, including but not limited to the number of divisions into which the court is divided and the assignment of judges to duty therein; the hours of operation of the court; the preparation of calendars deemed necessary and proper; and a system for keeping court records and shall require such reports from the judges, solicitor, public defender, clerk/administrator, and other court personnel as deemed necessary and proper. Such rules so promulgated shall be reduced to writing. The chief judge shall be responsible also for the preparation and submittal of budgets of said court to the mayor and city council and appropriate departments, committees, and agencies. He or she shall further perform other duties as the council may provide by ordinance or as required by law. 
(c)  Vacancy, incapacity, or inability. In the event of a vacancy, incapacity, or inability of the chief judge to perform his or her duties, the remaining judges of the court, by a majority vote, shall select another chief judge in accordance with this section. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 4-106. - Judicial commission. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created an Atlanta Judicial Commission, established for the purpose of nominating to the mayor persons for appointment to the positions of judges, solicitors and public defenders of city and municipal courts, and any judge pro hac vice of municipal court. 
(b)  Composition; appointments. The Atlanta Judicial Commission shall be composed of eight voting members, consisting of three members appointed by the Atlanta Bar Association who are actively engaged in the practice of law, three members appointed by the Gate City Bar Association who are actively engaged in the practice of law, and two members appointed by the mayor who are residents and qualified electors of the city but not attorneys. All persons appointed to the judicial commission shall have resided in the city for at least 12 months and continue to reside in the city during their terms of office. Of the members first appointed after the effective date of this Charter, one member of the Atlanta Bar Association and Gate City Bar Association shall be appointed for two years, one member of the Atlanta Bar Association and Gate City Bar Association shall be appointed for three years, one member of the Atlanta Bar Association and Gate City Bar Association shall be appointed for four years, and the two members appointed by the mayor shall be appointed for four years. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed to four-year terms. A chairperson and secretary shall be elected by the members; however, the chairperson shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(c)  Functions; duties. Whenever a vacancy occurs in the positions of judges, solicitors and public defenders of city and municipal courts, or a judge pro hac vice of municipal court for any cause, the mayor shall provide written notification to the chairperson within 30 days of the act creating the vacancy or any new position. The judicial commission shall certify to the mayor a list of three nominees who are members of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing. Such list shall be submitted by the judicial commission no later than 90 days after receiving the above written notification from the mayor. The nominations and appointments to fill vacancies shall be based solely upon merit, legal experience, ability, and integrity. Any member shall be disqualified from consideration of an applicant who is related by blood or marriage. 
(d)  Confidentiality of deliberations. The deliberations of the judicial commission shall be confidential and privileged. The identity of the applicants and nominees certified to the mayor shall be public information. 
(e)  Failure to submit nominations. If the judicial commission has not presented its nominations as required by subsection (c) herein to the mayor within 120 days after being informed by the mayor of a vacancy or pending vacancy, the mayor may thereafter fill such vacancy on his or her own motion, applying the standards herein. However, any such appointment made by the mayor shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the members of council. 
(f)  Appointments by mayor as a result of court consolidation. Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (e) of this section, the mayor, at the mayors sole discretion, shall have the temporary authority for a period of one year from the effective date of this subsection to appoint any City of Atlanta judge who resigns or retires in good standing to the municipal court without first observing the Atlanta Judicial Commission process provided in subsections (a) through (e) of this section. This subsection shall not longer be applicable and shall be repealed one year following the effective date of this subsection. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; S.B. 498/2004, § 4, 5-17-04) 
Section 4-107. - Retention of judges. 
(a)  Filing of declaration. A judge of the municipal court who desires to retain judicial office for a succeeding term shall file with the municipal clerk, not more than 90 days nor less than 60 days prior to each regular general municipal election prior to the expiration of the judge's term of office, a declaration of intent to run for another term. 
(b)  Ballot question. Upon the filing of the above declaration, a question shall be placed upon the appropriate ballot of such municipal election as follows: 
"Shall Judge (name of judge) of the Atlanta Municipal Court be retained in office? 
Yes, to retain. 
No, against retention." 
If a majority of those voting on such question vote to retain a judge, the judge is thereupon retained for a four-year term commencing on the first Monday in January following each municipal election. If a majority of those voting on such question vote not to retain a judge, a vacancy shall exist upon the expiration of the term being served by the judge. Such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions within this article. 
(c)  Prohibition against appointment. Any judge failing to be retained by city electors shall be ineligible for appointment to the municipal court for a period of four years. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 4-108. - Removal of judges. 
(a)  A judge of the municipal court may be removed from office in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Judicial Conduct effective on January 1, 1994, as now or hereafter amended, as adopted by the Supreme Court of Georgia. 
(b)  Whenever a judge of the municipal court shall be indicted for a crime involving moral turpitude, a felony, or other crime involving malfeasance or misfeasance while in office, he or she shall be automatically suspended from office without pay until final conviction, acquittal, or other disposition of the charges against him or her. Immediately thereafter, unless he or she has been convicted or pleaded guilty, he or she shall be reinstated in office and shall receive all compensation withheld during his or her suspension; otherwise his or her office shall be vacant. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 4-109. - Judges pro hac vice. 
(a)  The council shall determine the initial number of judges pro hac vice. The mayor shall appoint judges pro hac vice from panels of three nominees submitted by the Atlanta Judicial Commission. The qualifications for said appointees shall be the same as for judges and a judge pro hac vice shall act in the event of an emergency, conflict of interest, or other necessity. 
(b)  At such time a judge pro hac vice is needed by the municipal court for more than three-fourths of the working days of this court in any six-month period, an additional position of associate judge shall be established, subject to approval by majority vote of the council. 
(c)  All judges pro hac vice for the municipal court shall serve four-year terms, commencing on July 1, 2004, or commencing on the effective date of their respective appointments, whichever date is earlier. Judges pro hac vice may be reappointed to that position, subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (c) of this section, the mayor shall, at the mayors sole option, have the temporary authority for a period of one year from the effective date of this subsection to appoint any former City of Atlanta full-time or pro hac vice judge who resigns or retires in good standing to the Municipal Court without first observing the Atlanta Judicial Commission process provided in subsections (a) through (e) of Section 4-106 of this charter. In no event shall any full-time judge of the City Court who, although his or her position has been abolished by court consolidation and who is still entitled to his or her regular salary through the end of his or her term, serve on the municipal court pro hac vice for additional compensation. This prohibition shall not affect the right of any retired employee to collect pension or other retirement benefits. This subsection shall not longer be applicable and shall be repealed one year following the effective date of this subsection. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; S.B. 498/2004, § 5, 5-17-04) 
Section 4-110. - Solicitor; qualifications; selection; term; assistants; duties; oath; prohibited activities; compensation; vacancies; removal. 
(a)  Qualifications. There shall be a solicitor of the municipal court. The solicitor shall be at least 25 years of age, a resident of the city for at least one year, a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and a practicing attorney with a minimum of five years' experience. During his or her term of office, the solicitor shall continue to reside within the city. 
(b)  Selection; term. Upon the submission of three nominees by the Atlanta Judicial Commission, the mayor shall appoint one of the three nominees as the solicitor of municipal court for a four-year term. The solicitor shall discharge the duties of the office until a successor is qualified and appointed. A solicitor may be appointed to subsequent terms. 
(c)  Assistants. The solicitor shall appoint such deputy or assistant solicitors as may be authorized by the city council. Any deputy or assistant solicitor shall be and remain a member in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia and shall serve at the pleasure of the solicitor. 
(d)  Duties. The solicitor shall be the prosecuting officer of the municipal court. The solicitor and assistant solicitors shall perform such duties as prescribed by ordinance and required by law. 
(e)  Oath. Before entering the duties of their offices, the solicitor and assistants shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation before some officer authorized to administer oaths, to faithfully discharge the duties of the office. 
(f)  Prohibited activities. The solicitor and deputy or assistant solicitors, excluding solicitor pro hac vice, shall devote full-time to the discharge of their duties and shall not engage in the private practice of law. 
(g)  Compensation. The annual salaries of the solicitor and assistants shall be fixed by the council. 
(h)  Vacancies. In the event of a vacancy in the position of the solicitor or any assistant for any cause, whether by death, resignation, or removal, such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions in this article. 
(i)  Removal. The solicitor shall be subject to removal from office by the mayor during the term of office to which such solicitor was appointed for any of the grounds enumerated in paragraphs (1) through (6) of subsection (a) of section 5-304. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 4-111. - Public defender; qualifications; selection; term; assistants; duties; oath; prohibited activities; compensation; vacancies; removal. 
(a)  Qualifications. There shall be a public defender of the municipal court. The public defender shall be at least 25 years of age, a resident of the city for at least one year, a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and a practicing attorney with a minimum of five years' experience. During his or her term of office, the public defender shall continue to reside in the city. 
(b)  The provisions of section 4-110 relating to the appointment, term, assistants, duties, oath, vacancies, removal, prohibited activities, and compensation shall apply also to the public defender and any assistant public defenders. The public defender and assistants shall perform such duties as shall be prescribed by ordinance and required by law. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 4-112. - Solicitors and public defenders pro hac vice. 
(a)  The solicitor shall appoint solicitors pro hac vice as needed by the municipal court to act in the event of emergency or necessity, except as provided herein. 
(b)  The chief judge of the municipal court shall appoint solicitors pro hac vice when there is a conflict of interest associated with the office of the solicitor. Under these circumstances, the solicitor shall make a written request setting out the nature of the conflict of interest to the chief judge. 
(c)  Any municipal court judge shall have authority to appoint public defenders pro hac vice to act in the event of emergency, conflict of interest, or necessity related to the office of the public defender. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 4-113. - Clerk/administrator and other court personnel. 
(a)  Clerk/administrator. The office of the clerk/administrator is hereby created. The clerk/administrator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the total number of judges thereof to serve at their pleasure and shall not be subject to civil service rules of the city. Any person appointed clerk/administrator shall be a resident of the city during his or her appointment. The clerk/administrator duties shall consist of submitting to the chief judge recommendations for improving the efficiency and operation of the court; being the official custodian of records of the court; assisting the chief judge in the preparation of the budgeting and fiscal reports and documents as may be necessary and proper for the operation and maintenance of the court; collecting and compiling data, including cases filed and disposed of, and information on the expenditures and receipts of the court; keeping and maintaining the docketing of cases in such form and manner as required by law or the chief judge; and other such duties as provided by ordinance. 
(b)  Other court personnel. The judges in conference shall employ, subject to the city's civil service laws, regulations, and rules, such employees and staff of the court as shall be authorized by the council. Such employees and staff shall be within the civil service system of the city. 
(c)  Prohibition. Unless provided otherwise in this Charter, personnel of the municipal court shall not be employed by, members of, or under the jurisdiction of the police department or be actively engaged in the practice of law before the court except in the actual discharge of their official duties. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 4-114. - Court procedures; service of processes and orders. 
(a)  Criminal prosecutions in the court may be instituted by summons, written information, or accusation specifically setting forth the offense charged. Such information, accusation, and summons may be signed by the solicitor or assistant solicitor, any sworn member of the police department, or such officers as may be specifically authorized by ordinance. The judges of such court may issue warrants either on their own knowledge or on information given under oath. Except in capital cases, they shall have the same power to fix bonds as judges of the superior courts. 
(b)  All copies of documents and records of the court certified by the clerk/administrator, or such deputy clerk/administrator, under the seal of the court shall be admissible in all proceedings in the same manner and to the same extent as documents bearing the certificate of the clerks of the superior courts of the state and the seals of such courts. 
(c)  The chief of police and sworn members of the police department of the city and employees of the court designated by the judges, and such other officials or persons authorized by law, shall have the authority to serve all processes and orders of the municipal court in the absence of sufficient designated employees of the court, and members of the police department shall have the authority to serve as bailiffs or constables at the discretion of the chief judge. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 4-115. - Codes of ethics. 
(a)  The Code of Judicial Conduct, as adopted by the Supreme Court of Georgia, as now or hereafter amended, shall govern the conduct of the judges of the municipal court. 
(b)  The Code of Professional Responsibility, as adopted by the Supreme Court of Georgia, as now or hereafter amended, shall govern the conduct of the solicitor, public defender, and their assistants of the municipal court. 
(c)  Said codes are hereby incorporated herein by reference as if set out at length in this section, and copies thereof are on file in the office of the municipal clerk. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 4-116. - Victims and witnesses assistance program. 
(a)  In every case in the Municipal Court of Atlanta in which the court imposes a fine for a violation of a state law or a city ordinance, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum not to exceed $3.00. 
(b)  At the time of posting bail or bond in any case before the Municipal Court of Atlanta, an additional sum not to exceed $3.00 shall be posted, and in every case in which the court orders the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum posted shall be distributed as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  The additional penalty in cases in which fines are imposed and the additional sum for forfeiture of bails and bonds provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be collected by the court officer charged with the duty of collecting fines and forfeited bails or bonds. The funds collected under this section shall be distributed by the City of Atlanta Finance Department to the Victims and Witnesses Assistance Program operated by the City of Atlanta in the Municipal Court of Atlanta. The budget for the Victims and Witnesses Assistance Program named in this section shall be submitted to the governing authority as a resolution of the Finance Committee of the Atlanta City Council for review and approval of the distribution of the funds. An annual report to the governing authority of the City of Atlanta of the moneys received by the recipient of these funds shall be made by the chief judge. 
(S.B. 498/2004, § 6, 5-17-04) 
Section 4-117. - Additional penalty for municipal detention and prison facilities. 
(a)  (1)  In every case in which the municipal court shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any ordinance of the City of Atlanta, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to 15 percent of the original fine. Such additional penalties shall be paid over as provided in subsection (c) of this section. The penalty provided in this paragraph shall be in addition to any penalty or additional penalty provided for in any other provision of this charter. 
(2)  At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this state or ordinance of the City of Atlanta, an additional sum equal to 15 percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which such court shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to 15 percent of the original bail or bond shall be paid over as provided in subsection (c) of this section. The additional sums provided for in this paragraph shall be in addition to any other sums provided by law. 
(b)  Such sums required by subsection (a) of this section and Section 4-116 of this charter shall be in addition to that amount required by Code Section 47-17-60 of the O.C.G.A. to be paid into the Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund or by Code Section 47-11-51 of the O.C.G.A. to be paid into the Judges of the Probate Courts Retirement Fund of Georgia. 
(c)  The sums provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting moneys arising from fines and forfeited bonds and shall be paid over to the governing authority of the city by the tenth day of the month following the month in which such sums are collected. Such sums paid over to the governing authority shall be deposited by the governing authority into a special account to be known as the "city jail fund". 
(S.B. 498/2004, § 7, 5-17-04) 
Section 4-118. - Senior judge. 
(a)  Creation. Any municipal court judge who retires in good standing after July 1, 2009, shall be a Senior Judge of the Atlanta Municipal Court 
(b)  Duties. The senior judge who retires shall continue to be in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia and shall be authorized to sit and function as a municipal court judge in the event of emergency or necessity of the court at the request of the municipal court's chief judge. 
(c)  Compensation. Any compensation provided for this service shall be approved by the Atlanta City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-57(09-O-0996), § 1, 9-30-09) 
ARTICLE 5. - ELECTIONS, REMOVAL AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 
[CHAPTER 1. - CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS] 

Section 5-101. - Applicability of general laws. 
Regular and special elections shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2009-71(09-O-1887), § 1, 11-25-09) 
Section 5-102. - Regular elections; time for holding; voting. 
(a)  The regular general election for electing the mayor, president of the council, and all councilmembers of the City of Atlanta shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 1997, and quadrennially thereafter. 
(b)  The entire electorate of the city shall be entitled to vote in elections for mayor, president of council, and at-large councilmembers. The entire electorate of each council district shall be entitled to vote for the election of a councilmember elected solely from that district. The person receiving the majority of the votes cast for each position shall be elected. 
(c)  The mayor, president of the council, and those members of the council who are serving as such on December 31, 1996, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such offices shall continue to serve as such for terms of office which expire December 31, 1997, and shall continue to represent the area or district from which elected. 
(d)  The first mayor, president of the council, and members of the council under this Act shall be elected at the time of the general municipal election in 1997. The mayor, president of the council, and members of the council elected thereto in 1997 shall take office the first Monday of January immediately following that election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 2001, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those and all future successors to the mayor, president of the council, and members of the council whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the general municipal election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and shall serve for terms of office of four years each. The mayor, president of the council, and members of the council shall serve for the terms of office specified therefor in this subsection and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 5-103. - Special elections; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  In the event the office of mayor, president of the council, or councilmember shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation, or any other cause, the council shall, within 15 days after the occurrence of such vacancy, call a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office by giving notice thereof in one or more newspapers of general circulation within the city, except: 
(1)  If a regular election for the office of mayor is to be held within one year after the date that a vacancy in the office of mayor occurs, the president of the council shall assume and discharge the powers and duties of the office of mayor for the duration of the mayor's unexpired term, and the president pro tempore shall perform the duties of the president of the council during such period; 
(2)  If a regular election for the office of the president of the council is to be held within one year after the date that a vacancy occurs in the office president of the council, the president pro tempore shall assume and discharge the powers and duties of the office of the president of the council during such period; 
(3)  If a regular election for the office of councilmember is to be held within one year after the date that a vacancy occurs in the office of councilmember, the remaining members of the council shall by majority vote appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy. The members of the council shall appoint such person within 30 days of the date the vacancy occurs. 
(b)  If any elected officer of the city qualifies for another municipal, county, state, or federal elective office, his or her resignation shall be governed solely by Article II, Section II, Paragraph V, of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Every special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia election code and rules of the State of Georgia and Fulton and DeKalb County Election Boards. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2008-82(08-O-1903), § 1, 11-6-08) 
Section 5-104. - Use of public buildings. 
It shall be the duty of the council to make available for voting purposes all public buildings of the city which may be needed or required for such purpose on all election days. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 5-105. - No partisan primaries; candidates listed without party label. 
No political party shall conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for municipal elections. In all municipal elections conducted by or for the City of Atlanta, the names of all candidates shall be listed upon the ballot without party label. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 5-106. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code", as now or hereafter amended. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2009-71(09-O-1887), § 2, 11-25-09) 
CHAPTER 2. - COUNCIL DISTRICTS; REAPPORTIONMENT 

Section 5-201. - Council districts. 
Beginning with the general municipal election of 1997 the territory of the council shall consist of 12 council districts to be designated as Districts No. 1 through 12, and three residency posts for the three at-large members. The boundaries of the districts are specifically described and set forth in Appendix I herein. Said appendix is incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this section. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 5-202. - Reapportionment of council districts. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations of state and federal law, the council shall reapportion the council districts from which members of the council are elected following publication of the 2000 United States decennial census or any future such census. Such reapportionment of districts shall be effective for the election of members to the council at the next regular general municipal election following the publication of the decennial census. 
(b)  The council shall reapportion the council districts in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)  Each reapportioned district shall be formed of contiguous territory, and the boundary lines of said district shall be the center lines of streets or other well-defined boundaries; 
(2)  Variation in population between such districts shall comply with the one-person-one-vote requirements of the United States Constitution; and 
(3)  The reapportionment shall be limited to adjusting the boundary lines of the existing districts only to the extent reasonably necessary to comply with the requirements of paragraph (2) above; and the number of members of the council and the manner of electing such members, except for the adjustment of district boundary lines, shall not be changed by the council. 
(c)  In addition to the reapportionment following publication of the decennial census, the council shall reapportion districts pursuant to this section if the annexation of additional territory to the corporate boundaries of the City of Atlanta has the effect of denying electors residing within the newly annexed territory the right to vote for the election of members of the council on substantially the same basis that the other electors of the City of Atlanta vote for members of the council. The reapportionment provided for herein shall meet the criteria specified in subsection (b) of this section and shall be further limited to making only those adjustments in district boundary lines as may be reasonably necessary to include the newly annexed territory within such districts. Reapportionment under this subsection shall be effective for the next regular general municipal election following annexation. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
CHAPTER 3. - REMOVAL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS 

Section 5-301. - Recall elections. 
Any person holding an elective office of the city shall be subject to removal from office at a recall election in the manner provided by Chapter 4 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Recall Act of 1989," as now or hereafter amended. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 5-302. - Offices to be vacated immediately upon the occurrence of certain events. 
Upon final conviction of or the entering of a plea of guilty for a crime involving moral turpitude, a felony, or other crime involving malfeasance or misfeasance while in office, the office of the mayor, president of the council, or any councilmember shall be vacated immediately without further action. The unexpired term of office shall be filled as provided in this Charter. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 5-303. - Removal of mayor for temporary inability to serve. 
During the temporary inability of the mayor to perform the duties of his or her office, the president of the council shall serve as and shall have all the powers and duties of the mayor, provided the council shall, by three-fourths' vote of the entire membership serving thereon, certify such inability by resolution, which resolution shall become immediately effective without action by the mayor. The council shall determine by majority vote of its members when the mayor is again able to perform the duties of his or her office. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 5-304. - Removal of elected officials. 
(a)  Grounds for removal. The mayor, the president of the council, or any councilmember shall be subject to removal from office for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Malpractice, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(3)  Failure to maintain continuously the residency within the district or districts from which elected. 
(4)  Violation of the conflicts of interest and standards of conduct provided in this Charter or the code of ordinances; 
(5)  Violation of the oath of office as provided in this Charter; 
(6)  Abandonment of office or ceasing to perform the duties thereof; or 
(7)  Failure for any cause to perform the duties of office as required by the provisions herein or by law. 
(b)  Procedures for removal. Removal of the mayor, the president of the council, or any councilmember pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by the following method. In the event the mayor, the president of the council, or any councilmember is sought to be removed by action of the council, an impartial panel shall conduct a hearing and render a decision on the matter. Such elected official sought to be removed shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground(s) for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The council shall provide by ordinance or resolution for the appointment of an impartial panel and the manner in which such hearings shall be held to render a decision. Any elected official sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the council to the Superior Court of Fulton County. Such appeals shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2000-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-15-00) 
CHAPTER 4. - CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 

Section 5-401. - Conflicts of interest provisions applicable to city officials and employees. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by general law, no elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any office, department, or agency thereof, shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction with, or have a financial or personal interest, direct or indirect, in the affairs of, the city, except through a procedure employing sealed bids; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is in conflict or incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information or use information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Title 50, Chapter 14, of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended, concerning the property, government or affairs of the city or any office, department, or agency thereof, not available to members of the public and gained by reason of his or her official position for his or her personal gain or benefit, to advance his or her financial or other private interest, or to advance the financial or private interest of any other person or business entity; 
(4)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against the city or any office, department, or agency thereof; 
(5)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
(b)  No elected official, officer, or employee shall use property of the city for his or her personal benefit or profit except in accordance with policies and procedures of the city. 
(c)  All elected officials, appointed officers or employees of the city or any office, department, or agency thereof, shall abide by any further standards of conduct adopted or as may be adopted by an ordinance of the council. 
(d)  As used in this chapter, the word "relative" shall mean an individual who is related to the elected official, appointed officer, or employee as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, husband, wife, domestic partner registered under section 94-133, grandfather, grandmother, grandchild, mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, any other relative living in the household of the elected official, appointed officer, or employee or who otherwise holds himself or herself out as or is generally known as the person whom the elected official, appointed officer, or employee intends to marry or with whom the elected official, appointed officer, or employee intends to form a household, or any other natural person having the same legal residence as the elected official, appointed officer, or employee. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2006-55, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Section 5-402. - Disclosures. 
(a)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who has any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any office, department, or agency of the city shall disclose such interest in writing to the council by filing a written memorandum with the municipal clerk. Any elected official who has a financial interest in any contract or matter before the council shall disclose such interest as provided in Article 2 within this Charter. 
(b)  Any elected official shall disclose publicly the identity of any relative, as defined in the Code of Ordinances, employed by the city on or before February 15th of each year, by the submission of an electronic form prescribed by the board of ethics. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2006-23, § 1, 5-18-06; Ord. No. 2006-59, § 1, 9-13-06) 
Section 5-403. - Contracts voidable and rescindable. 
Any contract between the city and another party shall be voidable or rescindable at the discretion of the council at any time if any elected official, officer, or employee has any interest in such contract and does not disclose such interest in accordance with the provisions within this chapter. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 5-404. - Ineligibility of elected officials. 
No elected official shall hold any compensated appointive office or employment with the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that official was elected to office, unless this provision is waived by a three-fourths vote of the council. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 5-405. - Hearings and determinations. 
Any hearings and determinations regarding any violations of the provisions herein shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Charter or any ordinance regulating standards of conduct as adopted by the council. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
ARTICLE 6. - REVENUE AND FUND ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER 1. - REVENUE 

Section 6-101. - General power of taxation. 
(a)  For the purpose of raising revenue for the support and maintenance of city government and for other corporate purposes, the governing body shall have full power and authority to provide by ordinance for the assessment, levy, and collection of an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property, which, under the laws of this state, is subject to taxation within the corporate limits of the city. For the purpose of raising revenue for the payment of interest and principal on the bonded indebtedness of the city, the governing body shall have full power and authority to provide by ordinance for the assessment, levy, and collection of an annual ad valorem tax on all real and personal property, which, under the laws of this state, is subject to taxation within the corporate limits of the city, and to provide such an amount in millage as may be necessary to meet and pay all such obligations. 
(b)  For the purpose of raising revenue for permanent improvements in the parks of the city, and for facility maintenance, repair, replenishment, enhancement, and the purchase of equipment for such parks, the governing body shall have full power and authority to provide by ordinance for the assessment, levy, and collection of an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property, which, under the laws of this state, is subject to taxation within the corporate limits of the city, in the amount of one-half mill on each dollar of assessed valuation thereon; such tax, when collected shall be used as follows: 90 percent exclusively for permanent improvements to the zoo, golf courses, recreational, and other park facilities of the city, and ten percent for park facility maintenance, repair, replenishment, enhancement, and the purchase of equipment. In the event that any part of the tax so collected cannot be used in any one year, it may be invested in short-term securities until such time as the use of said funds becomes necessary or possible. The tax provided for herein shall be in addition to all other taxes authorized by this Charter. 
(c)  The tax authorized by subsection (b) shall be used only as provided herein. Any sums not used in any one year for such purposes shall be converted into a trust fund to be held and expended for such purposes in future years. Half of the half-mill tax may, at the discretion of the council, be used for the purpose of constructing a stadium and related facilities in the city or for the purpose of paying in whole or in part the obligation assumed by the city by contract now or hereafter entered into with any authority now in existence or hereafter created which has agreed to construct a stadium and related facilities in the city. 
(d)  No enumeration of any right, power, or authority provided in this Charter shall be construed as limiting or abolishing any right, power, or privilege herein set forth. 
(e)  There shall be assessed, levied, and collected an annual ad valorem tax for the support of public schools and for educational purposes, at the millage rate determined by the Atlanta Board of Education, to be billed and collected as other ad valorem taxes are billed and collected in accordance with this Charter, the basis for the billing and collection of such tax to be the millage as set forth in an annual written request signed by the president of said board of education together with a certified copy of said board's budget and filed with the governing authority, the format and time of annual filing of such request to be the only action by the governing authority of the city necessary to levy such tax annually. All revenue derived from such school and educational ad valorem tax shall be paid into the treasury of the city and shall be remitted monthly to said board of education free from any charge except the direct cost of collecting such tax. 
(f)  The governing body shall be authorized to assess, levy, and impose taxes on lots and lot owners for sanitary purposes in such amount, rates, or methods of assessment and taxation; provided, further, the governing body shall be authorized and empowered to collect such taxes by execution against the lot so assessed and the owner thereof and provide for the use of such proceeds. The amount so assessed shall be a lien on the lot from the date of the assessment. The governing body shall be authorized to prescribe what should constitute a lot for sanitary purposes and assessment; provided, however, that assessment shall be made on vacant lots as follows: A front footage fee may be assessed in accordance with the zoned property category, residential, apartment, or commercial and no unit fee shall be assessed. Resident lots shall not be subdivided or assessed separately except where they have two or more houses used or intended for use as separate tenements built upon them, in which case a sanitary assessment maybe levied against the lot for each house situated thereon. 
(g)  The governing body of the city, in addition to being authorized to assess, levy, and impose taxes for sanitary purposes, as set forth hereinabove in subsection (f), shall be authorized to charge fees for the collection, removal or disposal, or both, of all solid waste except body wastes, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and market and industrial wastes, such fees to be charged against the owners or, when not owner-occupied, against the occupants, tenants, or lessees of the premises from which the fee is collected, and from which such waste is removed or disposed of, or both, from which collection and removal services are made available. The amount of such fees may depend upon the amount, weight, or volume of collections and whether collected from residential, commercial, industrial, or other property. 
(h)  All public property exempt from taxation by the city by law shall likewise be exempt from all assessments, levies, and taxes specified under subsection (f) above. All fees for services charged against any such property as specified in subsection (g) above shall be due and payable when billed in due course by the city. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2006-56, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Section 6-102. - Excise taxes. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by general law, the governing body shall be authorized and empowered to classify businesses and arrange the various businesses, trades, and professions carried on in the city into such classes of subjects for taxation as may be just and proper. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by general law, the governing body shall have full power and authority to require any person, firm, corporation, or company engaged in, prosecuting, or carrying on, or that may engage in, prosecute, and carry on any trade, business, calling, or profession, to register their names and business, calling, or profession annually and to require such person, company, or association to pay for such registration or license, or both, to engage in, prosecute, or carry on such business, calling, or profession such fee, charge, or tax as the governing body may deem expedient for the safety, benefit, convenience, and advantage of the city. Such tax, registration fee, or license shall be imposed at the discretion of the governing body. The governing body shall also have power and authority to prescribe and collect fees for the issuance of business licenses or executions and for the collection of executions. 
(c)  The governing body shall be authorized to impose and collect license fees and taxes on life insurance companies as authorized by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia approved February 20, 1964 (Ga. L. 1964, p. 122), as now or hereafter amended, and on fire and casualty insurance companies as authorized by an Act of the General Assembly approved April 12, 1968 (Ga. L. 1968, p. 3706), as now or hereafter amended. 
(d)  The governing body shall have full and complete power and authority to require every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of selling spirituous, vinous, or malt liquors at wholesale to pay excise taxes based on the quantity or value of the commodity sold. Such taxes shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and license fees authorized by law. 
(e)  If the corporate limits of the city are extended so as to include therein businesses, professions, and trades located therein which were previously licensed through an examination or otherwise by the governing authority of the annexed area, such licenses shall have the same dignity and standing as if they were in the first place issued by the governing authority of the city; provided, however, that any businesses not located therein must secure a new license from the city; provided, further, that city license renewal fees shall be payable thereby following the calendar year of said extension of the corporate limits. No such license shall have such dignity and standing unless the licensee applies to the city for a certificate of proficiency within six months after approval of the annexation affecting such licensee. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-103. - Assessment, return, and collection of city taxes. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by general law, this Charter, or ordinance, all taxes on property subject to taxation other than assessments made by the revenue commissioner of Georgia shall be assessed by the Fulton County or DeKalb County board of tax assessors and collected by the Fulton County or DeKalb County Tax Commissioner in accordance with applicable laws as now or hereafter amended governing the return, assessment, and collection of taxes with the City of Atlanta. The tax commissioners shall receive all tax returns for the city of all taxable property located in the city within Fulton County and DeKalb County except business property situated in such counties, the return of which shall be made to the board of tax assessors of Fulton or DeKalb Counties as provided by Georgia law. For the City of Atlanta in Fulton County and for that portion of the City of Atlanta located in DeKalb County, the tax commissioners shall prepare consolidated tax return forms for state, county, and city taxes and shall cause their use for the return of such property. The tax commissioners shall bill for all taxes due to the city on property in such counties and shall receive all payments of such taxes, including interest and fi. fa. costs thereon. He or she may be authorized by the governing body to collect delinquent taxes due to the city on property in such counties with the same powers and authorities held by the chief financial officer of the city. Sales made by the tax commissioner shall carry the title to the property as if made by the city's chief financial officer. 
(b)  Any tax commissioner shall give bond payable to the City of Atlanta, in an amount to be determined by ordinance, conditioned upon payment to the city of all sums collected by him or her for and on behalf of the city. The premium on such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(c)  The time or times for the payment of taxes assessed against real estate and personal property in the city shall be fixed by ordinance of the governing body; provided, however, that said ordinance shall not be changed during any current year but shall apply to the years succeeding the date of the passage of such ordinance. The ordinance may provide for payment of taxes monthly, quarterly, or otherwise; and on failure to pay the taxes or installment on taxes, such taxes shall bear interest at such rate as may be fixed by the governing body, to be charged on any installment not paid at the time ordained. If all the tax assessed for the current year is paid during the first tax period fixed, as provided by ordinance, a discount for such payment, not exceeding three percent, may be provided for by ordinance, on the total amount of such annual taxes. If the total taxes are not paid during the first period, but are paid during some of the other periods fixed in the ordinance, a discount may be allowed thereon not exceeding the stated sum of three percent; provided, however, that there shall be deducted from the discount a proportionate sum corresponding to the period of the year during which such taxes remain unpaid. The interest shall be computed from the date the taxes are made payable. The times of payment shall be provided by ordinance, with one or more times of payment during the current year. If any ad valorem tax or portion of ad valorem tax is not paid at the time prescribed by ordinance, execution shall be issued for the entire tax or the unpaid balance of the entire tax on December 20 and shall bear interest from August 15; provided, however, if December 20 of any year shall fall on Sunday, then the fi. fa. shall be dated December 21. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for the year 1999 only, unpaid ad valorem taxes for property owners within the City of Atlanta in DeKalb County shall bear interest from September 15. 
(d)  The governing body may provide by ordinance for penalty for late payment of business licenses, taxes, and sanitary services in such amounts as deemed necessary. 
(e)  The chief financial officer shall be ex officio marshal and shall collect all delinquent taxes and shall be authorized to collect or levy fi. fas. for taxes, assessments, and fines; make sales of property to satisfy executions under the laws applicable to sheriff's sales; issue, sign, and record executions; and issue tax executions instanter against the owner of personal property, subject to a lien for unpaid taxes, which is being removed or is about to be removed beyond the limits of the city. He or she shall pay into the city treasury all fees paid into his or her office. He or she shall transfer and assign all fi. fas. issued for assessments, as provided by law for tax fi. fas. A deputy of the chief financial officer, or any other city officer as provided by ordinance, may issue and sign executions and levy fi. fas. A proportionate amount of taxes due under a fi. fa. may be paid, as to a particular lot or tract of land, to withdraw said land from the lien thereof. Deeds made under this section shall be admissible in evidence on the same terms as deeds made for state and county taxes. The proceedings preliminary to the execution of such deeds shall also be admissible. The governing body may sell and transfer executions at a discount or discounts and preserve liens as provided in Ga. L. 1937, p. 795, as amended. Personal property levied on in the city may be sold at any place within the corporate limits thereof as provided by ordinance. The chief officer shall deduct from any payment due by the city to pay any person, firm, or corporation the amount of any delinquent bill or amount due the city prior to the payment of any such bill or account. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the tax commissioners to furnish with all tax bills a detailed statement which includes (1) purposes for which the taxes have been assessed and levied and (2) the number of mills assessed; for general operations and debt service, schools, parks, and any other purpose for which taxes have been assessed and levied; the dollar amount of taxes levied by purpose; and any other relevant information necessary to advise the taxpayers, either on the statement or on a paper to be enclosed with the statement, concerning the taxes imposed on them. 
(g)  The chief financial officer shall be ex officio treasurer of the city and shall assume all the duties as may be required of that office. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1999-65, § 1, 9-16-99) 
Section 6-104. - Collection of public utility taxes. 
The chief financial officer, ex officio marshal, shall collect all taxes, including sanitary service charges, assessments and fees, and delinquent taxes, due to the city by public utilities. Utility ad valorem taxes shall be paid within the period fixed for payment of ad valorem taxes generally or within 20 days following certification by the state revenue commissioner, whichever is later. The chief financial officer is further empowered to collect, levy, issue, transfer and assign all fi. fas. for taxes and fines, to sell property so levied on under rules governing the sheriff and his or her deputies, to issue and assign executions and instanter executions for taxes and assessments, and to perform such other services as the governing body shall prescribe by ordinance; provided, however, property so levied upon may be redeemed by proportionate payment of taxes, as provided for by law. Provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall abrogate the central assessment and return provisions of general law as applied to public utilities. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1996-46, § 1, 7-8-96) 
Section 6-105. - Fulton and Dekalb County territory. 
(a)  The governing body shall be authorized to contract with Fulton and Dekalb County tax receivers and commissioners for that portion of the city lying within such counties for consolidated tax return forms, tax digests of property returned, billing for taxes, receipt of payment for such taxes, and payment to the city of such sums as provided in this chapter. Compensation for rendering such services shall be an amount equal to the cost of rendering the services but not to exceed one percent of all sums collected for the city. 
(b)  The records of the tax receivers or commissioners of any counties in which portions of the city lie shall be available at all business hours to duly authorized representatives of the city and any members of the public. 
(c)  The contents and delivery of tax bills, information to be furnished by the city, payment of taxes in installments, apportionment of taxes, partial payments, kinds of taxes collected, tax executions, and bonds of tax collectors of tax commissioners shall be provided for by ordinance in accordance with an Act of the General Assembly approved February 21, 1951 (Ga. L. 1951, p. 3087), and an Act of the General Assembly approved March 2, 1953 (Ga. L. 1953, p. 2809), as amended, and as otherwise required by law. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-106. - Homestead exemptions. 
(a)  The maximum homestead exemption as authorized by law is applicable to all property qualifying for such exemption which is subject to ad valorem taxes in the city. 
(b)  The procedures and requirements for determination of eligibility, application for exemption, time for filing, and absence due to duty in armed forces shall be provided for by ordinance. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-107. - No new grant of taxing power. 
Any other provisions of this Charter to the contrary notwithstanding, nothing contained within this Charter shall be deemed nor construed to confer upon the City of Atlanta any power to levy and assess taxes and fees which the city did not possess on January 1, 1973. Provided, however, nothing contained within this section shall preclude said city from exercising additional powers to levy and assess taxes and fees which are conferred by general or local law, other than this Charter, which are enacted subsequent to January 1, 1973. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
CHAPTER 2. - BORROWING AND INDEBTEDNESS 

Section 6-201. - Bonds to be issued and sold under general state laws. 
The city shall issue and sell bonds under the provisions of the general laws of the state; and where an issue of bonds is desired and the purposes thereof are legal and the amount proposed is not in excess of the constitutional limit, the governing body shall call an election when required therefor by ordinance, observing any and all formalities of notice, time, place and manner of election, voting, and declaring the result as provided by the general laws. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-202. - Issuance of general obligation bonds. 
(a)  The city shall be authorized to issue and sell general obligation bonds under the provisions of the Constitution and of the laws, both general and special, of the state as now or hereafter permitted for any public purpose. 
(b)  The city shall have the authority to levy and collect ad valorem taxes without limit as to rate or amount on all taxable property within the territorial limits of the city, as the same may now exist and may be hereafter changed, to pay the principal of, redemption premium, if any, and interest on general obligation bonds issued by the city. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-203. - Limitations upon general obligation bonds. 
(a)  The city shall be authorized to incur general bond indebtedness to the extent authorized by the Constitution of Georgia of 1983, as now or hereafter amended, and the general laws of this state. 
(b)  The proceeds from said general obligation bonds shall be utilized only for the purposes authorized by the bond issue; provided, however, the proceeds of such bonds shall not be utilized for payment of other than capital expenditures or expenses incidental thereto. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-204. - Issuance of general obligation bonds. 
The city shall be authorized to issue general obligation bonds as provided by the Constitution and laws of Georgia. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-205. - Revenue bonds. 
The city is empowered and authorized to issue revenue bonds in the manner authorized by the Constitution and laws of Georgia. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-206. - Other revenue bonds. 
The city shall be authorized to issue revenue bonds for the waterworks system, for sanitary services, and for grandstands and stadiums as provided by the Constitution of Georgia of 1983, as now or hereafter amended. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-207. - Special assessment bonds. 
The city shall be authorized to issue special assessment bonds as provided by the Constitution and laws of Georgia. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-208. - Investment of surplus funds. 
The chief financial officer shall be authorized by ordinance to invest or reinvest all surplus funds of any type not immediately needed. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-209. - Registration, transfer, and negotiation of bonds. 
The city is hereby authorized and empowered to provide for and regulate the registration of bonds of the city and to prescribe the manner in which such bonds have been registered and may be transferred or negotiated. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-210. - Issuance of registered bonds in lieu of coupon bonds. 
The city may provide for the issuance of registered bonds of the city in lieu of any coupon bonds issued by the city. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
CHAPTER 3. - FISCAL CONTROL 

Section 6-301. - Budget commission. 
(a)  There is hereby created a budget commission consisting of the mayor, chief financial officer, chairperson of the finance committee or equivalent committee of the governing body, and two governing body members nominated and confirmed by the governing body at large for one-year terms. 
(b)  The budget commission: 
(1)  Shall annually prepare and file with the governing body for submission to the mayor the budget revenue anticipations for the city, provided that such anticipations shall not exceed 99 percent of the normal revenue collected during the previous year, with the following exceptions: (A) the normal revenue which the city may be expected to collect from the taxable property in newly annexed territory may be anticipated; (B) collections from tax executions on real estate and on personal property and choses in actions owned by the city may be anticipated, provided that revenues from such anticipations shall not exceed 85 percent of tax executions on real estate and 50 percent of tax executions on personal property not more than three years old and choses in actions certified solvent and collectable by the tax assessor. When such revenue anticipations have been filed, they shall be binding upon the governing body without any action of approval or disapproval; 
(2)  Shall allocate a sum sufficient to provide for debt service, including sinking fund and interest on bonded indebtedness; a general fund budget reserve equal to the amount, if any, specified under Section 6-315, Fund Balance Policy; 
(3)  In the event the income of the city should be decreased by law, either by act of the General Assembly or by the governing body, it shall be the duty of the budget commission to immediately adjust the budget revenue anticipations to comply with such decreased revenue. In the event of an increase in the tax rate, or if the schedule of charges for city service, such as water service, sanitary service, or any other similar assessments or charges should be changed by law, the budget commission may revise the budget revenue anticipations and considering assessments, sanitary service charges, or any other similar assessments or charges of the previous year apply new rates thereto and adjust the budget revenue anticipations accordingly; 
(4)  In the event the city receives any money, income, or revenue from any extraordinary source, either by sale of its property, gift, grant, or otherwise, which has not been considered in the preparation of the budget revenue anticipations or other normal revenue in excess of appropriations, the budget commission shall have the right to allocate immediately such increased revenue for lawful purposes. However, in the preparation of the budget for the next year no such extraordinary revenue shall be considered as a part of the normal revenue of the city; 
(5)  If at any time during any year, the expenditures exceed the revenues collected and a deficit is created, it shall be the duty of the budget commission before appropriating any other sum for any purpose other than the interest and sinking fund on the bonded indebtedness to appropriate a sufficient sum to immediately discharge any deficit which has accrued during the preceding year. 
(6)  The members of the budget commission shall be personally liable for the over-anticipation of receipts. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 1, 3-12-02; Ord. No. 2002-18, § 1, 3-12-02; Ord. No. 2008-39(08-O-1019), § 1, 6-11-08; Ord. No. 2012-26(12-O-0501), § 1, 6-13-12) 
Section 6-302. - Adoption of budget. 
(a)  At the first Council meeting in March of each year, beginning in 2007, each council member may submit his/her budget priorities for the coming year. Such priorities shall be referred to the Finance/Executive Committee, which shall submit these priorities in the form of a resolution to be adopted by the council no later than the second council meeting in March. The Mayor, in conjunction with the Chief Financial Officer, may take these priorities into consideration in the preparation of the tentative budget. 
(b)  The mayor shall prepare and submit the proposed annual budget ordinance to the governing body no later than the first regular meeting of the governing body in May, preceding the commencement of the fiscal year. 
(c)  The governing body shall hold one or more public hearings on the proposed budget as required by the laws of Georgia, notice of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least seven days prior to the date set therefore. 
(d)  The governing body may amend the proposed annual budget, except that the budget as finally amended must provide for all expenditures required by law or by this Charter, including but not limited to debt service, sinking fund, interest on bonded indebtedness and a general fund budget reserve equal to the amount, if any, specified under Section 6, Fund Balance Policy. The General Fund budget reserve as identified in this subsection cannot be expended without prior approval of the governing body. 
(e)  The governing body shall by ordinance adopt the annual budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than June, preceding the commencement of the fiscal year. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1998-58, § 1, 9-17-98; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 2, 3-12-02; Ord. No. 2005-09, § 1, 2-16-05; Ord. No. 2005-84, § 1, 11-22-05; Ord. No. 2008-21(08-O-0351), § 1, 3-25-08; Ord. No. 2008-34(08-O-0826), § 1, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2008-38(08-O-1018), § 1, 6-10-08; Ord. No. 2009-06(09-O-0200), § 1, 2-11-09; Ord. No. 2012-26(12-O-0501), § 2, 6-13-12) 
Section 6-303. - Expenditures of excess in receipts over appropriations. 
The governing body is hereby authorized to expend and use any excess in the receipts of the city of any year over the amount appropriated for such year, provided such expenditure shall in no case exceed the actual receipts for such year. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-304. - Budget amendments. 
(a)  With the exception of budgeted contracts pertaining to the agencies under the jurisdiction of the other standing committees, the finance committee or equivalent committee of the governing body shall approve or disapprove all measures to expend money prior to their consideration by the governing body, provided that upon the committee's failure to report thereon by the second regular meeting of the governing body following a reference to the committee, the governing body may act on such measures without such report. 
(b)  (1)  The finance committee or equivalent committee of the governing body shall approve or disapprove measures pertaining to the intradepartmental transfer of appropriations from one line item account to another line item account in the operating funds of the city prior to their consideration by the governing body, provided, however, the governing body shall not transfer to any other department funds that have been set aside for debt service, including sinking fund and interest on bonded indebtedness, general fund restricted reserves, and any other appropriations required by law or for the deficit of the prior year. 
(b)  (2)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Charter, upon consideration by the finance committee or equivalent committee, the governing body may approve or disapprove any request to make a transfer of funds from the general fund restricted reserve to a general fund unrestricted reserve or a line item account in the operating funds of the city by the majority vote of the council members then constituting the membership of the Atlanta City Council. 
(c)  Intradepartmental transfers of appropriations from one line item account to another line item account in the operating funds, the working capital fund, and the grant funds of the city may be made upon unanimous approval of the chairperson of the finance committee or equivalent committee of the governing body, the head or director of the department affected, the chief financial officer, and the chief operating officer. When the decision to transfer intradepartmental funds is not unanimous, such transfers shall be submitted to the governing body by the chairperson of the finance or equivalent committee of the governing body for approval or disapproval. The chairperson of the finance or equivalent committee of the governing body and the chief financial officer are jointly authorized to transfer appropriation surpluses, as the same may occur, from line accounts in the various departments of the operating funds, the working capital fund, and the grant funds of the city. Copies of any transfers shall be filed with the municipal clerk at the next regular meeting of the governing authority after said transfer of appropriations or appropriation surplus is made. The clerk shall enter such transfers in the minutes of such meeting and announce to the members of the governing body that such transfers have been made. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to the transfer of surplus funds from salary accounts. 
(d)  (1)  The finance committee or equivalent committee of the governing body shall approve or disapprove any additional one-time and/or recurring expenses, programs or expenditures proposed after the adoption of the annual budget and not funded during adoption of the annual budget if accompanied by the identification of corresponding new revenue source(s) or expenditure reduction(s) and as necessary, program/expenditure reductions. 
(d)  (2)  The finance committee or equivalent committee of the governing body shall approve or disapprove any additional one-time and/or recurring expenses, programs or expenditures approved after the adoption of the annual budget and not funded during adoption of the annual budget if accompanied by the identification and concomitant approval of corresponding new revenue source(s) or expenditure reduction(s) and as necessary, program/expenditure reductions. 
(d)  (3)  All reductions or proposals for reductions in one-time or recurring revenue must be accomplished in conjunction with the identification of new alternative one-time or recurring revenue source(s) or expenditure reductions. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 3, 3-12-02; Ord. No. 2006-24, § 1, 5-18-06; Ord. No. 2008-21(08-O-0351), § 2, 3-25-08; Ord. No. 2009-05(09-O-0099), § 1, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 2009-75(09-O-1922), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Section 6-305. - Unlawful obligations void. 
(a)  The city shall incur no obligation, except bonds lawfully issued, in excess of the annual budget and such other special appropriations as may be lawfully made and shall incur no liability except as authorized by such budget or appropriation. Any such liabilities attempted to be incurred shall be void in law and equity. 
(b)  All contracts entered into by the governing body, contrary to the provisions of this Charter, for the purpose of raising money, or otherwise engaging the credit of the city, shall be null and void as to the city, but the mayor, if he or she approves, and all members of the governing body, present and voting, who fail to record their votes against such measure or contract, shall be jointly and severally liable thereon, as upon their own contracts, which liability may be enforced against such mayor and members of the governing body in any court of this state having jurisdiction thereof. 
(c)  It is contemplated that contracts and obligations undertaken pursuant to a consent decree which implements a corrective remedial plan by the city to resolve Clean Water Act and Georgia Water Quality Control Act violations at the city's combined sewer overflow (CSO) facilities are lawfully made. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1998-51, § 1, 7-13-98) 
Section 6-306. - Appropriations for charitable purposes. 
The governing body of the City of Atlanta shall have the authority to annually appropriate and donate money, derived from taxation, contributions, or otherwise, for and to any corporation, company, association, or institution for purely charitable purposes. The governing body shall also have the authority to enter into contracts and agreements with any school of higher learning located in the city for services to be rendered the city and payment for such services may be made from funds derived from taxation. The governing body is authorized, in its discretion, to select the recipients of such appropriations and donations and as to determine the amounts of same. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-307. - Authority of city to contract with commissions, councils, boards, etc. 
With respect to services and properties of any kind or character related to corporate, municipal, governmental, or public purposes, the City of Atlanta shall have the authority to contract with any commission, council, or board, created by the governing body of the city or otherwise, or with any other corporation, company, association, institution, or individual. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-308. - Audit. 
(a)  The governing body, defined as the City Council through the Finance/Executive Committee, shall provide annually for an independent audit of the accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the city and departments, boards, and commissions thereof. The audit shall be made by a certified public accountant or a certified public accounting firm, the members of which are independent as defined by professional rules of conduct prescribed by the national association governing the practices of certified public accountants. 
(b)  The final report of the annual audit shall be completed as soon as practicable after the close of the year and in no event later than six months thereafter. Said report and the opinion and recommendations of those making the same shall be: 
(1)  Made available online on the City of Atlanta Department of Finance website; 
(2)  Made available thereto for inspection at no charge; and 
(3)  Sent to the Atlanta-Fulton Public Library and to the state auditor. 
(c)  A report shall be presented to the governing body through the Finance/Executive Committee by the certified public accountant or certified public accounting firm that will include all communications required by Statements on Auditing Standards, as promulgated by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2008-37(08-O-1017), § 1, 6-11-08) 
Section 6-309. - Accounting systems. 
The chief financial officer shall be responsible for the administration of the accounting systems of the city, for proper recording of receipts and disbursements of each department, fund, or other breakdown, and shall provide a financial statement not less than quarterly for the first, second and third fiscal quarter to the mayor, governing body, and other agencies as may be required. The Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) shall serve as the fourth quarter's report. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2006-25, § 1, 5-18-06) 
Section 6-310. - Increase in salaries. 
The governing body shall not increase the salaries or other remuneration in any form of any officer or employee of the city during the fiscal year except by ordinance as finally adopted and approved on or before the last day of the sixth month of any fiscal year; however, normal salary increments as authorized by the city's pay plan and reclassifications may be provided for, salaries for new offices or positions may be fixed, salaries may be reduced because of economic conditions, or positions may be abolished. Notwithstanding the above, between May 1 and December 31, 1999, the council may by ordinance make a one-time, two-installment payment of a bonus to members of the fire department. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1999-61, § 1, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 1, 5-18-06) 
Section 6-311. - Evidence of justice of claims. 
Whenever a warrant or claim shall be presented to the chief financial officer, he or she shall have the power to require evidence that the amount claimed is justly due and for that purpose may summon before him or her any officer, agent, or employee of any department or other person and examine him or her upon oath or affirmation, relative to such warrant or claim, and may require the production of books and papers to be used as evidence before him or her. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-312. - Financial stabilization plan. 
(a)  The Mayor shall present to the governing body by February 15 of each year a five-year financial stabilization plan consisting of the following elements: 
(1)  A five-year projection of general fund revenues broken down by major category. The projection shall identify the economic trends and assumptions upon which such projection is based. 
(2)  A five-year projection of total general fund expenses on a departmental level. Such expense projection shall assume the continuation of department operations as they exist in the current general fund budget and shall take into account the following: 
i.  The effect of inflation on general fund budgeted costs; 
ii.  A projection of pension costs as provided by the city's actuaries; and 
iii.  Costs occurring in future years that the city is legally obligated to pay. 
(3)  A calculation of the surplus or deficit produced by the projected revenues and expenditures described in (1) and (2) above. 
(4)  A cost estimate of long-term initiatives of the city. Such initiatives shall include, but are not limited to, long-term operating infrastructure and capital infrastructure needs and the elimination of deficit positions in funds that are subsidized or have historically been subsidized by the general fund. At any time the governing body of the city may, by resolution, request specific long-term initiatives to be included in the five-year financial stabilization plan. 
(5)  A comprehensive list of revenue initiatives the city may pursue during the five years covered by the financial stabilization plan, including an estimate of the revenues to be produced by such initiatives. 
(6)  A comprehensive list of cost saving initiatives the city may pursue during the five years covered by the financial stabilization plan, including an estimate of costs saved by such initiatives. 
(b)  The governing body shall adopt the financial stabilization plan by April 30 of each year. In no event shall the governing body adopt the budget for the upcoming fiscal year prior to consideration of the financial stabilization plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-56(09-O-1406), § 1, 9-25-09; Ord. No. 2011-52(11-O-1415), § 1, 11-16-11) 
Section 6-313. - Pension Actuarial Audit. 
That every five years or at such regular intervals as determined by City Council, an independent licensed actuary be engaged by the City of Atlanta Audit Committee to conduct an actuarial audit of the City's General Employee Pension Fund, Firefighter Pension Fund, and Police Pension Fund with the costs of such audits to be paid by the corresponding pension fund. Upon completion of each such audit, the findings are to be presented to the Finance/Executive Committee of City Council for review. 
(Ord. No. 2011-34(11-O-0944), § 1, 7-27-11) 
Section 6-314. - Pension Experience Study. 
That every five years or at such regular intervals as determined by City Council, a licensed actuary be engaged by the City of Atlanta Audit Committee to conduct an actuarial experience review of the City's General Employee Pension Fund, Firefighter Pension Fund, and Police Pension Fund with the costs of such study to be paid by the corresponding pension fund. Upon completion of each such study, the findings are to be presented to the Finance/Executive Committee of City Council for review. Immediately after the presentation of findings, the Finance/Executive Committee of City Council shall perform an analysis of the goals and structure of the City's entire retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 2011-34(11-O-0944), § 2, 7-27-11) 
Section 6-315. - Fund balance policy. 
The City will report fund balance amounts consistent with the appropriate Governmental Accounting Standards Board ("GASB") guidance. This policy and the procedures promulgated under it supersede all previous regulations regarding the City's fund balance and reserve policies. 
(a)  Fund balance terms. The following fund balance definitions will be recognized: 
Fund equity. A fund's equity is generally the difference between its assets and its liabilities. For governmental funds, fund equity is also known as fund balance. 
Fund balance. An accounting distinction is made between the portions of fund equity that are spendable and nonspendable. These are broken up into five categories: 
(1)  Nonspendable fund balance includes amounts that are not in a spendable form or are required to be maintained intact. Examples are inventory or long term advances to or from other funds. 
(2)  Restricted fund balance includes amounts that can be spent only for the specific purposes stipulated by external resource providers either constitutionally or through enabling legislation. Examples include grants and bond covenants. 
(3)  Committed fund balance includes amounts that can be used only for the specific purposes determined by a formal action of the government's highest level of decision-making authority. Commitments may be changed or lifted only by the government taking the same formal action that imposed the constraint originally. 
(4)  Assigned fund balance comprises amounts intended to be used by the government for specific purposes. Intent can be expressed by the governing body or by an official or body to which the governing body delegates the authority. In governmental funds other than the general fund, assigned fund balance represents the amount that is not restricted or committed. This indicates that resources in other governmental funds are, at a minimum, intended to be used for the purpose of that fund. Example includes fund balance used to balance the budget. 
(5)  Unassigned fund balance is the residual classification of the general fund and includes all amounts not contained in other classifications. Unassigned amounts are technically available for any purpose. The general fund is the only fund that may have a positive balance in this category. 
Unrestricted fund balance. The total of committed fund balance, assigned fund balance, and unassigned fund balance, which includes only resources without a constraint on spending or for which the constraint on spending is imposed by the government itself. 
(b)  Prioritization of fund balance use. 
(1)  When an expenditure is incurred for purposes for which both restricted and unrestricted (committed, assigned, or unassigned) amounts are available, the City shall consider restricted amounts to have been reduced first. 
(2)  When an expenditure is incurred for purposes for which amounts in any of the unrestricted fund balance classifications could be used, the City shall first reduce committed amounts, followed by assigned amounts and then unassigned amounts. 
(3)  Prior to the fund balance being encumbered for any expenditure in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection, three and one-half (3.5) percent of the general fund budget at the beginning of each fiscal year shall be appropriated to ensure adequate annual funding for routine maintenance, repair, and replacement of public infrastructure. 
(c)  Authority to commit or assign. Commitments or assignments will only be used for specific purposes. Committed balances or assigned balances will only be established pursuant to a formal action by the City Council, upon recommendation from the Chief Financial Officer. Such commitments or assignments cannot exceed the available fund balance in any particular fund. 
(d)  Minimum unrestricted fund balance in the General Fund. 
(1)  The City will maintain a minimum unrestricted fund balance ranging from no less than 15 percent to 20 percent of the subsequent year's budgeted expenditures and outgoing transfers. 
(2)  At any time that the City's unrestricted fund balance is within the range of 15 percent to 20 percent of the subsequent year's budgeted expenditures and outgoing transfers, upon recommendation by the Chief Financial Officer, Council may authorize additional transfers to fund balance or any deficit fund at its discretion, up to a maximum of five percent per year of the subsequent year's budgeted revenues, in preparation for adoption of the upcoming years' budget. 
(e)  Replenishing deficiencies in the General Fund. When the unrestricted fund balance falls below the minimum 15 percent of the subsequent year's budgeted expenditures and outgoing transfers, the City will replenish shortages/deficiencies within the following time periods and, upon recommendation by the Chief Financial Officer, Council may authorize additional transfers to the fund balance at its discretion, up to a maximum of five percent per year of the subsequent year's budgeted revenues, in preparation for adoption of the upcoming years' budget. Sufficient transfers shall be budgeted to restore/replenish deficits within the timelines outlined below: 
(i)  Deficiency resulting in a minimum unrestricted fund balance between 12.5 percent and 15 percent shall be replenished over a period not to exceed one year; 
(ii)  Deficiency resulting in a minimum unrestricted fund balance between ten percent and 12.5 percent shall be replenished over a period not to exceed three years; 
(iii)  Deficiency resulting in a minimum unrestricted fund balance of less than ten percent shall be replenished over a period not to exceed five years. 
(f)  Surplus fund balance. Should the unrestricted fund balance of the General Fund exceed the maximum of 20 percent, upon recommendation by the Chief Financial Officer, Council may consider such surplus fund balance as available to reduce deficit balances in other funds and for one-time expenditures that are nonrecurring in nature. At least 50 percent of surplus fund balance must be used to reduce any deficit fund balance prior to allocation for any one-time expenditures. All such expenditures are subject to approval via regular council action. 
(g)  Financial reporting. An annual reporting of fund balances as classified in accordance with GASB 54 shall be as reported in the annual Audited Financial Statements of the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2012-26(12-O-0501), § 3, 6-13-12; Ord. No. 2015-07(14-O-1513), § 1, 2-26-15 ) 
CHAPTER 4. - PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY 

Section 6-401. - Contracting procedures. 
(a)  The governing body shall prescribe by ordinance or resolution the procedures to be followed in the making of contracts which shall bind the city. The governing body is authorized to remedy discrimination or the present effects of past discrimination by an affirmative action program which is in compliance with the Constitution and laws of the United States of America and the State of Georgia. All contracts shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. The mayor shall sign all contracts; however, the governing body may authorize the mayor by ordinance to designate another appropriate official to sign any type contract. The municipal clerk shall authenticate all contracts. The original of all contracts shall be maintained on file in the office of the chief financial officer. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, all contracts which bind the city and Fulton County jointly in accordance with the terms and conditions of a joint venture agreement for the construction and operation of a water treatment plant and appurtenances may be signed and approved by duly authorized officers of said joint venture, provided that sufficient funds for each such contract have been appropriated by the city and Fulton County. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 6-402. - Purchasing procedures. 
(a)  The governing body shall prescribe by ordinance or resolution the procedures for all purchases of real and personal property by the city. The following alternative methods of securing contracts are hereby authorized, as set forth in and defined by ordinances currently effective or hereafter adopted or amended by the city council: competitive sealed bidding; competitive sealed proposals; small purchases not exceeding $20,000.00; sole-source procurement; emergency procurement; and competitive selection procedures for professional and consultant services. Awards of contracts shall be made to the most responsible and responsive firms, said responsibleness and responsiveness to be determined by factors including those set forth in subsection (b) below, including but not limited to compliance with the requirements of any existing minority and female business opportunity development plans and any local preference program as established by City ordinance. The terms "competitive bidding" and "most responsible and responsive firm" shall be defined to include compliance with the requirements of any minority and female business participation plan which has been implemented by city ordinance pursuant to: 
(1)  A finding by the city that such a plan is necessary to remedy the effects of prior private and public discrimination in the procurement and contracting practices of the city; 
(2)  A requirement by federal law that the city maintain such a plan for purposes of receiving any federal grants or loans; 
(3)  A finding by a judicial tribunal that such a plan is necessary to remedy past or present private and public discrimination in the procurement and contracting procedures of the city. 
(b)  In determining the most responsible and responsive firm, the purchasing and contracting authority shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The ability, capacity, and skill of the firm to perform the contract or to provide the services required; 
(2)  The capability of the firm to perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the firm; 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the firm with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or services; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the firm to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The compliance of the firm with the requirements of an equal employment opportunity in contracting program as may be prescribed by ordinance; 
(8)  The compliance of the firm with the requirements of a minority and female business enterprise participation program as may be prescribed by ordinance; 
(9)  The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or services to the particular use required; 
(10)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid by the firm, if any; 
(11)  Price; and 
(12)  The compliance of the bidder or firm with the requirements of a local preference program as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(c)  Any and all bids or proposals may be rejected when it is in the best interest of the city to do so; in addition to the foregoing, the governing body shall prescribe by ordinance the procedure for amending, modifying, or otherwise changing contracts and for authorizations for the purchase of goods, materials, supplies, equipment, and services. Prior to the making of purchases and contracts, or amendments, modifications, or changes thereto, the availability of adequate funds shall be certified by the chief financial officer as provided by ordinance. 
(d)  Any and all competitive bids or proposals shall be sealed and shall be opened at the same time in a public place as directed by the council and remain open for public inspection. 
(e)  Contractual work related to any competitive sealed bid or proposal shall not be broken into components or parts so as to avoid the council's approval of awards of greater than $100,000.00. 
(f)  In exercising the power of purchasing and procurement provided for in section 3-104 of this Charter, the mayor shall adhere to the provisions within this Charter and any ordinance governing purchasing and procurement; provided, however, when the mayor proposes to let a contract to one other than the lowest bidder or offeror or award a contract which has not been competitively procured, the contract shall be approved by the council prior to an award of contract. Any contracts awarded by the mayor pursuant to the powers provided in section 3-104 of this Charter and the provisions herein shall be reported monthly by the chief procurement officer to the president of the council and councilmembers. 
(g)  The governing body may prescribe different procedures for sales and other disposition of real and personal property acquired by the city pursuant to any approved application or amended application under Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended. 
(h)  The governing body may authorize different procedures for all purchases of real and personal property in connection with its joint venture with Fulton County for the construction and operation of a water treatment plant and appurtenances, provided that funds for each such purchase have been appropriated by the city and Fulton County. 
(i)  As used in this Charter section, the word "firm" shall mean and include any individual, partnership, corporation, association, joint venture, or other legal entity authorized to do business in Georgia which desires to contract with the City of Atlanta. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2001-12, §§ 1(A), 1(B), 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2002-74, § 2, 10-15-02; Ord. No. 2007-01, §§ 2, 3, 1-9-07; Ord. No. 2008-36(08-O-0818), §§ 2, 3, 6-2-08) 
Charter reference— Powers and duties, § 3-104(14). 
Cross reference— Signing contracts on behalf of mayor, § 2-1140. 
Section 6-403. - Sale and disposition of property. 
The governing body shall prescribe by ordinance or resolution the procedures for all sales and other disposition of real and personal property by the city. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
ARTICLE 7. - INTERIM AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7-101. - Officials; officers and employees. 
(a)  The current terms of office of all elected and appointed officials and officers of the city and its agencies, serving on the effective date of this Charter, shall not be diminished and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(b)  The provisions of this Charter establishing a residency requirement for appointed officials and employees shall not apply to those holding such appointed offices and positions prior to the effective date of this Charter. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 7-102. - Existing ordinances and resolutions continued in effect. 
Existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Atlanta and existing rules and regulations of departments and agencies thereof not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall be effective as ordinances and resolutions of the council and rules and regulations of the appropriate department or agency thereof until they have been repealed, modified, or amended. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 7-103. - Contracts and obligations. 
All contracts, orders, leases, bonds, and other obligations or instruments entered into by the City of Atlanta or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this Charter shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof as obligations and rights of the city. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 7-104. - Transfer of certain provisions to the code. 
(a)  The provisions of Division 2 (Housing Commission), Chapter 4 (Boards and Commissions) of Article 3 being deleted by this Charter are hereby transferred to Part 8 of the code of ordinances. 
(b)  The provisions of section 3-503 (Civil service board) being deleted by this Charter are hereby transferred to Part 5, Chapter 2 of the code of ordinances. 
(c)  The provisions of Article VIII (Administrative Organization Ordinance) being deleted by this Charter are hereby transferred to Part 2, Chapter 4 of the Code of ordinance. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 7-105. - Existing rights and interests. 
(a)  Any rights or interest, public or private, vested in whole or in part on the effective date of this Charter, whose validity might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provisions of law repealed by this Charter, shall not be affected by this Charter. This section shall not apply to any right or interest in any elective public office not conferred by this Charter. 
(b)  Any rights or interests, public or private, derived from or which might be sustained or preserved in reliance upon action taken (including the adoption of ordinances or resolutions) pursuant to or within the scope of any provisions of law repealed by this Charter, shall not be affected by this Charter. 
(c)  Repealed. 
(d)  The provisions of Ga. L. 1951, pp. 529 et seq., 531 et seq., 537 et seq., 549 et seq., 3014 et seq., 3018 et seq., 3048 et seq. and 3057 et seq., protecting the pension rights in connection with the plan of improvement recommended by the local government commission (Ga. L. 1949, p. 921), shall continue to apply to employees of counties, boards of education, and any other agencies designated in said Acts in the event of any future annexations of territory to the city. 
(e)  There shall be on the Dekalb County Board of Health to represent the city two members, who shall be residents of that part of the city situated in Dekalb County, which members shall be appointed by the council. The term of office of such members shall be four years and until their successors have taken office. The municipal clerk shall certify the names of the members thus appointed to the chairperson of the Dekalb County Board of Health. Vacancies for any cause shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term by the council. 
(f)  No other municipality or town shall have any authority, although the land may be located within its limits, to charge or exact any license fees or occupation taxes for the operation by the City of Atlanta of a landing field therein or for the operation or conduct of any business or occupation thereon. Nor shall such other municipality or town have any authority to assess or collect any ad valorem tax against said land as against the City of Atlanta or otherwise where said city might be required to pay same, if held under lease; nor shall such other municipality or town have any authority to lay any improvements in, through, or along said property such as street paving, sidewalks, curbing, sewers, or otherwise and assess and collect the cost thereof against said land if owned by the City of Atlanta or under lease contract by the City of Atlanta or otherwise where said city might be called upon to pay or discharge the same. 
(g)  The mayor, president of the council, and members of council shall receive as their annual salaries such amounts being received as of the effective date of this Charter until such amounts are changed by the council in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 1996-54, § 2, 7-8-96) 
Section 7-106. - Section captions. 
The captions to the several sections of this Charter are informative only and are not to be construed as a part thereof. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 7-107. - Effect of repeals. 
No law heretofore repealed, expressly or by implication, shall be revived by the repeal herein of the repealing act or by any provisions of this Charter that disclaim an intention to repeal or affect enumerated laws. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 7-108. - Severability of sections. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or provision of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions or other applications of this Charter, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this Charter and the applications thereof are hereby declared to be severable. In the event any provision of this Charter is declared invalid for any reason, then the provision pertaining to the same subject matter that existed in the prior Charter of the City of Atlanta shall be in force and effect and applicable until repealed. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 7-109. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 7-110. - Specific repeal of prior laws. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Charter are hereby repealed. The Charter of 1973 (Ga. L. 1973, p. 2188) and all Acts amendatory thereof are hereby specifically repealed in their entirety except for those provisions of said Charter and amendatory Acts thereof defining the boundaries of the City of Atlanta on the first Monday in January of 1974; and except for any other provisions of such charter specifically incorporated herein by reference and which are not in conflict herewith. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
Section 7-111. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469) 
APPENDIX I. - COUNCIL DISTRICTS 
Atlanta City Council District Boundary Descriptions 
District 1 
All of that portion of Fulton County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Edgewood Avenue NE and Park Place S SE, and proceeding easterly along Edgewood Avenue NE to Peachtree Center Avenue NE, and proceeding southerly along Peachtree Center Avenue NE to Gilmer Street SE, and proceeding easterly along Gilmer Street SE to Jesse Hill Jr. Drive SE, and proceeding southerly along Jesse Hill Jr. Drive SE to CSX Railroad, and proceeding easterly along CSX Railroad to the northbound I-75 On-Ramp, and proceeding southerly along the On-Ramp to Martin Street SE, and proceeding southerly along Martin Street SE to Memorial Drive SE, and proceeding easterly along Memorial Drive SE to Boulevard SE, and proceeding southerly along Boulevard SE to I-20, and proceeding easterly along I-20 to Bill Kennedy Way SE, and proceeding southerly along Bill Kennedy Way SE to Glenwood Avenue SE, and proceeding easterly along Glenwood Avenue SE to the DeKalb/Fulton county line, and proceeding southerly along the DeKalb/Fulton county line to South River, and proceeding westerly along South River to Macon Drive SW, and proceeding northerly along Macon Drive SW to Lakewood Avenue SE, and proceeding easterly along Lakewood Avenue SE to Shadydale Avenue SE, and proceeding northerly along Shadydale Avenue SE to Claire Drive SE, and proceeding westerly along Claire Drive SE to Claire Drive SW, and proceeding westerly along Claire Drive SW to Pryor Cir SW, and proceeding northerly along Pryor Cir SW to Pryor Rd, and proceeding northerly along Pryor Road to CSX Railroad (A&WP Beltline), and proceeding easterly along CSX Railroad to Capitol Avenue SW, and proceeding northerly along Capitol Avenue SW to Norfolk Southern Railway, and proceeding westerly along Norfolk Southern Railway to Fortress Avenue SW, and proceeding northerly along Fortress Avenue SW to Adamson Street SW, and proceeding northerly along Adamson Street SW to Doane Street SW, and proceeding westerly along Doane Street SW to Windsor Street SW, and proceeding northerly along Windsor Street SW to Hendrix Avenue SW, and proceeding easterly along Hendrix Avenue SW to Cooper Street SW, and proceeding northerly along Cooper Street SW to Dodd Avenue SW, and proceeding easterly along Dodd Avenue SW to Central Avenue SW, and proceeding northerly along Central Avenue SW to Bass Street SW, and proceeding easterly along Bass Street SW to I-75, and proceeding northerly along I-75 to Fulton Street SW, and proceeding easterly along Fulton Street SW to Capitol Avenue SE, and proceeding northerly along Capitol Avenue SE to Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SE, and proceeding westerly along Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SE to Washington Street SW, and proceeding northerly along Washington Street SW to CSX Railroad, and proceeding westerly along CSX Railroad to Pryor Street SE, and proceeding northerly along Pryor Street SE to Park Place S SE, and proceeding northerly along Park Place S SE to the point of beginning. 
District 2 
All of that portion of DeKalb County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the Fulton/DeKalb county line with the property line separating 633 Moreland Avenue NE and 1181 Fairview Road NE, and proceeding easterly along the property lines to Clifton Terrace NE, and proceeding easterly along Clifton Terrace NE to Clifton Road NE, and proceeding southerly along Clifton Road NE to DeKalb Avenue NE, and proceeding easterly along DeKalb Avenue NE to Arizona Avenue NE, and proceeding southerly along Arizona Avenue NE to CSX Railroad, and proceeding westerly along CSX Railroad to the Fulton/DeKalb county line, and proceeding northerly along the Fulton/DeKalb county line to the point of beginning. All of that portion of Fulton County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of 17th Street and I-75, and proceeding easterly along 17th Street to W Peachtree Street NW, and proceeding southerly along W Peachtree Street NW to 14th Street NE, and proceeding easterly along 14th Street NE to Piedmont Road NE, and proceeding southerly along Piedmont Road NE to 10th Street NE, and proceeding easterly along 10th Street NE to a driveway into the Henry W Grady High School campus approximately 480 feet east of Charles Allen Drive NE, and proceeding southerly through the campus to the intersection of Vedado Way NE and 8th Street NE, and proceeding easterly along 8th Street NE to Monroe Drive NE, and proceeding southerly along Monroe Drive NE to Ponce de Leon Avenue NE, and proceeding easterly along Ponce de Leon Avenue NE to the DeKalb/Fulton county line, and proceeding southerly along the DeKalb/Fulton county line to CSX Railroad, and proceeding westerly along CSX Railroad to Boulevard SE, and proceeding northerly along Boulevard SE to Edgewood Avenue NE, and proceeding westerly along Edgewood Avenue NE to Jackson Street NE, and proceeding northerly along Jackson Street NE to Auburn Avenue NE, and proceeding westerly along Auburn Avenue NE to Fort Street NE, and proceeding northerly along Fort Street NE to Irwin Street NE, and proceeding easterly along Irwin Street NE to Jackson Street NE, and proceeding northerly along Jackson Street NE to Freedom Parkway NE, and proceeding easterly along Freedom Parkway NE to Boulevard NE, and proceeding northerly along Boulevard NE to Ralph McGill Blvd, and proceeding westerly along Ralph McGill Boulevard to Peachtree St, and proceeding southerly along Peachtree Street to Peachtree Center Avenue NE, and proceeding southerly along Peachtree Center Avenue NE to Edgewood Avenue NE, and proceeding westerly along Edgewood Avenue NE to Park Place S SE, and proceeding southerly along Park Place S SE to Pryor Rd, and proceeding southerly along Pryor Road to CSX Railroad, and proceeding westerly along CSX Railroad to Andrew Young International Boulevard, and proceeding easterly along Andrew Young International Boulevard to Williams Street NW, and proceeding northerly along Williams Street NW to I-75, and proceeding northerly along I-75 to the point of beginning. 
District 3 
All of that portion of Fulton County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Peachtree Road and Norfolk Southern Railway, and proceeding southerly along Peachtree Road to W Peachtree Street NW, and proceeding southerly along W Peachtree Street NW to 17th St, and proceeding westerly along 17th Street to I-75, and proceeding southerly along I-75 to North Avenue NW, and proceeding westerly along North Avenue NW to Norfolk Southern Railway, and proceeding southerly along Norfolk Southern Railway to Centennial Olympic Park Drive NW, and proceeding westerly along Centennial Olympic Park Drive NW to Mitchell Street SW, and proceeding easterly along Mitchell Street SW to Elliott Street SW, and proceeding southerly along Elliott Street SW to Nelson Street SW, and proceeding southerly along Nelson Street SW to Walker Street SW, and proceeding southerly along Walker Street SW to Fair Street SW, and Proceeding westerly along Fair Street SW to Atlanta Student Movement Boulevard NW, and proceeding westerly along Atlanta Student Movement Boulevard NW to Walnut Street SW, and proceeding northerly along Walnut Street SW to Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SW, and proceeding westerly along Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SW to Chappell Road NW, and proceeding northerly along Chappell Road NW to CSX Railroad, and proceeding westerly along CSX Railroad to Hamilton E. Holmes Drive NW, and proceeding northerly along Hamilton E Holmes Drive NW to Baker Road NW, and proceeding easterly along Baker Road NW to North Avenue NW, and proceeding easterly along North Avenue NW to CSX Railroad, and proceeding northerly along CSX Railroad to Norfolk Southern Railway, and proceeding westerly along Norfolk Southern Railway to the point of beginning. 
District 4 
All of that portion of Fulton County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of North Avenue NW and Norfolk Southern Railway, and proceeding easterly along North Avenue NW to I-75, and proceeding southerly along I-75 to Williams Street NW, and proceeding southerly along Williams Street NW to Andrew Young International Blvd, and proceeding westerly along Andrew Young International Boulevard to CSX Railroad, and proceeding easterly along CSX Railroad to Courtland Street SW, and proceeding southerly along Courtland Street SW to Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SE, and proceeding easterly along Martin Luther King Jr., Drive SE to Capitol Are SE, and proceeding southerly along Capitol Avenue SE to Fulton Street SW, and proceeding westerly along Fulton Street SW to I-75, and proceeding southerly along I-75 to Bass Street SW, and proceeding westerly along Bass Street SW to Central Avenue SW, and proceeding southerly along Central Avenue SW to Dodd Avenue SW, and proceeding westerly along Dodd Avenue SW to Cooper Street SW, and proceeding southerly along Cooper Street SW to Hendrix Avenue SW, and proceeding westerly along Hendrix Avenue SW to Windsor Street SW, and proceeding southerly along Windsor Street SW to Doane Street SW, and proceeding easterly along Doane Street SW to Adamson Street SW, and proceeding southerly along Adamson Street SW to Fortress Avenue SW, and proceeding southerly along Fortress Avenue SW to Norfolk Southern Railway, and proceeding westerly along Norfolk Southern Railway to the shared railroad right-of-way of Norfolk Southern Railway and CSX Railroad, and proceeding southerly along the shared railroad right-of-way of Norfolk Southern Railway and CSX Railroad to the north property line of Fort McPherson, and proceeding westerly along said property line to Ingram Street SW, and proceeding westerly along Ingram Street SW to property line, and proceeding westerly along property line to Venetian Drive SW, and proceeding westerly along Venetian Drive SW to Centra Villa Drive SW, and proceeding northerly along Centra Villa Drive SW to Cascade Rd, and proceeding easterly along Cascade Road to Cascade Cir SW, and proceeding northerly along Cascade Cir SW to Cascade Rd. and proceeding easterly along Cascade Road to Ralph David Abernathy Blvd, and proceeding northerly along Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard to Anderson Avenue SW, and proceeding northerly along Anderson Avenue SW to CSX Railroad, and proceeding easterly along CSX Railroad to Chappell Road NW, and Proceeding southerly along Chappell Road NW to Martin Luther King Jr., Drive SW, and proceeding easterly along Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SW to Walnut Street SW, and proceeding southerly along Walnut Street SW to Atlanta Student Movement Boulevard SW, and proceeding easterly along Atlanta Student Movement Boulevard SW to Fair Street SW, and proceeding easterly along Fair Street SW to Walker Street SW, and proceeding northerly along Walker Street SW to Nelson Street SW, and proceeding easterly along Nelson Street SW to Elliott Street SW, and proceeding northerly along Elliott Street SW to Mitchell Street SW, and proceeding westerly along Mitchell Street SW to Centennial Olympic Park Drive SW, and proceeding northerly along Centennial Olympic Park Drive SW to Norfolk Southern Railway, and proceeding northerly along Norfolk Southern Railway to the point of beginning. 
District 5 
All of that portion of DeKalb County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of S Ponce de Leon Avenue NE and Clifton Road NE, and proceeding easterly along S Ponce de Leon Avenue NE to the Atlanta city line, and proceeding southerly (keeping the Atlanta City Limits on the right) along the Atlanta city line to the Fulton/DeKalb county line, and proceeding northerly along the Fulton/DeKalb county line to CSX Railroad, and proceeding easterly along CSX Railroad to Arizona Avenue NE, and proceeding northerly along Arizona Avenue NE to DeKalb Avenue NE, and proceeding westerly along DeKalb Avenue NE to Clifton Road NE, and proceeding northerly along Clifton Road NE to the point of beginning. All of that portion of Fulton County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Ralph McGill Boulevard NE and Peachtree St, and proceeding easterly along Ralph McGill Boulevard NE to Boulevard NE, and proceeding southerly along Boulevard NE to Freedom Pkwy NE, and proceeding westerly along Freedom Pkwy NE to Jackson Street NE, and proceeding southerly along Jackson Street NE to Irwin Street NE, and proceeding westerly along Irwin Street NE to Fort Street NE, and proceeding southerly along Fort Street NE to Auburn Avenue NE, and proceeding easterly along Auburn Avenue NE to Jackson Street NE, and proceeding southerly along Jackson Street NE to Edgewood Avenue NE, and proceeding easterly along Edgewood Avenue NE to Boulevard SE, and proceeding southerly along Boulevard SE to CSX Railroad, and proceeding easterly along CSX Railroad to the DeKalb/Fulton county line, and proceeding southerly along the DeKalb /Fulton county line to Glenwood Avenue SE, and proceeding westerly along Glenwood Avenue SE to Bill Kennedy Way SE, and proceeding northerly along Bill Kennedy Way SE to I-20, and proceeding westerly along I-20 to Boulevard SE, and proceeding northerly along Boulevard SE to Memorial Drive SE, and proceeding westerly along Memorial Drive SE to Martin Street SE, and proceeding northerly along Martin Street SE to I-75 On-Ramp, and proceeding northerly along I-75 On-Ramp to CSX Railroad, and proceeding westerly along CSX Railroad to Jesse Hill Jr. Drive SE, and proceeding northerly along Jesse Hill Jr. Drive SE to Gilmer Street SE, and proceeding westerly along Gilmer Street SE to Peachtree Center Avenue NE, and proceeding northerly along Peachtree Center Avenue NE to Peachtree St, and proceeding northerly along Peachtree Street to the point of beginning. 
District 6 
All of that portion of DeKalb County bounded and described as follows: 
1.  Beginning at the point of intersection of the Druid Hills/Atlanta census designated place/city line and the Fulton/DeKalb county line (the northwest corner of 1036 Rosedale Road NE), and proceeding easterly along the Druid Hills/Atlanta census designated place/city line S Ponce de Leon Avenue NE, and proceeding westerly along S Ponce de Leon Avenue NE to Clifton Road NE, and proceeding southerly along Clifton Road NE to Clifton Terrace NE, and proceeding westerly along Clifton Terrace NE to the northern property line of' Candler Park, and proceeding westerly along said property line and other rear property lines to the Fulton/DeKalb county line, and proceeding northerly along the Fulton/DeKalb county line to the point of beginning. 
2.  As well as beginning at the point of intersection of the North Druid Hills/Atlanta census designated place/city line and the Fulton/DeKalb county line (northwest corner of l824 Homestead Avenue NE), and proceeding easterly along the North Druid Hills/Atlanta census designated place/city line to the Druid Hills/Atlanta census designated place/city line, and proceeding southerly along the Druid Hills/Atlanta census designated place/city line to the Fulton/DeKalb county line, and proceeding northerly along the Fulton/DeKalb county line to the point of beginning. 
3.  As well as beginning at the point of intersection of the North Druid Hills/Atlanta census designated place/city line and the Fulton/DeKalb county line (northwest corner of 1842 Homestead Avenue NE), and proceeding easterly along the North Druid Hills/Atlanta census designated place/city line to the Fulton/DeKalb county line, and proceeding northerly along the Fulton/DeKalb county line to the point of beginning. All of that portion of Fulton County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Piedmont Road NE and Norfolk Southern Railway/Amtrak RR, and proceeding southerly along Piedmont Road NE to Sidney Marcus Boulevard NE, and proceeding easterly along Sidney Marcus Boulevard NE to Buford Hwy NE, and proceeding easterly along Buford Hwy NE to the DeKalb/Fulton county line, and proceeding southerly along the DeKalb/Fulton county line to Ponce de Leon Avenue NE, and proceeding westerly along Ponce de Leon Avenue NE to Monroe Drive NE, and proceeding northerly along Monroe Drive NE to 8th Street NE, and proceeding westerly along 8th Street NE to the intersection of 8th Street NE and Vedado Way NE, and proceeding northerly across the Henry W Grady High School campus to the driveway entrance into the campus at 10th Street NE, and proceeding westerly along 10th Street NE to Piedmont Road NE, and proceeding northerly along Piedmont Road NE to 14th Street NE, and proceeding westerly along 14th Street NE to W Peachtree Street NW, and proceeding northerly along W Peachtree Street NW to Peachtree Rd, and proceeding northerly along Peachtree Road to the Railroad Right-of-Way lying to the north of Peachtree Valley Road NE, and proceeding easterly along the Railroad Right-of-Way to Norfolk Southern Railway/Amtrak RR, and proceeding northerly along Norfolk Southern Railway/Amtrak RR to the point of beginning. 
District 7 
All of that portion of DeKalb County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the North Atlanta/Atlanta census designated place/city line and the Fulton/DeKalb county line (on the northern property line 4118 E Brookhaven Drive NE), and proceeding easterly along the North Atlanta/Atlanta census designated place/city line to the Fulton/DeKalb county line, and proceeding northerly along the Fulton/DeKalb county line to the point of beginning. All of that portion of Fulton County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the Sandy Springs/Atlanta city line and Roswell Rd, and proceeding easterly along the Sandy Springs/Atlanta city line to the DeKalb/Fulton county line, and proceeding southerly along the DeKalb/Fulton county line to Buford Hwy NE, and proceeding southerly along Buford Hwy NE to Sidney Marcus Boulevard NE, and proceeding westerly along Sidney Marcus Boulevard NE to Piedmont Road NE, and proceeding northerly along Piedmont Road NE to Norfolk Southern Railway/Amtrak RR, and proceeding southerly along Norfolk Southern Railway/Amtrak RR to the Railroad Right-of-Way lying to the south of Peachtree Creek, and proceeding westerly along the Railroad Right-of-Way to Peachtree Rd, and proceeding northerly along Peachtree Road to Roswell Rd, and proceeding northerly along Roswell Road to the point of beginning. 
District 8 
All of that portion of Fulton County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the Sandy Springs/Atlanta city line and the Cobb/Fulton county line, and proceeding easterly along the Sandy Springs/Atlanta city line to Roswell Rd, and proceeding southerly along Roswell Road to Peachtree Rd, and proceeding southerly along Peachtree Road to Norfolk Southern Railway/Amtrak RR, and proceeding westerly along Norfolk Southern Railway/Amtrak RR to Northside Drive NW, and proceeding northerly along Northside Drive NW to I-75, and proceeding westerly along I-75 to Peachtree Creek, and proceeding westerly along Peachtree Creek to Bohler Road NW, and proceeding northerly along Bohler Road NW to Battleview Drive NW, and proceeding westerly along Battleview Drive NW to the property line between 1380 and 1383 Battleview Drive NW, and proceeding westerly along the property line to Peachtree Creek, and proceeding westerly along Peachtree Creek to Ridgewood Road NW, and proceeding southerly along Ridgewood Road NW to Coronet Way NW, and proceeding westerly along Coronet Way NW to CSX Railroad, and proceeding westerly along CSX Railroad to the Cobb/Fulton county line, and proceeding northerly along the Cobb/Fulton county line to the point of beginning. 
District 9 
All of that portion of Fulton County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Peachtree Creek and Ridgewood Road NW, and proceeding easterly along Peachtree Creek to the property line between 1380 and 1383 Battleview Drive NW, and proceeding easterly along the property line to Battleview Drive NW, and proceeding easterly along Battleview Drive NW to Bohler Road NW, and proceeding southerly along Bohler Road NW to Peachtree Creek, and proceeding easterly along Peachtree Creek to I-75, and proceeding southerly along I-75 to Northside Drive NW, and proceeding southerly along Northside Drive NW to Norfolk Southern Railway/Amtrak RR, and proceeding westerly along Norfolk Southern Railway/Amtrak RR to CSX Railroad, and proceeding southerly along CSX Railroad to North Avenue NW, and proceeding westerly along North Avenue NW to Baker Road NW, and proceeding westerly along Baker Road NW to Hamilton E Holmes Drive NW, and proceeding northerly along Hamilton E Holmes Drive NW to Baker Ridge Drive NW, and proceeding westerly along Baker Ridge Drive NW to Waterford Road NW, and proceeding northerly along Waterford Road NW to Sandy Creek, and proceeding westerly along Sandy Creek to the Atlanta city line, and proceeding northerly along the Atlanta city line to the Cobb/Fulton county line, and proceeding northerly along the Cobb/Fulton county line to CSX Railroad, and proceeding easterly along CSX Railroad to Coronet Way NW, and proceeding easterly along Coronet Way NW to Ridgewood Road NW, and proceeding northerly along Ridgewood Road NW to the point of beginning. 
District 10 
All of that portion of Fulton County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Sandy Creek and the Atlanta city line, and proceeding easterly along Sandy Creek to Waterford Road NW, and proceeding southerly along Waterford Road NW to Baker Ridge Drive NW, and proceeding easterly along Baker Ridge Drive NW to Hamilton E Holmes Drive NW, and proceeding southerly along Hamilton E Holmes Drive NW to CSX Railroad, and proceeding easterly along CSX Railroad to Anderson Avenue SW, and proceeding southerly along Anderson Avenue SW to Ralph David Abernathy Blvd, and proceeding easterly along Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard to Cascade Rd, and proceeding westerly along Cascade Road to Cascade Terrace SW, and proceeding westerly along Cascade Terrace SW to Clearvue Terrace SW, and proceeding northerly along Clearvue Terrace SW to Rosemary Avenue SW, and proceeding northerly along Rosemary Avenue SW to Beecher Street SW, and proceeding westerly along Beecher Street SW to Beecher Road SW, and proceeding westerly along Beecher Road SW to Cascade Rd, and proceeding westerly along Cascade Road to the Atlanta city line, and proceeding northerly along the Atlanta city line to the point of beginning. 
District 11 
All of that portion of Fulton County bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the East Point/Atlanta city line and Fort Valley Drive SW, and proceeding southerly along the Atlanta city line to Cascade Road, and proceeding easterly along Cascade Road to Beecher Road SW, and proceeding northerly along Beecher Road SW to Beecher Street SW, and proceeding easterly along Beecher Street SW to Rosemary Avenue SW, and proceeding southerly along Rosemary Avenue SW to Clearvue Terrace SW, and proceeding southerly along Clearvue Terrace SW to Cascade Terrace SW, and proceeding easterly along Cascade Terrace SW to Cascade Rd, and proceeding westerly along Cascade Road to Cascade Cir SW, and proceeding westerly along Cascade Cir SW to Cascade Rd, and proceeding westerly along Cascade Road to Centra Villa Drive SW, and proceeding southerly along Centra Villa Drive SW to Venetian Drive SW, and proceeding easterly along Venetian Drive SW to Pinehurst Drive SW, and proceeding southerly along Pinehurst Drive SW to Fort Valley Drive SW, and proceeding southerly along Fort Valley Drive SW to the point of beginning. 
District 12 
All of that portion of Fulton County bounded and described as follows: 
1.  Beginning at the point of intersection of Norfolk Southern Railway H-Line and CSX Railroad near the intersection of Peters Street SW and McDaniel Street SW, and proceeding southerly along Norfolk Southern Railway H-Line to Capitol Avenue SW, and proceeding southerly along Capitol Avenue SW to CSX Railroad (A&WP Beltline), and proceeding westerly along CSX Railroad to Pryor Rd, and proceeding southerly along Pryor Road to Pryor Cir SW, and proceeding southerly along Pryor Cir SW to Claire Drive SW, and proceeding easterly along Claire Drive SW to Claire Drive SE, and proceeding easterly along, Claire Drive SE to Shadydale Avenue SE, and proceeding southerly along Shadydale Avenue SE to Lakewood Avenue SE, and proceeding westerly along Lakewood Avenue SE to Macon Drive SW, and proceeding easterly along Macon Drive SW to South River, and proceeding easterly along South River to the DeKalb/Fulton county line, and proceeding southerly along the DeKalb/Fulton county line to the Clayton/Fulton county line, and proceeding westerly along the Clayton/Fulton county line to the Hapeville/Atlanta city line, and proceeding northerly along the Hapeville/Atlanta city line to the East Point/Atlanta city line, and proceeding northerly along the East Point/Atlanta city line to Fort Valley Drive SW, and proceeding westerly along Fort Valley Drive SW to Pinehurst Drive SW, and proceeding northerly along Pinehurst Drive SW to Venetian Drive SW, and proceeding easterly along Venetian Drive SW to the northern property line of Fort McPherson, and proceeding easterly along the property line to Ingram Street SW, and proceeding easterly along Ingram Street SW to the property line, and proceeding easterly along the property line to CSX Railroad, and proceeding northerly along CSX Railroad to the point of beginning. 
2.  As well as beginning at the point of intersection of the Hapeville/Atlanta city line and the East Point/Atlanta city line at N Inner Loop Rd, and proceeding easterly along the Hapeville/Atlanta city line to the Clayton/Fulton county line, and proceeding westerly along the Clayton/Fulton county line to the College Park/Atlanta city line, and proceeding northerly along the College Park/Atlanta city line to the East Point/Atlanta city line, and proceeding northerly along the East Point/Atlanta city line to the point of beginning. 
(1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469; Ord. No. 2002-33, § 2, 5-25-02; Ord. No. 2009-21(09-O-0655), § 1, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 2012-04(11-O-1827), § 2(Exh. B), 2-15-12) 
APPENDIX II. - HOUSING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— This appendix has been created by the editor and consists of provisions formerly found in Article 3, Chapter 4, Division 2, §§ 3-411—3-418 of the city charter of 1973 (1973 Ga. L. p. 2188), as amended. Such provisions were transferred by § 7-104(a) of the new city charter (1996 Ga. L. p. 4469) to Part 8 of the city's 1973 code, which code had been replaced by the current city code when the new charter was adopted. The provisions of this appendix will be retained in this appendix until transferred to the new city code. 

Section 1. - Creation. 
A standing housing commission is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 1993-70, § 1, 4-12-93) 
Section 2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the housing commission shall be: 
(1)  To review the housing policies of the city with an emphasis on affordable housing. 
(2)  To review the city's permitting procedures related to the construction and rehabilitation of housing. 
(3)  To explore creative methods of financing affordable housing. 
(4)  To review housing policies, practices and procedures of other jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 1993-70, § 2, 4-12-93) 
Section 3. - Composition. 
The housing commission shall be comprised of 15 members; with five (5) to be named by designated organizations (from their membership) and the remaining 10 to be appointed by the mayor, president of council and councilmembers. 
The designated organizations to be represented on the commission shall be: 
(1)  The urban residential finance authority. 
(2)  The Atlanta Neighborhood Development Partnership. 
(3)  The Atlanta Task Force on the Homeless. 
(4)  The Georgia Housing and Finance Authority. 
(5)  The Atlanta Mortgage Consortium. 
The remaining 10 members shall be: 
(1)  Representatives from two (2) community development corporations. 
(2)  Four (4) developer representatives: (two) nonprofits (1 multi-family and 1 single family); (two) for-profits (1 multi-family and 1 single family). 
(3)  Two (2) mortgage lenders. 
(4)  Two (2) laypersons. 
Confirmation by council shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 1993-70, § 3, 4-12-93) 
Section 4. - Method of appointment. 
The method of appointment shall be as follows: 
(1)  One (1) mortgage lender and one (1) lay person shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(2)  One (1) mortgage lender and one (1) lay person shall be appointed by the president of council. 
(3)  One (1) nonprofit multi-family developer shall be appointed by councilmembers from districts three (3) and four (4) and the at-large councilperson. 
(4)  One (1) for-profit multi-family developer shall be appointed by councilmembers from districts five (5) and six (6) and the at-large councilperson. 
(5)  One (1) nonprofit single-family developer shall be appointed by councilmembers from districts one (1) and two (2) and the at-large councilperson. 
(6)  One (1) for-profit single-family developer shall be appointed by councilmembers from districts seven (7) and eight (8) and the at-large councilperson. 
(7)  One (1) community development corporation representative shall be appointed by the councilmembers from districts nine (9) and 10 and the at-large councilperson. 
(8)  One (1) community development corporation representative shall be appointed by the councilmembers from districts 11 and 12 and the at-large councilperson. 
(Ord. No. 1993-70, § 4, 4-12-93) 
Section 5. - Staffing. 
The housing commission shall receive primary staff support and assistance from the city's department of housing. Other city departments and bureaus shall provide support and assistance as specifically requested by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1993-70, § 5, 4-12-93) 
Section 6. - Meetings, reports and recommendations. 
The housing commission shall meet at least once per quarter and shall produce a report on its work and shall make recommendations to the mayor and city council at least once annually. 
(Ord. No. 1993-70, § 6, 4-12-93) 
Section 7. - Terms of office. 
The terms of office shall be for a two-year period, with the exception of the mayoral and presidential appointees, which terms shall be for a three-year period. 
(Ord. No. 1993-70, § 7, 4-12-93) 
Section 8. - Compensation; appointment. 
Members of the housing commission shall serve voluntarily and without compensation. Appointees shall be submitted to the community development committee. The chair of the community development committee shall convene the first meeting of the commission. The members shall elect their own chairperson and other officers they deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1993-70, § 8, 4-12-93) 
Editor's note— The catchline for this section was added by the editor to maintain consistency in the Charter. 
APPENDIX III. - CIVIL SERVICE BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— This appendix has been created by the editor and consists of provisions formerly found in Article 3, Chapter 6, § 3-503 of the city charter of 1973 (1973 Ga. L. p. 2188), as amended. Such provisions were transferred by § 7-104(b) of the new city charter (1996 Ga. L. p. 4469) to Part 5, Chapter 2 of the city's 1973 code, which code had been replaced by the current city code when the new charter was adopted. The provisions of this appendix will be retained in this appendix until transferred to the new city code. 

Section 1. - Civil service board. 
(a)  There shall be a civil service board, which shall be the official protector of the civil service system. 
There shall be a civil service board consisting of five (5) members, appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council to three-year staggered terms of office as specified by ordinance of the council. (This shall in no way affect the terms of the present members.) 
(b)  The board shall: 
(1)  Hold its meetings in the city hall; 
(2)  Hold regular meetings at least once monthly; 
(3)  Review, and in its discretion recommend amendments to, rules and regulations submitted thereto by the official responsible for personnel administration; 
(4)  Hold hearings when requested by an employee on proposed demotions, suspensions, dismissals, or other such actions and shall have such powers to dispose of such cases as shall be provided by ordinance; 
(5)  Make investigations requested by the mayor or the council or on its own motion; 
(6)  Keep minutes of its meetings and such other records as it may deem necessary; 
(7)  Establish guidelines for hearing any matters referred thereto by the official responsible for personnel administration, employees and employee organizations; and 
(8)  Recommend improvements in the civil service system to the council. 
(1976 Ga. Laws, page 4532, § 1; Ord. No. 1981-87, § 1, 12-15-81) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Subpart B is a compilation of various local and special acts that were deemed to be of interest to the city. The source of each section is given in history notes. The location in session laws, when known, of ordinance amendments is indicated in tables following amended provisions. Section numbers and catchlines have been editorially supplied and internal references to other provisions have been altered so as to reference the compilation. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of citations to state statutes and session laws has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City paid golf professionals. 
In all municipalities having a population of 300,000 or more, according to the United States Census of 1950, or any future United States census, all golf professionals employed, associated or serving in any capacity as employees, facilities or adjuncts of any park, golf course or other recreational facility owned or operated by such city, shall be compensated equally and shall bear equal status and classification; except that compensation, when derived from commissions on the sale or rental of facilities or equipment, shall not be affected thereby. Provided, however, that no golf professionals shall be paid less than $300.00 per month by the governing authorities, exclusive of commissions derived from the sale or rental of facilities or equipment. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 2843, § 1; 1964 Ga. Laws p. 2707, § 1) 
Secs. 2-2—2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-36. - Promotion of industry. 
Article VII, section VI, paragraph I, of the Constitution of Georgia, be and the same is hereby amended by adding at the end of said paragraph the following language: 
Provided, however, that the board of commissioners of the County of Fulton and the proper authorities of the City of Atlanta are authorized to make appropriations from county or city funds not derived from taxation to advertise and promote the agricultural, industrial, historic, recreational and natural resources, facilities and assets of such county and city and environs, to encourage the location of new industries therein and to attract tourists and conventions of visitors thereto, making such appropriations directly for such purposes, or through such agencies as it may designate. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 24, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1877) was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4029. 
Sec. 2-37. - Self-insurance for motor vehicles. 
(a)  All municipal corporations of Georgia whose population as determined by the 1960 federal decennial census or any later federal decennial census shall be more than 350,000 are authorized in their discretion to become self-insurers under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 33-24-51. 
(b)  Each such municipality shall be authorized to provide for the amount and extent of self insurance which such municipality shall assume, the necessary risk and the type of additional or excess insurance coverage that may be required. 
(1970 Ga. Laws, page 3207, §§ 1, 2; 1991 Ga. Laws, page 302, § 1) 
Secs. 2-38—2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BONDS, REVENUE CERTIFICATES AND OTHER INSTRUMENTS OF INDEBTEDNESS 

Sec. 2-56. - Street improvement bonds. 
Provided, any municipality having a population of 150,000 or more can issue and sell street improvement bonds, without the said assent of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the qualified voters at an election called thereon, but upon a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the members of its governing body, with these limitations: 
(1)  First, the time of such bonds shall in no case exceed 10 years. 
(2)  Second, the amount of each issue shall be limited to the amount assessed by such municipality upon each improvement. 
(3)  Third, these bonds shall be issued only for the grading and paving or repaving of streets. 
(4)  Fourth, the interest thereon shall not exceed six per centum (6%) per annum. 
(5)  Fifth, these bonds can be issued without regard to the amount of other outstanding debts or bonds of said municipality. 
(6)  Sixth, these bonds not be issued except in case such pavement or repavement has been petitioned for in writing by the owners of more than 50 percent of the property abutting on the street or portion of street paved or repaved. 
(1920 Ga. Laws, page 25, § 1, ratified Nov. 2, 1920) 
Editor's note— Constitutional provision. The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1877) art. VII, § VII, ¶ I was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4508. 
Sec. 2-57. - Revenue certificates for repairs and improvements in waterworks department and sanitary department. 
And, except that the City of Atlanta for the purpose of (1) improving, repairing, constructing and reconstructing, making additions, extensions, alterations, or improvements in its waterworks system, and acquiring the necessary property therefor; and (2) improving, repairing, purchasing, installing and constructing incinerators or crematories for the disposal of garbage, refuse and waste, by its sanitary department, and acquiring the necessary property therefor, either or both, may, from time to time, issue interest bearing revenue certificates to be paid solely out of the revenues derived from water or sanitary service charges respectively, and to provide for the payment of said revenue certificates by setting aside in special funds to be known as "waterworks department revenue fund" and "sanitary department revenue fund," a sufficient sum, not to exceed 40 per centum of the annual charges, fees and taxes received from the water and sanitary service charges respectively, to retire the certificates. Said percentages shall be based upon the total annual receipts from each of said services for the year previous to the issue. Said certificates may be issued in one (1) or more series, bearing such date or dates, maturing at such time or times not exceeding 20 years from their respective dates; with interest at such rate or rates, not exceeding five per centum (5%) per annum, payable at such time or times, and in such medium of payment at such place or places, and in such denomination or denominations and form, either coupon or registered, and may carry such registration, conversion and exchangeability privileges, and may be subject to such terms of redemption with or without premium, and to become due before the maturity date thereof, and be executed in such manner and contain such terms, covenants, assignments and conditions as the resolution authorizing the issuance of such certificates may provide. Said certificates shall not be sold for less than par value. Said certificates shall be negotiable for all purposes and shall be nontaxable for any and all purposes. They shall be issued when authorized by a majority vote of the mayor and board of aldermen, and signed by the mayor and comptroller of the City of Atlanta, and validated pursuant to the existing laws for validation of bonds and when so validated thereunder shall be forever incontestable and conclusive. Before issuing any such revenue certificates the mayor and board of aldermen shall provide by resolution for the allocation of a percentage of the anticipated receipts necessary to pay said certificates as they mature from the particular service from which the certificates are to be paid for the year in which they mature, and as said funds are received they shall be deposited in said special funds, without deduction, for the benefit of any other department or fund of the City of Atlanta and used solely for payment of the principal and interest of said certificates. Said revenue certificates shall not be payable from or charged upon any funds other than the revenue pledged to the payment thereof, nor shall the City of Atlanta be subject to any pecuniary liability thereon, nor shall any such certificates constitute a charge, lien or incumbrance upon any of its property. The obligation created by said certificates shall not be construed as a debt within the restriction as to debt limit of this paragraph. 
(1939 Ga. Laws, page 8, § 1; 1947 Ga. Laws, page 664, § 1; 1956 Ga. Laws, page 257, § 1; 1962 Ga. Laws, page 1002, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1877), art. VII, § VII, ¶ I was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4810. 
Sec. 2-58. - Revenue anticipation obligations for grandstands and stadia. 
Revenue anticipation obligations may be issued by the City of Atlanta, Fulton County or DeKalb County, or either of them or by any public corporation created by them or either of them, to provide funds for the construction, in whole or in part of grandstands and stadia or either of them, or to provide funds to extend, repair or improve such existing facilities. Such revenue anticipation obligations shall be payable, as to principal and interest, only from revenue produced by such facilities, and shall not be deemed debts of or to create debts against, the issuing political subdivision within the meaning of the Constitution as amended; and no such issuing political subdivision shall exercise the power of taxation for the purpose of paying the principal or interest of any such revenue anticipation obligations or any part thereof. 
(1947 Ga. Laws, page 1759, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1945), art. VII, § VII, ¶ V was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4786. 
Sec. 2-59. - Twelve percent debt limit. 
Article VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended, be further amended by adding at the end thereof a new section to be appropriately numbered and to read as follows: 
Section _____, Paragraph I. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the total indebtedness hereafter incurred by the City of Atlanta, except as in this Constitution provided for, shall never exceed 12 per centum of the assessed value of all the taxable property therein, provided such indebtedness shall be authorized by the assent of the majority of the qualified voters of said city voting in an election for that purpose to be held as prescribed by law; 
Provided further, that the indebtedness of said city, now existing for all purposes or hereafter incurred, for its lawful corporate purposes, other than school purposes, shall never exceed eight per centum (8%) of the assessed value of all the taxable property therein; 
And provided further, that the indebtedness of said city, hereafter incurred, for the purpose of providing funds to acquire, construct, equip, improve and add to new or existing school buildings or facilities of the school system of the city, and for the acquisition of the necessary land and other property therefor and the payment of expenses incident thereto, shall never exceed four per centum (4%) of the assessed value of all the taxable property therein. 
(1956 Ga. Laws, page 360, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4816. 
Sec. 2-60. - Stadium; retirement of construction debt. 
Article XI of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1945, as amended, be further amended by adding at the end thereof the following provision: 
Paragraph XI: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, Fulton County is hereby authorized to cooperate with the City of Atlanta, or any authority now in existence or hereafter created, to construct a stadium and related facilities within the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta, and to that end is hereby authorized to contract with said city and any such authority for the purpose of paying up to one-third of the amount necessary to retire the principal of and the interest on any obligations issued to finance the construction of any such stadium and related facilities. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 891, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4047. 
Sec. 2-61. - Bonds for school purposes. 
Article VII of the Constitution, as amended, is further amended by adding at the end thereof a new section to be appropriately numbered and to read as follows: 
Section _____ Paragraph I. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the City of Atlanta may issue general obligation bonds for school purposes without submitting the issuance thereof to the voters of said city at a referendum, subject to the following restrictions and limitations: 
(1)  The issuance of such bonds shall be authorized at a public meeting held for such purpose after at least 10 days' notice thereof in the official organ of said city, and in at least one (1) of the daily newspapers of said city. Within 30 days after said public hearing, any person opposed to the issuance of said bonds without a referendum may prepare a petition for a referendum, to be filed with the city clerk of the City of Atlanta. If such petition shall contain the signatures of not less than five percent (5%) of the registered voters of said city, and such fact shall be determined by the clerk, the clerk shall call an election to be held in said city, at which time the question of the issuance of the bonds shall be submitted to the vote of the qualified voters of the City of Atlanta, at an election to be held not earlier than 30 days nor later than 45 days from the date of said call; provided, however, that the board of aldermen, upon the filing of said petition for referendum, may withdraw the proposal from further consideration and decline to issue the bonds, either with or without a referendum. Should the board make such an election to withdraw, no new public meetings to consider the same proposal may be had within a period of 90 days following the date on which the aforesaid petition for referendum was filed. 
(2)  Not more than $4,000,000.00 in aggregate principal amount of such bonds so issued without a referendum shall be issued in any fiscal year. 
(3)  The aggregate of all outstanding bonds, including those issued by vote of the people in a referendum and those issued under this amendment without a referendum, shall not exceed the limitations provided elsewhere in this article. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 1582, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4822. 
Sec. 2-62. - Bonds for school system repairs and additions. 
Article VII of the Constitution of Georgia, as amended, be further amended by adding at the end thereof a new section to be appropriately numbered and to be as follows: 
Notwithstanding, any other provisions of this Constitution, the City of Atlanta is authorized to incur bonded indebtedness to the extent of $45,000,000.00 issued for the purpose of providing funds to repair, add to and improve the existing school facilities of the city public school system, to purchase equipment necessary for the proper utilization of additions to and renovations of existing school buildings or facilities and to acquire, construct and equip new school buildings and facilities, acquire the property necessary therefor and pay the expenses incident thereto. Said bonded indebtedness shall be incurred by the City of Atlanta in all respects in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution except that the same may be incurred from time to time, but not later than December 31, 1970, upon request of the Board of Education of the City of Atlanta and shall not be conditioned upon approval by the voters in a referendum or election, and provided further that said indebtedness shall be in addition to any other indebtedness which the city is now or may hereafter be authorized to incur. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 1589, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4564. 
Sec. 2-63. - Bonds for nonschool purposes. 
Article VII of the Constitution, as amended, is further amended by adding at the end thereof a new section to be appropriately numbered and to read as follows: 
Section _____ Paragraph I. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the City of Atlanta may issue general obligation bonds for any lawful public purpose other than for school purposes, without submitting the issuance thereof to the voters of said city at a referendum, subject to the following restrictions and limitations: 
(1)  The issuance of such bonds shall be authorized at a public meeting held for such purpose after at least 10 days' notice thereof in the official organ of said city, and in at least one (1) of the daily newspapers of said city. Within 30 days after said public hearing, any person opposed to the issuance of said bonds without a referendum may prepare a petition for a referendum, to be filed with the city clerk of the City of Atlanta. If such petition shall contain the signatures of not less than five percent (5%) of the registered voters of said city, and such fact shall be determined by the clerk, the clerk shall call an election to be held in said city, at which time the question of the issuance of the bonds shall be submitted to the vote of the qualified voters of the City of Atlanta, at an election to be held not earlier than 30 days nor later than 45 days from the date of said call; provided, however, that the board of aldermen, upon the filing of said petition for referendum, may withdraw the proposal from further consideration and decline to issue the bonds, either with or without a referendum. 
(2)  Should the board make such an election to withdraw, no new public meeting to reconsider the same proposal may be had within a period of 90 days following the date on which the aforesaid petition for referendum was filed. 
(3)  Not more than $4,000,000.00 in aggregate principal amount of such bonds so issued without a referendum shall be issued in any fiscal year. 
(4)  The aggregate of all outstanding bonds, including those issued by vote of the people in a referendum and those issued under this amendment without a referendum, shall not exceed the limitations provided elsewhere in this article. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 1586, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4824. 
Sec. 2-64. - Revenue bonds for off-street parking. 
Article IX, section VIII, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, relating to the issuance of revenue bonds, be and the same is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
"The City of Atlanta shall have power and authority to issue and sell revenue bonds subject to and in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Act of the General Assembly approved March 31, 1937, known as the `Revenue Bond Law of 1937,' [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.] as amended and as the same may be hereafter amended, to provide funds for the purchase of lands and the construction and establishment thereon of off-street vehicle parking lots, parking structures, parking buildings, parking garages, and parking facilities; provided, however, that such parking lots, parking structures, parking buildings, parking garages, and parking facilities shall be contiguous to, adjacent to, related to or incidental to municipally owned buildings or structures. Said city shall have power and authority to equip, maintain, and operate such parking lots, parking structures, parking buildings, parking garages, and parking facilities." 
(1980 Ga. Laws, page 2112, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1976) was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4830. 
Chapter 3 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Removal or demolition of unfit buildings or structures. 
The General Assembly may establish procedures whereby any municipal corporation having a population of more than 400,000 according to the last or any future United States decennial census may carry out and enforce the removal or demolition or closing of buildings or structures, and clearing of premises, not of necessity a part of any slum or blighted area, at public expense, after an administrative determination that a building or structure is unfit for human habitation, or is unfit for commercial, industrial or business occupancy or use and is economically unrepairable, under standards for such determination as prescribed by the General Assembly, and which may provide for commencement of an administrative proceeding in rem provided the owner and person having an interest in the real property involved are given notice and an opportunity to appear and be heard on the question of unfitness or unrepairability of the building or structure at issue. All expenses of such removal or demolition, or closing and clearing of premises and all costs of any such proceeding may be included in the amount of the lien against the property on which the building or structure is located. All such proceedings and work shall constitute and are hereby declared to be a governmental function undertaken for public purposes, and the powers of taxation and eminent domain may be exercised and public funds expended in furtherance thereof. 
(1974 Ga. Laws, page 1663, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1976) art. IX, § IV was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4566. 
Secs. 3-2—3-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 3-36. - Short title. 
This Act shall be referred to as the "Atlanta Community Improvement District Act." 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 1) 
Sec. 3-37. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this Act shall be to provide for the creation of one or more community improvement districts within the City of Atlanta, Georgia, and such districts shall be created for the provision, acceleration, supplementation, or enhancement of such of the following governmental services and facilities as may be provided for in the resolution activating each district created hereby, or any supplemental resolution amending same: 
(1)  Construction and maintenance of local, collector, and arterial streets as shown on the city's street classification map or as otherwise included in the city's most recently adopted Comprehensive Development Plan, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights, and devices to control the flow of traffic on local, collector, and arterial streets; 
(2)  Parks and recreational areas and facilities; 
(3)  Stormwater and sewage collection and disposal systems; 
(4)  Development, storage, treatment, purification, and distribution of water; 
(5)  Public transportation; 
(6)  Terminal and dock facilities and parking facilities; and 
(7)  Such other services and facilities as may be provided for by general law. 
(b)  A community improvement district is intended to provide a means to address needs for the above governmental services and facilities as may be necessary in high-growth, high-intensity, nonresidential areas. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 2) 
Sec. 3-38. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Agricultural" means the growing of crops for sale or raising of animals for sale or use, including the growing of field crops, fruit or nut trees, the raising of livestock or poultry, and the operation of dairies, horse-boarding facilities, and riding stables. 
(2)  "Board" means the governing body created for the governance of each community improvement district herein authorized. 
(3)  "Bonds" or "general obligation bonds" means any bonds of a district which are authorized to be issued under the Constitution and laws of Georgia, including refunding bonds but not including notes or other obligations of a district. 
(4)  "Caucus of electors" means for each district the meeting of electors hereinafter provided for at which the elected board members of the district are elected. A quorum at such caucus shall consist of those electors present, and a majority of those present and voting is necessary to elect board members. No proxy votes may be cast. 
(5)  "City council" means the Atlanta City Council. 
(6)  "City governing authority or body" means the Atlanta City Council. 
(7)  "Cost of the project" or "cost of any project" means and includes: 
a.  All costs of acquisition (by purchase or otherwise), construction, assembly, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation incurred in connection with any project or any part of any project; 
b.  All costs of real property, fixtures, or personal property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project or for any facilities related thereto, including, but not limited to, the cost of all land, estates for years, easements, rights, improvements, water rights, connections for utility services, fees, franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, and certificates; and the cost of preparation of any application therefor and the cost of all fixtures, machinery, equipment (including all transportation equipment and rolling stock), furniture, and other property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project; 
c.  All financing charges and loan fees and all interest on bonds, notes, or other obligations of a district which accrue or are paid prior to and during the period of construction of a project and during such additional period as the board may reasonably determine to be necessary to place such project in operation; 
d.  All costs of engineering, surveying, and architectural and legal services and all expenses incurred by engineers, surveyors, architects, and attorneys in connection with any project; 
e.  All expenses for inspection of any project; 
f.  All fees of fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees for bondholders under any trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement; all expenses incurred by any such fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees; and all other costs and expenses incurred relative to the issuances of any bonds, notes, or other obligations for any project; 
g.  All expenses of or incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of any projects; 
h.  All costs of plans and specifications for any project; 
i.  All costs of title insurance and examinations of title with respect to any project; 
j.  Repayment of any loans made for the advance payment of any part of any of the foregoing costs, including interest thereon and any other expenses of such loans; 
k.  Administrative expenses of the board and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any project or the financing thereof or the placing of any project in operation; and 
l.  The establishment of a fund or funds for the creation of a debt service reserve, a renewal and replacement reserve, or such other funds or reserves as the board may approve with respect to the financing and operation of any project and as may be authorized by any bond resolution, trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement pursuant to the provisions of which the issuance of any bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district may be authorized. 
Any cost, obligation, or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of proceeds of bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by the district. 
(8)  "District" means the geographical area designated as such by the resolution of the governing body consenting to the creation of the community improvement district or as thereafter modified by any subsequent resolution of the governing body within which the district is or is to be located, or a body corporate and politic being a community improvement district created and activated pursuant hereto, as the context requires or permits. 
(9)  "Electors" means the owners of real property within the district which is then subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board, as appear on the most recent ad valorem real property tax return records of Fulton or DeKalb counties, or both, or one officer or director of a corporate elector, one trustee of a trust which is an elector, one partner of a partnership elector, or one designated representative of an elector whose designation is made in writing to the appropriate Fulton County or DeKalb County tax commissioner, on a form satisfactory to the commissioner, at least eight days prior to an election. An owner of property subject to taxes, fees, or assessments levied by the board shall have one vote for an election based on numerical majority, and one vote for each $1,000.00 (or fraction thereof) in assessed value of the owner's property for an election based on value majority. An owner of multiple parcels has one vote, not one vote per parcel, for an election based on numerical majority, and one vote for each $1,000.00 (or fraction thereof) in assessed value of the aggregate of the owner's properties subject to taxes, fees, or assessments levied by the board, for an election based on value majority. Multiple owners of one parcel have one vote for elections based on numerical majority, and one vote for each $1,000.00 (or fraction thereof) in assessed value of the owners' property for elections based on value majority, which must be cast by one of their number who is designated in writing by such multiple owners as their elector. 
(10)  "Equitably apportioned among the properties subject to such taxes, fees, and assessments according to the need for governmental services and facilities created by the degree of density of development of each such property," with reference to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board, means that the burden of the taxes, fees, and assessments shall be apportioned among the properties subject thereto based upon the values established in the most recent ad valorem tax reassessment of such properties certified by the chairman of the Joint City-County (Atlanta-Fulton County) Board of Tax Assessors or DeKalb County Board of Tax Assessors, or may be apportioned among the properties subject thereto in direct or approximate proportion to the receipt of services or benefit derived from the improvements or other activities for which the taxes, fees, or assessments are to be expended, or may be apportioned in any other manner or combination of manners deemed equitable by the board, including but not limited to the recognition of differential benefit which may reasonably be expected to accrue to new land development in contrast to lands and improvements already in existence at the time of creation of the community improvement district. 
(11)  "Forestry" means the planting and growing of trees for sale in a program which includes reforestation of harvested trees, regular underbrush and undesirable growth clearing, fertilizing, pruning, thinning, cruising, and marking which indicate an active tree-farming operation; it does not include the casual growing of trees on land otherwise idle or held for investment, even though some harvesting of trees may occur thereon. 
(12)  "Hereby," "herein," "hereinunder," and "herewith" mean under this Act. 
(13)  "Mayor" means the mayor of the City of Atlanta. 
(14)  "Project" means the acquisition, construction, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation of land, interests in land, buildings, structures, facilities, or other improvements, including operation of facilities or other improvements, located or to be located within or otherwise providing service to the district and the acquisition, installation, modification, renovation, rehabilitation, or furnishing of fixtures, machinery, equipment, furniture, or other property of any nature whatsoever used on, in, or in connection with any such land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, or other improvement; the creation, provision, enhancement, or supplementing of public services (such as fire, police, and other services), provided that same do not conflict with or duplicate existing public services; and all for the essential public purposes set forth in [section 3-37 of this article]. 
(15)  "Property owner" or "owner of real property" means any entity or person shown as a taxpayer for one or more parcels of real estate on the most recent ad valorem tax records of Fulton County or DeKalb County, or both, within the district as certified by the appropriate Fulton County tax commissioner or DeKalb County tax commissioner. Multiple owners of one parcel shall constitute one property owner and shall designate in writing one of their number to represent the whole. 
(16)  "Property used nonresidentially" means property or any portion thereof used for neighborhood shopping, planned shopping center, general commercial, transient lodging facilities, tourist services, office or institutional, office services, light industry, heavy industry, central business district, parking, or other commercial or business use or vacant land zoned or approved for any of the aforementioned uses, which does not include residential. 
(17)  "Residential" means a specific work or improvement undertaken primarily to provide single-family or multifamily dwelling accommodations for persons and families and such community facilities as may be incidental or appurtenant thereto. 
(18)  "Taxpayer" means any entity or person paying ad valorem taxes on real property, whether on one or more parcels of property within the district. Multiple owners of one parcel shall constitute one taxpayer and shall designate in writing one of their number to represent the whole. 
(19)  "Value" or "assessed value" of property means the values established in the most recent ad valorem tax reassessment of such properties certified by chairman of the Joint City-County (Atlanta-Fulton County) Board of Tax Assessors or DeKalb County Board of Tax Assessors. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 3) 
Sec. 3-39. - Creation. 
(a)  Pursuant to Article IX, Section VII, of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended in 1984 (said amendment being set out at 1984 Ga. Laws, page 1703 et seq.), there is created one or more community improvement districts to be located in the City of Atlanta, Georgia, each of which shall be activated upon compliance with the conditions hereinafter provided, and which shall be governed by a board as hereinafter constituted. The conditions for such activation shall be: 
(1)  The adoption of a resolution by the city governing authority consenting to the creation of each community improvement district and imposing such conditions on the projects and activities which may be undertaken as will ensure their compatibility with adopted city policies and planning for the area; and 
(2)  Written consent to the creation of the community improvement district by: 
a.  A majority of the owners of real property within the district which shall be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board of the district; and 
b.  The owners of real property within the district which constitutes at least 75 percent by value of all real property within the district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board and for this purpose value shall be determined by the most recent approved county ad valorem tax digest. 
(b)  The written consents provided for by paragraph (2) of subsection (a) of this section shall be submitted to the appropriate Fulton County or DeKalb County tax commissioner, or both, who shall certify whether subparagraphs (a) and (b) of said paragraph (2) have been satisfied with respect to each such proposed district. 
(c)  No district or board created hereunder shall transact any business or exercise any powers hereunder until the foregoing conditions are met. A copy of such resolutions shall be filed with the Secretary of State, who shall maintain a record of all districts activated hereunder, and with the Department of Community Affairs. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 4) 
Sec. 3-40. - Administration, appointment, and election of board members. 
(a)  Each district created pursuant hereto shall be administered by a board composed of nine board members to be appointed and elected as hereinafter provided. One board member shall be appointed by the mayor; two members shall be appointed by the president of the city council (one of whom shall be the current chairperson of the finance committee of the city council); and the remaining board members shall be elected by the owners of real property within the district subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board. The appointed board members shall serve at the pleasure of the city governing body for terms in office not to exceed four years. The initially elected board members shall serve for terms of office as follows: one-half thereof, or one less than half if an odd number, shall serve for two years, and the remaining board members shall serve for four years, respectively. Thereafter, all terms of office shall be for four years, including the appointed board members who serve at the pleasure of the city governing body. 
(b)  The initial board members to be elected as provided above shall be elected in a caucus of electors which shall be held within 60 days after the adoption of the resolutions and obtaining the written consents herein provided at such time and place within the district as the governing body of the municipality shall designate after notice thereof shall have been given to said electors by publishing same in the legal organ of Fulton or DeKalb counties, or both, as hereinafter provided. Thereafter, there shall be conducted biennially, not later than 60 days following the last day for filing ad valorem real property tax returns in Fulton or DeKalb counties, or both, a caucus of said electors at such time and place within the district as the board shall designate in such notice for the purpose of electing board members to those positions which have terms expiring or are vacant. If a vacancy occurs in an elected position on the board, the board shall, within 60 days thereof, call a special election to fill the same to be held within 60 days of the call unless such vacancy occurs within 180 days of the next regularly scheduled election, in which case a special election may, but need not, be called. For any election held hereunder, notice thereof shall be given to said electors by publishing notice thereof in the legal organ of Fulton County or DeKalb County, or both, on four dates, at least 45 days, 31 days, 17 days, and ten days, respectively, prior to such election. 
(c)  One board member shall be elected by majority vote of the electors present and voting at the caucus, on the basis of one vote for each elector. Said board member shall be elected to a term of office of two years at the initial caucus of electors when the board is first formed, and to terms of office of four years thereafter. Five board members shall be elected by majority of the votes cast by the electors present and voting at the caucus, with each elector having one vote for each $1,000.00 (or fraction thereof) in assessed value of the property owned by the elector subject to taxes, fees, or assessments levied by the board. All vacancies to be filled through election shall be filled by majority vote in the same manner as the board member previously holding the seat. 
(d)  The board members shall be subject to recall as any other elected public official by the electors hereinabove defined. 
(e)  Board members, including appointed board members (with the exception of the chairman of the finance committee of the city council), shall be electors within the district. If a board member ceases to be an elector, such board member's position shall be declared vacant as of the date of the event terminating such status. 
(f)  The board members shall receive no compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. They shall elect one of their members as chairman and another as vice-chairman and shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer or a secretary-treasurer, either of whom may but need not be a member of the board. 
(g)  O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), known as the "Georgia Election Code," shall not apply to the election of district board members. Should a vacancy in office occur of a district board member and the regular caucus of electors is more than six months in the future, a special election shall be called to fill such vacancy, unless filled by appointment as hereinabove required. The district board may adopt such bylaws not inconsistent herewith to provide for any matter concerning such elections. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 5) 
Sec. 3-41. - Taxes, fees, and assessments. 
(a)  The board may levy taxes, fees, and assessments within the district only on real property used nonresidentially, specifically excluding all property exempt from ad valorem taxation under the Constitution or laws of the State of Georgia and all property used for residential, agricultural, or forestry purposes and specifically excluding tangible personal property and intangible property. Any tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall not exceed 2.5 percent of the aggregate assessed value of all such real property. The taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board shall be equitably apportioned among the properties subject to such taxes, fees, and assessments according to the need for governmental services and facilities created by the degree of density of development of each such property. The proceeds of taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board shall be used only for the purpose of providing governmental services and facilities which are specially required by the degree of density of development within the district and not for the purpose of providing those governmental services and facilities which are provided to the City of Atlanta as a whole. Any tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall be collected by Fulton County or DeKalb County, or both, in the same manner as taxes, fees, and assessments are levied by Fulton County, DeKalb County, or the City of Atlanta, respectively. Delinquent taxes shall bear the same interest and penalties as Fulton County, DeKalb County, or City of Atlanta ad valorem taxes, respectively, and may be enforced and collected in the same manner. The proceeds of taxes, fees, and assessments so levied, less a fee to cover the costs of collection of one percent thereof, but not more than $25,000.00 in any one calendar year, shall be transmitted by Fulton County or DeKalb County, or both, to the board and shall be expended by the board only for the purposes authorized hereby. 
(b)  The board shall levy the above-provided taxes between January 1 and June 1 each calendar year and notify in writing the collecting governing body or bodies by June 15 each year so they may include the levy on their regular ad valorem tax bills. 
(c)  If, but for this provision, a parcel of real property is removed from a district or otherwise would become nontaxable, it shall continue to bear its tax millage then extant upon such event, for bonded indebtedness of the district then outstanding, until said bonded indebtedness then outstanding is paid or refunded. 
(d)  In accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-7, each property paying taxes, fees, or assessments levied by the board for any public facility as set forth in section 3-37 of this article, shall receive a credit equal to the present value of all such taxes, fees, and assessments toward any impact fee as may be levied by the City of Atlanta against said property for system improvements, as defined under O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 71 (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq.), known as the "Georgia Development Impact Fee Act," which are in the same category as said public facility. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 6) 
Sec. 3-42. - Boundaries of the districts. 
(a)  The boundaries of each district shall be as designated as such by the city council as set forth in the resolutions required in section 3-39 of this article, or as may thereafter be added as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The boundaries of a district may be increased after the initial creation of a district pursuant to the following: 
(1)  Written consent of a majority of the owners of real property within the area sought to be annexed and which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board of the district is first obtained; 
(2)  Written consent of owners of real property within the area sought to be annexed which constitutes at least 75 percent by value of the property which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board and, for this purpose, value shall be determined by the most recent county ad valorem tax digest; 
(3)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the annexation by the board of the district; and 
(4)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the annexation by the city council. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 7) 
Sec. 3-43. - Debt. 
Each district may incur debt without regard to the requirements of Article IX, Section V of the Constitution of Georgia, or any other provision of law prohibiting or restricting the borrowing of money or the creation of debt by political subdivisions of the State of Georgia, which debt shall be backed by the full faith, credit, and taxing power of the district but shall not be an obligation of the State of Georgia or any other unit of government of the State of Georgia other than the district. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 8) 
Sec. 3-44. - Cooperation with local governments. 
The services and facilities provided pursuant hereto shall be provided for in a cooperation agreement executed jointly by the board and the governing body of the City of Atlanta. The provisions of this section shall in no way limit the authority of the City of Atlanta to provide services or facilities within the district; and the City of Atlanta shall retain full and complete authority and control over any of its facilities located within its respective areas of any district. Said control shall include, but not be limited to, the modification of, access to, and degree and type of services provided through or by facilities of the municipality. Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to limit or preempt the application of any governmental laws, ordinances, resolutions, or regulations to the district or the services or facilities provided therein. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 9) 
Sec. 3-45. - Powers. 
(a)  Each district and its board created pursuant hereto shall have powers, as determined by resolution of the governing authority, which powers are deemed necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions hereof including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(1)  To bring and defend actions; 
(2)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(3)  To make and execute contracts, agreements, and other instruments necessary or convenient to exercise the powers of the board or to further the public purposes for which the district is created, including, but not limited to, contracts for construction of projects, leases of projects, contracts for sale of projects, agreements for loans to finance projects, and contracts with respect to the use of projects; 
(4)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character, or any interest therein, in furtherance of the public purposes of the district; 
(5)  To finance (by loan, grant, lease, or otherwise), construct, erect, assemble, purchase, acquire, own, repair, remodel, renovate, rehabilitate, modify, maintain, extend, improve, install, sell, equip, expand, and to operate or manage projects and to pay the cost of any project from the proceeds of bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district or any other funds of the district, or from any contributions or loans by persons, corporations, partnerships (whether limited or general), or other entities, all of which the board is authorized to receive, accept, and use; 
(6)  To borrow money to further or carry out its public purposes and to execute bonds, notes, other obligations, leases, trust indentures, trust agreements, agreements for the sale of its bonds, notes, or other obligations, loan agreements, security agreements, assignments, and such other agreements or instruments as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the board, to evidence and to provide security for such borrowing; 
(7)  To issue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district and use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project and otherwise to further or carry out the public purposes of the district and to pay all costs of the board incidental to, or necessary and appropriate to, furthering or carrying out such purposes; 
(8)  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, whether public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in furtherance of the district's public purposes and to accept and use the same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by such federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
(9)  To enter into agreements with the federal government or any agency thereof to use the facilities or services of the federal government or any agency thereof in order to further or carry out the public purposes of the district; 
(10)  To contract for any period, not exceeding 50 years, with the State of Georgia, state institutions, or any municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of this state for the use by the district of any facilities or services of the state or any such state institution, municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of this state, or for the use by any state institution or any municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of the state of any facilities or services of the district, provided that such contracts shall deal with such activities and transactions as the district contracts are authorized by law to undertake; 
(11)  To receive and use the proceeds of any tax levied by any county or any municipal corporation to pay the costs of any project or for any other purpose for which the board may use its own funds pursuant hereto; 
(12)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and devises of money and property of any kind and to administer trusts; 
(13)  To use any real property, personal property, or fixtures or any interest therein or to rent or lease such property to or from others or make contracts with respect to the use thereof or to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or grant options for any such property, to operate or contract for operation of facilities and other improvements in any manner as it deems to be to the best advantage of the district and the public purposes thereof; 
(14)  To appoint, select, and employ engineers, surveyors, architects, urban or city planners, fiscal agents, attorneys, and others and to fix their compensation and pay their expenses; 
(15)  To encourage and promote the improvement and development of the district and to make, contract for, or otherwise cause to be made long-range plans or proposals for the district in cooperation with the City of Atlanta; 
(16)  To adopt bylaws governing the conduct of business by the board, the election and duties of officers of the board, and other matters which the board determines to deal with in its bylaws; 
(17)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of this state to public or private corporations which is not in conflict with the public purposes of the district; 
(18)  To create, provide, enhance, or supplement public services such as fire, police, and other such services as may be deemed necessary, provided that said public services do not conflict with or duplicate existing City of Atlanta services; and 
(19)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers conferred hereby. 
(b)  The powers enumerated in the resolution of the governing authority are to be drawn from those powers enumerated herein and elsewhere in this Act. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 10) 
Sec. 3-46. - Bonds—Generally. 
(a)  Notes or other obligations issued by the district other than general obligation bonds shall be paid solely from the property pledged to pay such notes or other obligations. General obligation bonds issued by any district shall constitute a general obligation of the district to the repayment of which the full faith and credit and taxing power of the district shall be pledged. 
(b)  All bonds, notes, and other obligations of any district shall be authorized by resolution of its board, adopted by a majority vote of the board members at a regular or special meeting. 
(c)  Bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bear such date or dates, shall mature at such time or times (not more than 40 years from their respective dates), shall bear interest at such rate or rates (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time), shall be subject to redemption on such terms, and shall contain such other terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions as the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds, notes, or other obligations may permit or provide. The terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions contained in or provided or permitted by any resolution of the board authorizing the issuance of such bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bind the board members of the district then in office and their successors. 
(d)  The board shall have power from time to time and whenever it deems it expedient to refund any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether or not the bonds to be refunded have matured, and may issue bonds partly to refund bonds then outstanding and partly for any other purpose permitted hereunder. The refunding bonds may be exchanged for the bonds to be refunded, with such cash adjustments as may be agreed upon, or may be sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase or redemption of the bonds to be refunded. 
(e)  There shall be no limitation upon the interest rates of any maximum interest rate or rates on any bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district; and the usury laws of this state shall not apply to bonds, notes, or other obligations of these districts. 
(f)  Bonds issued by a district may be in such form, either coupon or fully registered, or both coupon and fully registered, and may be subject to such exchangeability and transferability provisions as the bond resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or any indenture or trust agreement may provide. 
(g)  Bonds shall bear a certificate of validation. The signature of the clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County or DeKalb County, or both, may be made on the certificate of validation of such bonds by facsimile or by manual execution, stating the date on which such bonds were validated; and such entry shall be original evidence of the fact of judgment and shall be received as original evidence in any court in this state. 
(h)  In lieu of specifying the rate or rates of interest which such bonds are to bear, and the principal amount and maturities of such said bonds, the notice to the district attorney or the Attorney General, the notice to the public of the time, place, and date of the validation hearing, and the petition and complaint for validation may state that the bonds when issued will bear interest at a rate not exceeding a maximum per annum rate of interest (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time) and that the principal amount will not exceed and the final maturity date will not be later than as specified in such notices and petition and complaint or may state that, in the event the bonds are to bear different rates of interest for different maturity dates, none of such rates will exceed the maximum rate (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time) so specified; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting or restricting the right of a board to sell such bonds at a discount, even if in doing so the effective interest cost resulting therefrom would exceed the maximum per annum interest rate specified in such notices and in the petition and complaint. 
(i)  The terms "cost of the project" and "cost of any project" shall have the meaning prescribed herein whenever those terms are referred to in bond resolutions of a board, in bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district, or in notices or proceedings to validate such bonds, notes, or other obligations of a district. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 11) 
Sec. 3-47. - Authorized contents of agreements and instruments of the board generally; use of proceeds of sale of bonds, notes, etc.; subsequent issues of bonds, notes, etc. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations and procedures provided by this section and by the immediately preceding section, the agreements or instruments executed by a board may contain such provisions not inconsistent with law as shall be determined by such board. 
(b)  The proceeds derived from the sale of all bonds, notes, and other obligations issued by a district shall be held and used for the ultimate purpose of paying, directly or indirectly as permitted herein, all or part of the cost of any projects, or for the purpose of refunding any bonds, notes, or other obligations issued in accordance hereunder. 
(c)  Issuance by a board of one or more series of bonds, notes, or other obligations for one or more purposes shall not preclude it from issuing other bonds, notes, or other obligations in connection with the same project or with any other projects; but the proceeding wherein any subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations are issued shall recognize and protect any prior loan agreement, security agreement, or other agreement or instrument made for any prior issue of bonds, notes, or other obligations, unless in the resolution authorizing such prior issue the right is expressly reserved to the board to issue subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations on a parity with such prior issue. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 12) 
Sec. 3-48. - Construction; applicability of Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973"; notice, proceeding, publication, referendum. 
This Act shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. The offer, sale, or issuance of bonds, notes, or other obligations by a district shall not be subject to regulation under O.C.G.A. tit. 10, ch. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 10-5-1 et seq.), the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973." No notice, proceeding, or publication except those required hereby shall be necessary to the performance of any act authorized hereby, nor shall any such act be subject to referendum. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 13) 
Sec. 3-49. - Dissolution. 
(a)  Any district activated under the provisions of this Act may be dissolved. The conditions for such dissolution shall be: 
(1)  The adoption of a resolution approving of the dissolution of each community improvement district by the city governing authority; 
(2)  The written consent to the dissolution of the community improvement district by: 
a.  A majority of the owners of real property within the district who are subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board of the district; 
b.  The owners of real property constituting at least 75 percent by value of all real property within the district who are to be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board. For this purpose, value shall be determined by the most recently approved county ad valorem tax digest; and 
(3)  The written consent provided for above shall be submitted to the Fulton or DeKalb County tax commissioner, as applicable, who shall certify whether paragraph (2) of this subsection has been satisfied with respect to each proposed district dissolution. 
(b)  At the official caucus of electors at which board members are to be elected in the sixth year following creation of the district, and every sixth year thereafter, the question shall be put to the electors present to dissolve the community improvement district. Upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the electors present and voting, who shall represent at least 75 percent of the votes cast on the basis of value, the board shall send a ballot to each owner of property subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board for a vote on the dissolution. Upon receipt of ballots consenting to the dissolution from a majority of the property owners, who shall represent at least 75 percent of the assessed value of said properties, the board shall request dissolution by the city governing authority and shall forward said ballots to the Fulton or DeKalb County tax commissioner for certification. 
(c)  In the event that successful action is taken pursuant to this section to dissolve the district, the dissolution shall become effective at such time as all debt obligations of the district have been satisfied. Following a successful dissolution action and until the dissolution becomes effective, no new projects may be undertaken, obligations or debts incurred, or property acquired. 
(d)  Upon a successful dissolution action, all noncash assets of the district other than public facilities or land or easements to be used for such public facilities, as described in section 3-37 of this article, shall be reduced to cash and, along with all other cash on hand, shall be applied to the repayment of any or all debt obligations of the district. Any cash remaining after all outstanding obligations are satisfied shall be refunded to each property owner in direct proportion to the total amount in taxes, fees, or assessments paid by the property relative to the total revenues paid by all properties in the district. 
(e)  When a dissolution becomes effective, the city governing authority shall take title to all public facilities or land or easements to be used for such public facilities previously in the ownership of the district and all taxes, fees, and assessments of the district shall cease to be levied and collected. 
(f)  A district may be reactivated in the same manner as an original activation. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3653, § 14) 
Chapter 4 - COURTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1—4-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COURTS 

Sec. 4-36. - Court authorized. 
Article VI, section I of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof a new paragraph to be known as paragraph III, to read as follows: 
Paragraph III. The General Assembly may, in its discretion, create a new court or system of courts in and for each city of this state having a population of more than 300,000 according to the United States decennial census of 1960, and any future such United States census, conferring upon such new court or system of courts jurisdiction to issue warrants, try cases and impose sentences thereon: 
(1)  In all misdemeanor cases arising under the act known as the Georgia State Highway Patrol Act of 1937, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, and all other traffic laws of the state, as the same exist or may hereafter be amended. 
(2)  In all misdemeanor cases arising under any law of the state regulating the ownership and operation of motor vehicles within its territorial jurisdiction, as the same exists on January 1, 1969, or as may thereafter be extended, and 
(3)  In all cases arising under any charter provision or ordinance of any such city regulating traffic or the ownership or operation of motor vehicles, together with provisions as to rules, organization and procedure in such courts and as to new trials and the correction of errors in and by such courts and with such further provisions for the correction of errors by the Superior Court, the Court of Appeals or the Supreme Court as the General Assembly may from time to time, in its discretion, provide or authorize. Any court or system of courts so established shall not be subject to the rules of uniformity in paragraph I, section IX of article VI of the Constitution of 1945. The General Assembly is authorized to delegate to the governing authorities of any such municipality any and all powers necessary and appropriate for the establishment, operation and maintenance of such court. 
In the event the territorial limits of any such city is decreased or increased in size, the jurisdiction of any court created pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph shall likewise be decreased or increased, as the case may be. 
In the event a new court or system of courts is created by the General Assembly pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph, the General Assembly, in its discretion, may abolish the jurisdiction of other courts to issue warrants, try cases and impose sentences in cases upon which jurisdiction is conferred upon the courts or systems of courts created pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph, and to further provide that all such cases pending in such court or system of courts shall be transferred to the court or system of courts created pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph. 
(1967 Ga. Laws, page 963, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4820. 
Sec. 4-37. - Establishment. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Article VI, Section I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended, and the provisions of that constitutional amendment authorizing the General Assembly to create a new court or system of courts in each city having a population of more than 300,000 and to provide jurisdiction of such court or system of courts (Res. Act No. 81; H.R. 167-510; Ga. L. 1967, p. 963), which constitutional amendment was specifically continued in force and effect on and after July 1, 1987, as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia by an Act approved March 26, 1986 (Ga. L. 1986, p. 4820) [see § 4-36 hereof], there is hereby established in each city of this state having a population of 300,000 or more according to the United States decennial census of 1990 or any future such a court to be known as the city court of such city. Such courts shall be considered courts of record and shall have a seal of appropriate design prescribed by the governing authority of each city; and the minutes, records, and other books and files that are required by law to be kept for the superior courts shall, in the same manner, so far as the jurisdiction of state courts may render necessary, be kept in and for such courts. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 1) 
Sec. 4-38. - Legislative determination. 
It is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination: 
(1)  That the problem of the enforcement of the criminal laws and ordinances involving the operation or ownership of motor vehicles upon the streets and highways of the state is particularly acute in areas where there are densely concentrated populations; 
(2)  That such traffic laws and regulations may be enforced more effectively, efficiently, and justly by the creation of courts specifically designed for such service in congested areas; and that such courts are state courts of limited jurisdiction. 
(3)  That the provisions of this Act will promote the general defense and public welfare. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 2) 
Sec. 4-39. - Jurisdiction. 
Each such court shall have jurisdiction coextensive with the territorial limits of the city in which it is located over: 
(1)  All crimes and offenses under the laws of the state relating to and regulating traffic, and all other crimes and offenses arising out of the same occurrence as such traffic offense, not above the grade of misdemeanor and not exclusively cognizable in the superior courts; provided, however, no defendant shall be tried on a misdemeanor charge in any county except where the alleged offense was committed. 
(2)  All offenses against the duly enacted laws and ordinances of such city relating to and regulating traffic, and all other offenses against laws and ordinances of such city arising out of the same occurrence as such traffic offense. Punishment for such offenses shall be imposed as provided by laws and ordinances duly enacted by the governing authority of such city. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 3) 
Sec. 4-40. - Judges—Qualifications; oath; compensation; restriction on practice of law. 
(a)  There shall be a chief judge of each such court and such number of judges as may be necessary to conduct the business of the court. 
(b)  Each judge shall have been for at least one year prior to appointment and continue to be during the term of office a resident of the city in which he or she is selected to serve, shall have been a resident of the state for at least three years next preceding the beginning of his or her term of office, shall as of such date be at least 25 years of age, and shall have been admitted to practice law for at least five years. Any judge holding office in such courts on the effective date of this Act but not a resident of the city as provided herein shall be eligible for retention in office as provided herein. 
(c)  Before discharging his or her duties, each judge shall take the same oath as judges of the superior courts. 
(d)  The annual salaries of the chief judge and of each judge shall be fixed by the governing authority of each city. However, the annual salaries of the chief judge and judges shall be no less than 90 percent of the annual salaries of the judges of the state court within the territorial jurisdiction of said court. 
(e)  A full-time judge of such courts shall not engage in the private practice of law or hold any other public office or office in any political party. Any person appointed a judge pro hac vice pursuant to the provisions herein may engage in the private practice of law in other courts but may not practice in his or her own court, appear on any matter as to which that judge has exercised jurisdiction, qualify for or hold any other public office, or hold an office in any political party. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 4) 
Sec. 4-41. - Same—Vacancies; method of appointment; removal; retirement. 
(a)  In the event of a vacancy in office of a judge of the court for any cause, the mayor shall fill such vacancy by appointing one of three qualified persons nominated by a judicial nominating commission constituted for the purpose of nominating city court judges in the territorial jurisdiction. All members of such commission shall reside within the city where such court is located. If such a commission does not exist within the territorial jurisdiction, the mayor shall appoint one of three qualified persons nominated by the judges of the superior court having territorial jurisdiction in the county where such court is located. Each judge so appointed shall hold office for a term ending with the regular city election following the date of appointment. 
(b)  Judges of a city court shall be subject to discipline, removal, and involuntary retirement pursuant to Article VI, Section VII, Paragraphs VI and VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 5) 
Sec. 4-42. - Retention of judges; term of office; failure to be retained. 
(a)  A judge of such court who shall desire to retain judicial office for a succeeding term shall file, with the municipal clerk not more than 90 days nor less than 60 days prior to each regular municipal election prior to the expiration of the judge's then term of office, a declaration of intent to run for another term. 
(b)  Upon the filing of the above declaration, a question shall be placed upon the appropriate ballot of such election within the territorial jurisdiction of the court as follows: 
"Shall Judge (Name of judge) of the (Name of the city) City Court be retained in office? 
_____ Yes, to retain 
_____ No, against retention." 
(c)  As of the November, 1997, regular municipal elections in the territorial jurisdiction where such courts are located, if a majority of those voting on such question vote to retain a judge, the judge is thereupon retained for a four-year term commencing on the first Monday in January following each such election. If a majority of those voting on such question vote not to retain a judge, a vacancy shall exist upon the expiration of the term being served by the judge. Such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(d)  Any judge failing to be retained by electors shall be ineligible for appointment to any such court for a period of four years. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 6) 
Sec. 4-43. - Chief judge; selection; chief judge pro tempore; duties. 
(a)  The judges of each such court shall elect by majority vote a chief judge from one of their number for a term of two years. The chief judge may succeed himself or herself for successive terms. A majority vote of all judges, including the chief judge, shall be required to remove an incumbent from the office of chief judge. In case of illness or temporary absence or incapacity of the chief judge, the judges shall select by majority vote one of their number to act as chief judge pro tempore. 
(b)  If no chief judge has been elected within 30 days after the creation of a vacancy, the judge senior in length of continuous judicial service on such court shall be ex officio chief judge. 
(c)  The chief judge of the court shall be responsible for the general superintendence of the business of the court. He or she shall promulgate all rules necessary for the supervision, conduct, and administration of said court, including but not limited to the following: determine the number of divisions into which the court shall be divided and assign the judges or judges pro hac vice to duty therein; prescribe the days and hours for the sessions of the various divisions of the court; prescribe the form and manner for the preparation and keeping of such calendars, dockets, and records of such court; call and preside at meetings of the judges of the court; require such reports from the judges, judges pro hac vice, solicitor, clerk, and other court personnel as deemed necessary and proper; prepare and submit the budget of said court to the mayor and city council and other appropriate departments, committees, and agencies; and perform other such duties as required by law. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 7) 
Sec. 4-44. - Authority of judges generally. 
The judges of such courts shall have the same authority as judges of the superior courts to: 
(1)  Compel the production of books, papers, and other documentary evidence in the possession of any party; 
(2)  Enforce obedience to their orders, judgments, and sentences with the same authority as judges of superior courts; 
(3)  Compel the attendance of witnesses or all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by issuance of summonses, subpoenas, warrants, orders, and all other processes in cases within its jurisdiction; 
(4)  Punish those in its presence for contempt by fines not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 20 days or both; 
(5)  Establish bail and forfeit bonds with the same authority as the judges of superior courts, except such bonds as may by law only be set by judges of superior courts; 
(6)  Administer oaths and exercise all other powers necessarily appertaining to their jurisdiction or which may be granted them by law; 
(7)  Issue criminal warrants either on their own knowledge or on information given under oath; 
(8)  Suspend or revoke the driver's license of any person found guilty of the violation of such traffic laws and ordinances; 
(9)  Probate, revoke, amend, remit, modify, alter or suspend sentences imposed; 
(10)  Take affidavits and attest other papers; and 
(11)  Such other powers and duties as shall be provided by law. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 8) 
Sec. 4-45. - Hearings on merits in open court; other proceedings allowed in chambers. 
All trials and preliminary hearings on the merits shall be conducted in open court and, so far as convenient, in a regular courtroom. All other proceedings, hearings, and acts may be done or conducted by a judge in chambers and in the absence of the clerk or other court officials. The judges of such courts may hear motions and enter orders in all cases pending in the court over which he or she presides in open court or chambers. The proceedings after information, accusation, uniform traffic citation, or summons shall conform to the rules governing like proceedings in superior courts. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 9) 
Sec. 4-46. - Jurors; jury trials. 
(a)  All laws with reference to the number, composition, qualifications, impaneling, challenging, and compensation of jurors in state courts within the territorial jurisdiction of such courts shall apply to and be observed by each such courts. 
(b)  In all instances where an accused has a right to a trial by jury, the judges of any such courts shall adhere to the practices and procedures of state courts. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 10) 
Sec. 4-47. - Solicitors. 
(a)  There shall be a solicitor of such courts and as many assistant solicitors for each of such courts as there are regular judges. Each solicitor and assistant solicitor shall take the same oath and perform the same duties as solicitors of the state courts, as far as applicable to and not inconsistent with this Act. 
(b)  The solicitors of each court shall be appointed and retained in the same manner as provided for judges within this Act. 
(c)  Each solicitor shall have been for at least one year prior to appointment and continue to be during the term of office a resident of the city in which he or she is selected to serve, shall be at least 25 years of age, and shall have been admitted to practice law in the State of Georgia for at least five years. 
(d)  Assistant solicitors shall be appointed by each solicitor and serve at his or her discretion. Each person so appointed shall have been admitted to practice law in the State of Georgia. 
(e)  Any full-time solicitors and assistant solicitors may not engage in the private practice of law. A part-time assistant solicitor of such courts may engage in the private practice of law but may not practice or appear in any matter as to which he or she has exercised jurisdiction. 
(f)  The annual salary of the solicitor and the annual salary of each assistant solicitor shall be fixed and determined by the governing authority of the city payable as provided by the governing authority for other employees within the city. 
(g)  The solicitor shall prepare and submit an annual budget for his or her office to the mayor and city council within the territorial jurisdiction. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 11) 
Sec. 4-48. - Public defender. 
(a)  Any such courts shall provide for the representation of indigent defendants by a public defender's office. 
(b)  The public defender shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of Section 4-43. The provisions relating to the qualifications, appointment of assistants, prohibition on the private practice of law, compensation, and budget of the solicitor in section 4-47 shall apply to the public defender. Any person appointed public defender shall be appointed to a four-year term of office and shall serve until a successor is duly appointed and qualified in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 12) 
Sec. 4-49. - Investigators. 
There shall be not less than one investigator for each of such courts, each of whom shall be appointed by and serve at the discretion of the solicitor. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 13) 
Sec. 4-50. - Clerk and other court personnel; prohibition. 
(a)  There shall be a clerk of each such court, as many deputy clerks as there are regular judges, and such clerical assistants as the judges determine necessary for the efficient operation of the court. The clerk, deputy clerks, and clerical assistants shall be appointed by the judges of each of such courts in conference and shall serve at their discretion. Any person appointed clerk shall be a resident of the city in which such court is located during his or her term of office. However, the residency requirement herein shall not apply to any person holding the position of clerk, but not a resident of the city, on the effective date of this Act. 
(b)  The clerk, deputy clerks, and clerical assistants shall have the same powers and duties as like officers of the superior courts, as far as applicable to and not inconsistent with this Act. Each clerk and deputy clerk shall be responsible for all moneys collected and shall give bond for the faithful discharge of his or her duties in such amount as may be fixed by the governing authority of each of such cities. 
(c)  The clerk shall further submit to the chief judges of such courts recommendations for improving the efficiency and operation of the court; assist the chief judges in the preparation of budgeting and fiscal reports and documents as may be necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of the court; maintain and keep the seal of such courts; and perform such other duties as may be required by law or the chief judge. 
(d)  The clerk and court personnel as provided herein are prohibited from practicing law in their own or another's name, as a partner or otherwise, in any court except in their own case. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 14) 
Sec. 4-51. - Bailiffs. 
There shall be as many bailiffs for each of such courts as there are regular judges. Each bailiff shall be appointed by and serve at the discretion of the judges in conference, shall attend all sittings of the court, and shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the judges. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 15) 
Sec. 4-52. - Constables. 
The constables of each of such courts shall be the sheriffs and deputy sheriffs of the several counties of this state and the chief of police and the regularly elected and qualified members of the police department of each city, each of whom shall serve all processes and orders to them directed. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 16) 
Sec. 4-53. - Service by judges pro hac vice. 
Upon certification by the chief judge that the business of the court is such that additional help is needed to promptly handle the business of the court, the chief judge may appoint one or more attorneys at law to act as judge pro hac vice. Any person appointed judge pro hac vice shall possess the same qualifications as required for judges within this Act. Each judge pro hac vice while serving as such shall have all the powers and authority of a judge. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 17) 
Sec. 4-54. - Service by senior judges. 
(a)  The office of senior judge of such court is created. Any judge, chief judge, or judge of any such court who retires pursuant to the provisions of applicable laws relating to such retirement shall be a senior judge on the effective date of such retirement. 
(b)  Senior judges may be called upon to serve as judges of such court when a regular judge for some reason is unable to serve. Any such senior judge may be subject to designation and assignment, with the senior judge's consent, either as additional or substitute judge. Such senior judge shall have all the power and authority when so designated or assigned as a judge of such court. Such senior judges shall be compensated in addition to retirement pay in the amount paid to judges pro hac vice of such court for such services. In addition to such compensation, such judges shall receive mileage at the same rate as other employees of the city for such services. Said compensation and mileage shall be paid from city funds appropriated or otherwise available for the operation of such court upon a certificate by the judge as to the number of days served and the mileage. Such compensation shall not diminish or otherwise impair the payment or receipt of any retirement or pension benefits of such judge. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 18) 
Sec. 4-55. - Solicitors and public defenders pro hac vice. 
(a)  The solicitors shall appoint solicitors pro hac vice as needed by such courts, and as provided by the governing body of each city, to act in the event of emergency or necessity except as provided herein. 
(b)  The chief judge of any such courts shall appoint solicitors pro hac vice or public defenders pro hac vice when there is a conflict of interest associated with the office of the solicitor or public defender. For the appointment of a solicitor pro hac vice or public defender pro hac vice, the solicitor or public defender shall make a written request to the chief judge or file a motion before the court setting out the nature of the conflict of interest. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 19) 
Sec. 4-56. - Terms of court. 
Each court shall have two terms of six months, each term to be designated by the name of the month in which the term begins and shall also have such adjourned terms as the chief judge may prescribe. Two or more sessions of each court may be held at the same time and each court shall sit at such places within the city as the governing authority shall provide. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 20) 
Sec. 4-57. - Housing and facilities for courts. 
Each court shall sit at such places within the city as the governing authority shall provide. However, the governing authority of each city shall provide adequate courtrooms, offices, equipment, and other facilities necessary for the operation of each of such courts. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 21) 
Sec. 4-58. - Violation bureau; director. 
(a)  The governing authority of each city may provide a violation bureau for the payment of fines for violations of traffic ordinances of the city without offenders being required to make an appearance in court. The fines for such offenses shall be in accord with a schedule of fines determined by the chief judge. However, such procedures shall not be available for violations involving an accident or driving while under the influence of intoxicants, whether or not an accident occurs. 
(b)  There shall be a director of the violation bureau who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of a majority of the judges. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 22) 
Sec. 4-59. - Probation. 
When such courts are located in counties having a county probation system where the probation officers are functioning and deemed to be the same as circuit probation officers under the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 42, ch. 8, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-20 et seq.), the "State-wide Probation Act," probationers from such courts shall be supervised by the county probation system. The expense of supervising such probationers shall be paid by such cities out of the moneys collected as fines and forfeitures. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 23) 
Sec. 4-60. - Criminal prosecutions. 
Criminal prosecutions in such courts may be instituted by summons, written information, or accusation specifically setting forth the offense charged. Such information, accusation, or summons may be signed by the solicitor or assistant solicitor or by the chief of police or any member of the police department. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 24) 
Sec. 4-61. - Appellate review. 
The orders, verdicts, judgments, and sentences of such courts shall be subject to appellate review in accordance with the provisions of general law: 
(1)  By the appropriate appellate court of this state in misdemeanor cases; and 
(2)  By writ of certiorari in the appropriate superior court in all other cases. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 25) 
Sec. 4-62. - Fines and forfeitures; priority in distribution. 
Except as provided in sections 4-63 and 4-64, all moneys arising from fines or forfeitures imposed and collected in such courts shall be paid into the treasury of the respective cities and shall be used first to cover the housing facilities, equipment, personnel and personnel training, and other costs necessary for the administration of such courts. Any remaining funds shall be used to defray the expenses associated with the enforcement of laws and ordinances relating to and regulating traffic. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 26) 
Sec. 4-63. - Additional penalty—For victims and witnesses assistance program. 
(a)  [ Established. ] 
(1)  In every traffic case, other than parking violations, in which a court imposes a fine under this Act for a violation of a state law or local ordinance there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum not to exceed three dollars. 
(2)  At the time of posting bail or bond in any traffic case before a court under this section, an additional sum not to exceed three dollars shall be posted. In every traffic case in which a court under this section orders the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum posted shall be paid over as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  [ Distribution. ] The additional penalty in cases in which fines are imposed and the additional sum for forfeiture of bails and bonds provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) of this section shall be collected by the court officer charged with the duty of collecting fines and forfeited bails or bonds. The funds collected shall be distributed by the finance department of the city served by the traffic court created by this Act. One-third of the funds collected shall be distributed to the court created by this Act in support of the victims and witnesses assistance program operated by the chief judge of such court. Two-thirds of the funds collected under this Act shall be distributed by the city finance department to the crime commission serving such city, in support of the victims and witnesses assistance program operated by the crime commission in the municipal court of said city. Budgets for each of the victims and witnesses assistance programs named in this section shall be submitted to the finance committee of the city council for review and approval of the distribution of the funds. An annual report to the governing authority of the city served by the traffic court created by this Act of the moneys received by each recipient of these funds shall be made by the chief judge of each court in which a victims and witnesses assistance program is supported by the funds collected under this section. 
(c)  [ Use. ] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section and except as otherwise provided in section 4-64, all moneys arising from fines or forfeitures imposed and collected in such courts shall be paid into the treasury of the respective city served by the court and shall be used exclusively to defray the expense of operating such courts and the enforcement of the laws and ordinances relating to and regulating traffic. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 27) 
Sec. 4-64. - Same—For other purposes. 
(a)  [ Required. ] 
(1)  In every case in which such courts shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any ordinance of a political subdivision thereof, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to 10 percent of the original fine. Such additional penalties shall be paid over as provided in subsection (c) of this section. The penalty provided in this paragraph shall be in addition to any penalty or additional penalty provided for in Sections 26 and 27 of this Act. 
(2)  At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this state or ordinance of a political subdivision thereof, an additional sum equal to 10 percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which such courts shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to 10 percent of the original bail or bond shall be paid over as provided in subsection (c) of this section. The additional sums provided for in this paragraph shall be in addition to any sums provided for in paragraph (2) of subsection (a) of Section 4-63 of this Act. 
(b)  [ Sum additional. ] Such sums required by subsection (a) of this section and Section 4-63 shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund or by O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 to be paid into the Judges of the Probate Courts Retirement Fund of Georgia. 
(c)  [ Disposition. ] The sums provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting moneys arising from fines and forfeited bonds and shall be paid over to the governing authority of the city in which the court is located by the tenth day of the month following the month in which such sums are collected. Such sums paid over to the governing authority shall be deposited by the governing authority into a special account to be known as the "city jail fund." 
(d)  [ Failure to collect. ] Any person whose duty it is to collect and remit the sums provided for in this Act who fails or refuses to remit such sums by the date required by this Act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  [ Use. ] Moneys collected pursuant to this section and placed in the city jail fund shall be expended by the governing authority of the city solely and exclusively for constructing, operating, and staffing city jails, city correctional institutions, and city detention facilities or for the purpose of contracting for such facilities with other cities, counties, the state, or other political subdivisions. The city jail fund and moneys collected pursuant to this Act to be placed in the city jail fund may be pledged as security for the payment of bonds issued for the construction of city jails, city correctional institutions, and city detention facilities. This section shall not preclude the appropriation or expenditure of other funds by the governing authority of any city or by the General Assembly for the purpose of constructing, operating, or staffing city jails, city correctional institutions, and city detention facilities. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 627, § 28) 
Chapter 4.5 - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly this Chapter pertained to education. See General Assembly S.B 204. 

Secs. 4.5-1—4.5-311. - Reserved. 
Chapter 5 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
  

Sec. 5-1. - Authority of state legislature in connection with health and sanitation in Fulton County and Atlanta. 
(a)  The General Assembly of Georgia shall have authority to determine and prescribe by general, local and special laws all the powers, responsibilities and limitations of Fulton County and the commissioners or other governing authority thereof both in the incorporated and unincorporated areas within its boundaries and throughout the City of Atlanta, located in Fulton County, in respect to health and sanitation, and outside of the incorporated areas within its boundaries in respect to police protection, fire protection and prevention, parks and recreational facilities, garbage and refuse collection and disposal, sewerage and drainage systems, water distribution systems, county streets and roads and other public works, the regulation and inspection of buildings, electrical installations, plumbing and other construction, airports, libraries, and the regulation of traffic. Without limiting the power granted above, the General Assembly is authorized to: 
(1)  District said county or authorize the commissioners or other governing authority thereof to do so, without regard to uniformity of area or population, for the purpose of providing any of such services; 
(2)  Empower the commissioners of said county to levy taxes or assessments, or both, on property or property owners to defray all or part of the cost of such services; 
(3)  Provide that any of such services except county streets and roads and other public works shall be rendered by said county only through one (1) or more municipalities lying wholly or partially in said county, in which event the General Assembly shall require one (1) or more of such municipalities to supply such services on a cost basis at the request of the commissioners; and the municipalities in said county are hereby empowered to supply any of such services, inside or outside their corporate limits, any provision of their charters to the contrary notwithstanding; 
(4)  Provide that the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations in force then or in the future in the City of Atlanta in respect to any function or service mentioned in this paragraph shall apply to all or any portion of the unincorporated area of said county, and that the violation thereof in such unincorporated area may be punished as for a misdemeanor and all fines collected therefor shall be paid to the City of Atlanta; and 
(5)  Provide that said county shall have the duty or authority to perform functions and render services relating to public health and sanitation throughout the City of Atlanta, located in Fulton County; that the rules, regulations and orders relating to public health and sanitation in said county shall apply with the same force and effect in the City of Atlanta, located in Fulton County, or any part thereof in Fulton County; and that the violation of any such rule, regulation or order may be punished as for a misdemeanor and the fines collected for offenses committed in the City of Atlanta shall be paid to the City of Atlanta. 
(b)  All of such powers may be exercised by the General Assembly without regard to uniformity and without being limited or restricted by any existing provisions of or amendment to this Constitution or any general or special laws heretofore enacted. 
(c)  Fulton County, or the commissioners or other governing authority thereof, shall not render any of the services or perform any of the functions mentioned in paragraph (a) of this section, except health and sanitation, inside any incorporated area within its boundaries. 
(d)  The authority conferred on the General Assembly by this amendment [section] shall be retroactive to January 1, 1951. Any act passed after January 1, 1951, germane to the subject matter of this amendment [section], shall be conclusively presumed to have been passed under the authority of this amendment [section]. It is declared that the authority conveyed to the General Assembly by this amendment [section] relates to only one (1) general subject matter, and the General Assembly is empowered, but not directed, to exercise such authority by one (1) law pertaining to all or any one (1) or more of said services, which law may be passed prior to the submission of this amendment [section] to the people. 
(1951 Ga. Laws, page 828, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1945), art. XI was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4442. 
Sec. 5-2. - Atlanta, Fulton County and DeKalb County may contract with each other or with a hospital authority. 
The City of Atlanta, Fulton County, and DeKalb County, or either of these political subdivisions, may jointly and severally, by a majority vote of the governing body, or bodies, of the respective political subdivisions, enter into contracts each with the other, or with a duly authorized and created hospital authority, and assume thereby definite and fixed future liabilities or obligations for the period of time provided under and in furtherance of the general powers and obligations pertaining to hospitalization authorized by Ga. Const. art. VII, § VI, ¶ III, of the Constitution and may agree to levy and collect a tax within the millage limitations as prescribed by the Hospital Authority Act, Ga. Laws 1941, page 241 et seq. [now O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq.], and any amendments thereto, for the purpose of complying with the terms of any contract so entered into; such contracts so entered into, and the liabilities or obligations arising thereunder shall not require an election for that purpose, and such liabilities or obligations so assumed thereby shall not be deemed within the debt limitation provision of the Constitution. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 18, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1877) art. VII, § VII, ¶ I was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4783. 
Chapter 6 - PENSIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Interest on refunds. 
Effective January 1, 1986, refunds of employee pension contributions shall include interest at the rate of five percent per annum on all employee contributions credited as of December 31, 1985, and each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 1985-94, § 14, 12-19-85) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-2. - Retirement Benefits. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section 6-2, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection (a), except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Actual Benefit means the annual gross amount of the retirement benefit received by a DB Plan Participant. The term is synonymous with "Pension Benefit." 
(2)  Actual Required Contribution or ARC means the total, Cumulative contribution amount paid by the City to fund the three Defined Benefit Plans in any given fiscal year, measured in dollars. 
(3)  Actuarial Valuation means the annual actuarial valuation provided by an accredited actuarial firm hired by the City to provide pension-related actuarial services. 
(4)  Benefit Formula means the base calculation utilized to calculate the Actual Benefit received by each DB Plan Participant. Adjustments are made to this calculation to determine the Actual Benefit. 
(5)  Cap means that the ARC is equal to 35% of the Total Payroll amount, or mathematically, the ARC divided by the Total Payroll amount equals 0.35. 
(6)  City means the City of Atlanta. 
(7)  Compensation means an Employee's annual salary from the City of Atlanta. This includes: base wages of the Employee (including lump-sum payments thereof); amounts contributed or deferred by the Employee and not includable in gross income under sections 125, 132(f) or 457 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code; amounts contributed by the Employee to a governmental qualified retirement plan and treated as employer contributions under Section 414(h) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code; and amounts credited to the Employee for furlough hours. Compensation shall not include: disability insurance payments; travel, mileage or automobile-related allowances or reimbursements; bonuses (other than sick-leave bonuses); performance awards; overtime or premium payments; or any other special, unusual or nonrecurring payment. 
(8)  Date of Disability means the date upon which the Eligible Employee became totally and permanently disabled, as determined in writing by the Disability and Survivor Benefits Committee. In the case of Catastrophic Injury in the Line of Duty, the Date of Disability means the date upon which the Eligible Employee suffered the Catastrophic Injury, as determined in writing by the Disability and Survivor Benefits Committee. 
(9)  DB Hybrid Option means the Retirement Plan terms selected by a DB Plan Member employed by the City prior to September 1, 2011, whereby the Employee chooses to participate beginning November 1, 2011 in the Retirement Plan benefits of DB Plan Members hired on and after September 1, 2011. 
(10)  DB Hybrid Participant means a DB Plan Participant who is enrolled in the DB Hybrid Option. 
(11)  DB Plan or Defined Benefit Plan means the City's Firefighters' Pension Plan (set forth in City Related Laws Sections 6-366 through 6-420), the Police Officers' Pension Plan (set forth in City Related Laws Sections 6-221 through 6-280), and/or the General Employees' Pension Plan (set forth in City Related Laws Sections 6-36 through 6-140). 
(12)  DB Plan Participant means an Employee (as defined in this Section 6-2(a)(19)) who is enrolled in a DB Plan. 
(13)  DC Plan or Defined Contribution Retirement Plan means the Defined Contribution Retirement Plan established by this Section 6-2 that: 1) includes a plan established under Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; and 2) includes the ability of Employees to make voluntary contributions to an account meeting the definition of Section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended. 
(14)  DC Plan Mandatory Participant means an Employee who was enrolled on October 31, 2011 in the Pre-November 1, 2011 Defined Contribution Plan, or an Employee hired on or after September 1, 2011 who was hired at pay grade 19 or higher and is not a sworn member of the Atlanta Police Department or Atlanta Fire Rescue Department. 
(15)  Disability and Survivor Benefits Committee or the DSB Committee means a group of no fewer than 7 people and no greater than 9 people, where members are appointed by the Mayor or her/his designee, and which includes at least one licensed physician, at least one licensed psychiatrist, the Chief Financial Officer, the Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources, one member of the General Employees' Pension Fund Board of Trustees, one member of the Police Officers' Pension Fund Board of Trustees, and one member of the Firefighters' Pension Fund Board of Trustees. 
(16)  Disability Benefit - see Long Term Disability Benefit. 
(17)  Disability Pension means the benefit provided to a DB Plan Participant pursuant to the applicable DB Pension Plan, based upon the eligibility criteria set forth in said Plan. A Disability Pension, which is established by the DB Pension Plans, is different from a Disability Benefit/Long Term Disability Benefit which is established by this Section 6-2. 
(18)  Eligible Employees (or in the singular Eligible Employee ) means all DB Plan Participants hired on or after September 1, 2011, and all DB Hybrid Participants for City employment on and after November 1, 2011. This term is utilized within the context of Long Term Disability Benefits and Survivor Benefits. 
(19)  Employee (or in the plural Employees ) means: 1) any person holding permanent, full-time, active employment with the City and all publicly elected City officials hired and/or elected on or after January 1, 1984; and 2) any person holding active employment with the City who was hired on or after January 1, 1984 and who is participating in the City's Defined Benefit or Defined Contribution Retirement Plan on August 31, 2011; however the term "Employee" shall not include: 1) any person who held permanent, full-time, active employment with the City prior to January 1, 1984, who has had continuous City service, or had a break in service and purchased the interim pension benefits upon rehire; or 2) any elected official in office on or after November 1, 2011 who has had continuous City service as an employee or elected official since before January 1, 1984, or had a break in service on or after January 1, 1984 but purchased the interim pension benefits upon rehire/re-election, 
(20)  Long Term Disability Benefit or Disability Benefit means the amount paid to an Eligible Employee pursuant to this Section 6-2, where the Eligible Employee is determined to be Totally and Permanently Disabled by the Disability and Survivor Benefits Committee. A Disability Benefit may be provided for Disability in the Line of Duty, Catastrophic Injury in the Line of Duty, and Disability Not in the Line of Duty. A Disability Benefit established by this Section 6-2 is different from a Disability Pension which is established by the DB Pension Plans. 
(21)  Monthly Compensation means the amount utilized to calculate the Disability Benefit of an Eligible Employee, and is equal to the highest 36 consecutive months of Compensation received by the Eligible Employee prior to the Date of Disability, divided by thirty-six. 
(22)  Multiplier means the percentage utilized in the calculation of a DB Plan Participant's Pension Benefit Formula. The Multiplier is established by the terms of the DB Pension Plan in which the DB Plan Participant is enrolled. 
(23)  Overage means the number of percentage points by which the ARC exceeds 35% of the Total Payroll. By way of example, where the ARC divided by the Total Payroll equals 40, the Overage is 5%. The Overage may also be expressed in dollar amounts. 
(24)  Pension Benefit means the annual gross amount received upon retirement by a DB Plan Participant from the DB Plan in which s/he participated. The term is synonymous with "Actual Benefit". The Pension Benefit is different from the Disability Benefit and the Survivor Benefit, even though all three are derived from a DB Plan. 
(25)  Pre-November 1, 2011 Defined Contribution Plan means the City's defined contribution plan created pursuant to City Ordinance number 01-O-0064 that was in effect through and including October 31, 2011. 
(26)  Retirement Account means the combination of all accounts owned by each Employee that contains her/his monetary benefits from the Defined Contribution Retirement Plan, including the Section 401(a) and Section 457(b) accounts, and the benefits from her/his Pre-November 1, 2011 Defined Contribution Plan if applicable. 
(27)  Retirement Age means: 1) a DB Plan Participant in the Firefighters' Pension Plan or Police Officers' Pension Plan hired prior to September 1, 2011 who is 55 years of age or older; 2) a DB Plan Participant in the Firefighters' Pension Plan or Police Officers' Pension Plan hired on or after September 1, 2011 who is 57 years of age or older; 3) a DB Plan Participant in the General Employees' Pension Plan hired prior to September 1, 2011 who is 60 years of age or older; or 4) a DB Plan Participant in the General Employees' Pension Plan hired on or after September 1, 2011 who is 62 years of age or older. 
(28)  Retirement Plan means the entire package of retirement benefits offered by the City to its Employees pursuant to this Section 6-2. The package is comprised of the DB Plans and the DC Plan. 
(29)  Thirty Years of Service means the date upon which a DB Plan Participant's Years of Service, as defined below, is thirty years, where such calculation is utilized for the sole purpose of determining whether the DB Plan Participant may retire prior to Retirement Age without receiving an age penalty. For the purpose of determining whether an Employee has attained Thirty Years of Service, the Years of Service amount may not be increased by application of the Employee's unused sick leave or unused annual leave, unless otherwise authorized by duly enacted City legislation. 
(30)  Total Payroll means the cumulative total earnings of all DB Plan Participants in the three Defined Benefit Plans in any given fiscal year. 
(31)  Totally and Permanently Disabled/Total and Permanent Disability means a state or condition of physical and/or mental incapacity resulting from an illness or injury suffered by an Eligible Employee, such that s/he is not expected to be able to perform the needed duties of any occupation for which s/he is qualified by education, training or experience, even after reaching the point of maximum healing. An Eligible Employee will be deemed totally and permanently disabled only if the City's Disability and Survivor Benefits Committee makes a written determination that the Employee meets the following criteria: a) the Committee reasonably anticipates that for 12 months following the Date of Disability, the incapacitation will cause the Employee to be unable to perform her/his regular, assigned or comparable duties; and b) the Committee reasonably anticipates that after the initial 12 month period, the incapacitation will cause the Employee to be unable to engage in any occupation for which s/he is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
(32)  Voluntary Contribution means the amount an Employee contributes to her/his Retirement Account, where such contribution is not mandated. 
(33)  Years of Service means the number of consecutive years or fractions thereof during which a DB Plan Participant was a permanent, full-time, active employee for the City. Years of Service may include periods of time when the DB Plan Participant is Totally and Permanently Disabled, but only as set forth in Section 6-2(e) below. Years of Service may also include non-consecutive years or fractions thereof where authorized by duly enacted City legislation. 
(34)  Years of Service Multiplier means the product of the Multiplier times the Years of Service as set forth in the Benefit Formula." 
(b)  The City shall offer a Retirement Plan to all Employees effective November 1, 2011, except that the Retirement Plan for any Employee hired on or after September 1, 2011 shall be effective upon the date of her/his employment. The Retirement Plan shall consist of a Defined Benefit Plan component and a Defined Contribution Plan component. The Defined Benefit Plan component will be comprised solely of the City's three DB Plans as defined in Section 6-2(a)(10) above, and intends to satisfy Code section 401(a) by meeting the requirements of Code section 414(d). Though this Section 6-2 modifies certain terms of the DB Plans, it does not create a "new" DB plan or plans. 
(c)  Retirement Plan -Defined Contribution Component. The Defined Contribution Retirement Plan shall be set forth in a plan document to be adopted and maintained by the DC Plan Management Committee as described in Section 6-2(c)(14) below. At a minimum, the DC Plan shall contain the terms described in this Section 6-2(c). 
(1)  All Employees enrolled in the Pre-November 1, 2011 Defined Contribution Plan must participate in the new DC Plan beginning November 1, 2011. In addition, each Employee hired on and after November 1, 2011 who has a pay grade of 19 or higher and is not a sworn member of the Atlanta Police Department or Atlanta Fire Department, must participate in the new DC Plan. A DC Plan Mandatory Participant must make a pre-tax contribution of 6% of Compensation into the Section 401(a) portion of her/his Retirement Account. The City will match the mandatory payment of the DC Plan Mandatory Participant by contributing 6% of Compensation into the Section 401(a) portion of the Employee's Retirement Account. 
(2)  Each DB Plan Participant hired on or after November 1, 2011 and each DB Hybrid Participant must make a pre-tax contribution of 3.75% of Compensation into the Section 401(a) portion of her/his Retirement Account. The City will match the mandatory payment by contributing 3.75% of Compensation into the Section 401(a) portion of the Employee's Retirement Account. 
(3)  The Employee contributions described in Paragraphs 6-2(c)(1) and (c)(2) above will be picked-up by the City on a salary reduction basis pursuant to Section 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The City's matching contributions as described in said Paragraphs shall vest over a 5-year period at 20% per year, such that all contributions made by the City after the completion of the fifth year are 100% vested. 
(4)  In addition to the mandatory payments made by an Employee into the DB Plan and/or the 401(a) portion of the DC Plan, each Employee has the option of making Voluntary Contributions into the Section 457(b) portion of her/his Retirement Account. The Employee's Voluntary Contribution shall be the percentage of Compensation directed by the Employee, and may not exceed the maximum contribution permitted under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(5)  The City will match 100% of the Voluntary Contribution made by a DB Plan Participant hired on or after November 1, 2011 and a DB Hybrid Participant up to 4.25% of Compensation. The Voluntary Contribution match amount will be in addition to the City's match of the 3.75% mandatory DC Plan contribution. The City's match will be deposited into the Section 401(a) portion of the Employee's Retirement Account. The match contributions shall vest over a 5-year period at 20% per year, such that all contributions made by the City after the completion of the fifth year are 100% vested. 
(6)  An Employee's Years of Service accumulated prior to November 1, 2011 shall be counted in the Years-of-Service calculations under the DC Plan for the sole purpose of determining vesting as described in Section 6-2(c)(3) and (c)(5) above. 
(7)  The Employee's Voluntary Contributions shall be paid with pre-tax dollars, unless indicated otherwise by the Employee in the manner prescribed by the City. Where an Employee chooses to utilize after-tax dollars for all or a portion of her/his Voluntary Contributions, said after-tax contributions shall be treated as Roth contributions to the extent allowed by Section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended. The Roth contribution option shall be available as of November 1, 2011. 
(8)  An Employee may change the amount of her/his Voluntary Contribution and/or the percentage of Voluntary Contribution that is paid with after-tax dollars (if any) in the manner prescribed by the City. Such changes may be made at any time, provided that the Employee does not make changes more than one time per month. 
(9)  The Retirement Account of an Employee who was enrolled in the Pre-November 1, 2011 Defined Contribution Plan shall be retained as part of the Employee's Retirement Account under the new Retirement Plan. 
(10)  Each Employee shall direct how the funds in her/his Retirement Account shall be invested, selecting from a menu of investment options provided by the Plan Administrator. The Employee may select more than one investment option. 
(11)  An Employee may direct lump sum distributions from her/his Retirement Account upon separation from the City, death, disability (pursuant to the City's disability retirement provisions), or retirement, in accordance with the terms of the applicable City ordinances and other laws. 
(12)  Each Employee may designate one or more Retirement Account beneficiaries of her/his choice. 
(13)  The Plan Administrator shall be the Chief Financial Officer or her/his designee. The Plan Administrator shall oversee the daily administration of the Defined Contribution Retirement Plan. The Plan Administrator shall report to the Management Committee of the DC Plan, as defined in number 14 immediately below. 
(14)  The Management Committee of the Defined Contribution Retirement Plan shall be comprised of: the Mayor or her/his designee; the City Council President or her/his designee; the Chairperson of the City Council Finance and Executive Committee; the City Attorney; the Chief Financial Officer; the Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources; a City Councilmember appointed by the Mayor, a Finance Management industry expert; and an Employee representative of the DC Plan who is elected by the DC Plan Mandatory Participants and DB Hybrid Participants, and who is a member of one of those two groups. The Management Committee shall manage and operate the DC Plan. It shall make all final decisions that materially impact the management and operation of the DC Plan, except that such decisions will be approved by duly enacted legislation where required by the Atlanta Code of Ordinances. The Management Committee shall have all powers necessary to enable it to properly carry out the duties of a retirement plan manager, which include the following: (i) engaging the services of third party service providers, consistent with the City's procurement procedures. The service providers may provide recordkeeping services for the DC Plan, provide investment fund options, provide and present investment education and other communication materials to Employees; and provide disability insurance; (ii) preparing and construing the DC Plan documents and agreements, and providing answers to all questions related thereto; (iii) providing answers to all questions relating to eligibility and benefit entitlement under the DC Plan, except where otherwise provided in this Section 6-2; (iv) maintaining records relating to Employees; (v) preparing and furnishing to Employees all applicable information required under state and/or federal law; (vi) preparing and furnishing to the third-party service provider all necessary Employee and financial data; (vii) providing direction and oversight of the third-party service provider; (viii) preparing and filing with all other appropriate government entities all reports and other information required under law to be so filed and/or published; (ix) engaging consultants, actuaries or other professional advisers as necessary to aid in the DC Plan administration; (x) arranging for fiduciary bonding if necessary; and (xi) providing procedures for benefit payments. 
(d)  Retirement Plan -Defined Benefit Component. 
(1)  The DB Plans, as defined in Section 6-2(a)(10) above, shall remain in effect. This Section 6-2 does not create new DB Plans, but rather modifies the DB Plans already in existence. 
(2)  Beginning on November 1, 2011, each DB Plan Participant hired prior to that date shall contribute 12% of her/his Compensation to the applicable DB Plan if s/he does not have a designated beneficiary, and shall contribute 13% of her/his Compensation to the applicable DB Plan if s/he does have a designated beneficiary, except that DB Plan Participants who choose to participate in the DB Hybrid Option shall make the contributions and receive the benefits described in Section 6-2(g) below. 
(3)  Each DB Plan Participant hired after September 1, 2011 shall contribute 8% of her/his Compensation to the applicable DB Plan. 
(4)  Except as set forth in Section 6-2(d)(6) and 6-2(g) below, the calculation of an Employee's Pension Benefit shall be the same as the calculation applied by the City in 2011, prior to November 1. Specifically, calculation of a Pension Benefit shall be as follows (elements of the calculation not addressed in this Section 6-2 shall be implemented as set forth in the applicable DB Plan): 
(i)  The DB Plan Benefit Formula ("Benefit Formula") is derived as follows: 
(A)  The pension multiplier set forth in the applicable DB Plan, ranging from 1%—3% (the "Multiplier"), is multiplied by the Employee's years of service with the City ("Years of Service") (the product shall be referred to as "Years of Service Multiplier"). 
(B)  The Years of Service Multiplier may not exceed 80% (the "Cap"), unless the Employee opted for a Benefit Formula that waives the Cap. If the Years of Service Multiplier exceeds 80%, the Years of Service Multiplier shall be reduced to 80% ("Adjusted Years of Service Multiplier"), except that if the Employee opted to waive the Cap, the Years of Service Multiplier shall remain unchanged (also referred to as the "Adjusted Years of Service Multiplier"). 
(C)  The Adjusted Years of Service Multiplier shall be multiplied by Annual Compensation. Annual Compensation is determined by calculating the highest Compensation received by an Employee over a consecutive 36 month period and dividing it by three ("Annual Compensation"). 
(D)  The Benefit Formula is increased by applying the Employee's unused annual leave and unused sick leave at the time of retirement. Annual leave is utilized to increase the value of Annual Compensation in the Benefit Formula. Sick leave is utilized to increase the value of Years of Service in the Benefit Formula and also to increase Annual Compensation under certain circumstances. The details of determining the value of the unused leave and how it impacts the Benefit Formula is set forth in the applicable DB Plan. 
(E)  In the form of a numerical equation, the Benefit Formula for Employees whose Benefit Formula has a Cap is: 
Benefit Formula= Annual Compensation x {lower of: 80% or (Multiplier x Years of Service)} 
The Benefit Formula for Employees whose Benefit Formula does not have a Cap is: 
Benefit Formula = Annual Compensation x Multiplier x Years of Service 
(F)  The Cost of Living Adjustment shall be calculated as set forth in the applicable DB Plan. 
(ii)  The actual benefit received by the Employee ("Actual Benefit") shall be equivalent to the Benefit Formula, unless the Employee is not fully vested in the DB Plan, or unless the Employee collects her/his DB pension prior to reaching Retirement Age or Thirty Years of Service. Calculation of the Actual Benefit prior to vesting and/or prior to reaching Retirement Age or Thirty Years of Service shall be as follows: 
(A)  If a DB Plan Participant is fully vested in the DB Plan and collects her/his DB pension prior to reaching Retirement Age or Thirty Years of Service, the Benefit Formula shall be reduced by the Age Penalty amount set forth in the applicable DB Plan. 
(B)  If a DB Plan Participant has completed at least 5 Years of Service with the City but has not fully vested in the DB Plan, and leaves City employment prior to reaching Retirement Age or Thirty Years of Service, the Employee may elect not to receive her/his pension until Retirement Age or later. Employees hired prior to July 1, 2010 shall be fully vested upon the completion of ten Years of Service. Employees hired on and after July 1, 2010 shall be fully vested upon the completion of fifteen Years of Service. At the time that the DB Plan Participant files a completed application with the City to receive pension (assuming s/he has reached Retirement Age), s/he will be provided a monthly pension benefit equivalent to the Benefit Formula multiplied by the Vesting Percentage. The Vesting Percentages are as follows: 
1.  Completion of 5 Years of Service - 25%; 
2.  Completion of 6 Years of Service - 30%; 
3.  Completion of 7 Years of Service - 35%; 
4.  Completion of 8 Years of Service - 40%; 
5.  Completion of 9 Years of Service - 45%. 
6.  For DB Plan Participants who require 10 Years of Service to fully vest, the Vesting Percentage will be 100% after the completion of 10 Years of Service. 
7.  For DB Plan Participants who require 15 Years of Service to fully vest, Completion of 10 Years of Service - 50%. 
8.  Completion of 11 Years of Service - 55%. 
9.  Completion of 12 Years of Service - 60%. 
10.  Completion of 13 Years of Service - 65%. 
11.  Completion of 14 Years of Service - 70%. 
12.  For DB Plan Participants who require 15 Years of Service to fully vest, the Vesting Percentage will be 100% after the completion of 15 Years of Service. 
(C)  It a DB Plan Participant is not fully vested in the DB Plan and leaves City employment prior to completion of 5 Years of Service, the Employee shall receive a cash-out value for her/his pension contributions equivalent to the amount s/he contributed into the DB Plan plus 5% per annum for the number of years in which s/he contributed to the DB Plan, subject to IRC Section 401(a)(31)(B). 
(D)  In the form of a numerical equation, the Actual Benefit for DB Plan Participants who are vested and retire prior to reaching Retirement Age or Thirty Years of Service is: 
Actual Benefit = Benefit Formula - Age Penalty 
The Actual Benefit for DB Plan Participants who have 5 or more years of service and draw their pension at Retirement Age or later is: 
Actual Benefit = Benefit Formula × Vesting Percentage 
(5)  The Pension Benefit calculation for a DB Plan Participant hired prior to September 1, 2011 shall be as set forth in Section 6-2(d)(4) above, except that the calculation for a DB Hybrid Participant shall be as set forth in Section 6-2(g) below. 
(6)  For DB Plan Participants hired on or after September 1, 2011 only, the Pension Benefit shall be as set forth in Section 6-2(d)(4) above, except for the following changes: 
(i)  The Multiplier in the Benefit Formula shall be 1%. 
(ii)  The value of Annual Compensation in the Benefit Formula shall be calculated based upon the highest Compensation received by an Employee over a consecutive 120 month period. The Compensation amount may be increased by adding the value of unused annual leave as described in the applicable DB Plan. 
(iii)  Unused sick leave may not be utilized to change any portion of the Benefit Formula or Actual Benefit. 
(iv)  The Cost of Living Adjustment for Post-Change Pension Benefits shall be a maximum amount of 1%. 
(v)  The Retirement Age for the Firefighters' Pension Plan or Police Officers' Pension Plan shall be 57 years of age or older. The Retirement Age for the General Employees' Pension Plan shall be 62 years of age or older. 
(vi)  The age penalty assessed for DB Plan Participants who retire prior to Retirement Age shall be 6% per year (or 0.5% per month). A DB Plan Participant in the Firefighters' Pension Plan or Police Officers' Pension Plan may not collect her/his pension prior to reaching 47 years of age, unless s/he has attained Thirty Years of Service. A DB Plan Participant in the General Employees' Pension Plan may not collect her/his pension prior to reaching 52 years of age, unless s/he has attained Thirty Years of Service. Nothing in this provision shall prevent a DB Plan Participant from obtaining a cash-out value for her/his pension contributions at any time, and such value shall be equivalent to the amount s/he contributed into the DB Plan plus 5% per annum for the number of years in which s/he contributed to the DB Plan. 
(vii)  At the time of retirement, a DB Plan Participant may choose to designate a qualified beneficiary (as defined in Section 6-2(f)(3)(i) below) who will receive 75% of the DB Plan Participant's Pension Benefit at the time of said Participant's death. Where the DB Plan Participant designates a beneficiary, her/his Pension Benefit shall be re-calculated using the assumption that it is a single-life annuity with duration through the life of the DB Plan Participant. A DB Plan Participant who designates a beneficiary will have his/her monthly Pension Benefit reduced. A calculation shall be performed to determine the City's expected total Pension Benefit payout to the Employee if s/he had no beneficiary. The actuarial equivalent of that expected total shall be determined for the expected total Pension Benefit payout with the Employee's designated beneficiary. This actuarial equivalence shall be utilized to determine the DB Plan Participant's reduced monthly Pension Benefit amount, so that the total Pension Benefit cost to the City is not increased by the election of a beneficiary. Upon the death of the DB Plan Participant, 75% of Employee's Pension Benefit amount will be paid as a monthly benefit to the identified qualified beneficiary as described in Section 6-2(f)(3)(i). The percentage payable to the beneficiary shall comply with the U.S. Treasury regulations § 1.401 (a)(9)-6, relating to the minimum distribution incidental benefit (MDIB) requirement under IRC § 401(a)(9)(G). 
(e)  Long Term Disability Benefit. 
(1)  A Long Term Disability Benefit or Disability Benefit is established pursuant to this Section 6-2, and is different from the Disability Pension established in and provided pursuant to the DB Plans. Eligible Employees whose Date of Disability is on or after November 1, 2011 shall be eligible for a Disability Benefit pursuant to the terms set forth in this Section 6-2(e). The Eligible Employee must submit a completed application to the Disability and Survivor Benefits Committee to apply for a Disability Benefit. 
(2)  The following provisions shall apply to the calculation of the Disability Benefit for every Eligible Employee: 
(i)  The City will provide a Long Term Disability Benefit to an Eligible Employee who is determined to be Totally and Permanently Disabled by the Disability and Survivor Benefits Committee. The DSB Committee shall make its determination by utilizing a preponderance of the evidence standard, and shall base its decision on official medical records, other documentary evidence, qualified medical expert opinions, sworn testimony, and/or other reliable sources accepted by the DSB Committee. The DSB Committee shall provide its determination in writing, with a detailed explanation of the supporting evidence. The City or the Eligible Employee may appeal the DSB Committee's determination pursuant to applicable law and the process established by the DSB Committee. 
(A)  Where the Eligible Employee applies for a Disability Benefit and a Disability Pension for the same underlying condition, the Eligible Employee shall submit identical applications and information to the DSB Committee and the appropriate Pension Board. All hearings regarding the application, including any appeal hearings, shall be presented to the DSB Committee and appropriate Pension Board simultaneously. 
(B)  The DSB Committee shall make a final determination about whether the Eligible Employee may receive a Disability Benefit. The DSB Committee decision shall be separate from the decision of the applicable Pension Board regarding the Disability Pension. It is acceptable for the determinations of the two bodies to differ. 
(C)  This process shall be utilized for determinations regarding whether an injury qualifies as a Disability in the Line of Duty or a Catastrophic Injury in the Line of Duty, and also whether Survivor Benefits shall be awarded as set forth in Section 6-2(e) below. 
(ii)  The Long Term Disability Benefit provided to an Eligible Employee shall begin after the Employee has utilized all of her/his accumulated sick leave. 
(iii)  The Long Term Disability Benefit shall continue until the earlier of the end of the Eligible Employee's Total and Permanent Disability, the Eligible Employee's attainment of Retirement Age or Thirty Years of Service, or death of the Eligible Employee. 
(iv)  During the time that an Eligible Employee is receiving a Disability Benefit, the Employee's and the City's mandatory contributions to the Employee's Retirement Plan shall cease except as set forth in Subsection (e)(2)(vii) below. The Employee may make Voluntary Contributions to the 457(b) portion of her/his Retirement Account. The City will not match any portion of the Voluntary Contributions while the Employee is receiving a Disability Benefit. 
(v)  The monthly amount of a DB Plan Participant's Long Term Disability Benefit shall be reduced by the monthly amount of her/his Disability Pension, where such Disability Pension is calculated under the applicable DB Pension Plan as amended by this Section 6-2. 
(vi)  In the event that the Eligible Employee receiving a Long Term Disability Benefit also receives a Workers' Compensation award for the same illness or injury for which the City is paying a Disability Benefit, the monthly amount of the Disability Benefit shall be reduced such that the sum of the monthly Disability Benefit amount, plus the monthly Disability Pension amount if any, plus the monthly value of the Workers' Compensation award, does not exceed 75% of the Eligible Employee's Monthly Compensation. This Section 6-2(e)(2)(vi) shall not apply to Eligible Employees who suffered a Catastrophic Injury in the Line of Duty, as defined in Section 6-2(e)(3)(iii) below. In addition, this Section 6-2(e)(2)(vi) shall not prevent the restoration of some or all of the Employee's Disability Benefit upon reduction or termination of any such Workers' Compensation payments. 
(vii)  For those fiscal years in which the Eligible Employee receives a Long Term Disability Benefit, the City shall deposit an amount into the Section 401(a) portion of the Employee's Retirement Account that is equal to the combination of the Employee's mandatory DC contribution and the City's match thereof based upon the Eligible Employee's Compensation at the Date of Disability. This amount shall not vest until the Eligible Employee attains Retirement Age or Thirty Years of Service. The provisions set forth in this Section 6-2 regarding utilization of the Retirement Account shall then be applied. In addition, the Eligible Employee may collect her/his retirement Pension Benefit in the manner set forth in this Section 6-2. 
(viii)  Upon the death of an Eligible Employee who is receiving a Long Term Disability Benefit, the monthly Long Term Disability Benefit shall cease and any future benefits shall be determined as set forth in Section 6-2(f) below, entitled Survivor Benefits. 
(3)  Disability Benefits shall be calculated based upon the type of disability, utilizing the applicable formula set forth below, and applying the provisions set forth in Section 6-2(e)(2) above. A monthly long term disability benefit for Eligible Employees shall be calculated as follows: 
(i)  Disability in the Line of Duty: 
(A)  Disability in the Line of Duty means that an Eligible Employee is Totally and Permanently Disabled due to an injury that occurred while in the line of duty or due to an illness contracted solely as a result of activities performed while in the line of duty. 
(B)  An Eligible Employee who was hired before 1986 will receive a monthly Long Term Disability Benefit amount that is equal to 70% of her/his Monthly Compensation. This amount shall be adjusted as set forth in Section 6-2(e)(2)(v) and (vi) above. 
(C)  Eligible Employees who were hired on or after January 1, 1986 will receive a monthly Long Term Disability Benefit equal to the greater of: a) 50% of the Eligible Employee's Monthly Compensation as adjusted pursuant to Section 6-2(e)(2)(v) and (vi) above; or b) the value of the following as adjusted pursuant to Section 6-2(e)(2)(v) and (vi) above: 
(1)  For Eligible Employees who are sworn members of the Atlanta Police Department or Atlanta Fire Rescue Department hired on or after January 1, 1986 and before November 1, 2011: Monthly Compensation, multiplied by Years of Service at the Date of Disability, multiplied by 3%, multiplied by the Vesting Percentage (if any) set forth in Section 6-2(d)(4)(ii)(B) above. 
(2)  For all non-sworn Eligible Employees hired before November 1, 2011: Monthly Compensation, multiplied by Years of Service at the Date of Disability, multiplied by 2.5%, multiplied by the Vesting Percentage (if any) set forth in Section 6-2(d)(4)(ii)(B) above. 
(3)  For all Eligible Employees hired on or after November 1, 2011: Monthly Compensation, multiplied by Years of Service at the Date of Disability, multiplied by 2%, multiplied by the Vesting Percentage (if any) set forth in Section 6-2(d)(4)(ii)(B) above. 
ii.  Disability Not in the Line of Duty: 
(A)  Disability Not in the Line of Duty means that an Eligible Employee Is Totally and Permanently Disabled due to an injury that did not occur while in the line of duty or due to an illness that was not contracted solely as a result of activities performed while in the line of duty. 
(B)  An Eligible Employee who was hired before 1986 will receive a monthly Long Term Disability Benefit that is equal to: 
1.  For Eligible Employees who are sworn members of the Atlanta Police Department or Atlanta Fire Rescue Department: Monthly Compensation, multiplied by Years of Service at the Date of Disability, multiplied by 3%. This amount shall be adjusted as set forth in Section 6-2(e)(2)(v) above. 
2.  For all non-sworn Eligible Employees: Monthly Compensation, multiplied by Years of Service at the Date of Disability, multiplied by 2.5%. This amount shall be adjusted as set forth in Section 6-2(e)(2)(v) above. 
(C)  Eligible Employees who were hired on or after January 1, 1986 and with at least 5 Years of Service will receive a monthly Long Term Disability Benefit equal to the greater of: a) 50% of the Eligible Employee's Monthly Compensation, as adjusted pursuant to Section 6-2(e)(2)(v) above; or b) the value of the following as adjusted pursuant to Section 6-2(e)(2)(v) above: 
1.  For Eligible Employees who are sworn members of the Atlanta Police Department or Atlanta Fire Rescue Department hired after January 1, 1986 and before November 1, 2011: Monthly Compensation, multiplied by Years of Service at the Date of Disability, multiplied by 3%, multiplied by the Vesting Percentage (if any) set forth in Section 6-2(d)(4)(ii)(B) above. 
2.  For all non-sworn Eligible Employees hired before November 1, 2011: Monthly Compensation, multiplied by Years of Service at the Date of Disability, multiplied by 2.5%, multiplied by the Vesting Percentage (if any) set forth in Section 6-2(d)(4)(ii)(B) above. 
3.  For all Eligible Employees hired on or after November 1, 2011: Monthly Compensation, multiplied by Years of Service at the Date of Disability, multiplied by 2%, multiplied by the Vesting Percentage (if any) set forth in Section 6-2(d)(4)(ii)(B) above. 
iii.  Catastrophic Injury in the Line of Duty: 
(A)  For purposes of this Section 6-2(e), "Catastrophic Injury" shall mean a sudden, violent, life-threatening injury sustained on or after November 1, 2011 by an Eligible Employee in the line of duty, that causes the Employee to be Totally and Permanently Disabled, and which injury is due to an externally-caused event or events. Catastrophic Injury shall be determined by the DSB Committee based upon the procedure set forth in Section 6-2(e)(2)(i) above. Examples of Catastrophic Injury shall include without limitation the following: 
1.  Loss of sight in one or both eyes; 
2.  Loss of one or both feet at or above the ankle; 
3.  Loss of one or both hands at or above the wrist; 
4.  An injury to the spine that results in permanent and complete paralysis of both arms, both legs, or one arm and one leg; 
5.  An externally caused traumatic physical injury to the brain or skull that renders one physically or mentally unable to perform two or more Activities of Daily Living (feeding oneself, dressing, continence, bathing, toileting and transferring, i.e. getting in and out of bed), driving a motor vehicle, or similar activities; and/or 
6.  A permanent severely disabling injury or disorder that compromises the ability to carry out the activities of daily living to such a degree that the individual requires personal or mechanical assistance to leave home or bed or requires constant supervision to avoid physical harm to self or others. 
(B)  Any Eligible Employee who receives a Catastrophic Injury in the Line of Duty will receive a fixed monthly Long Term Disability Benefit equal to 100% of the top salary for the payroll grade and position that s/he occupied at the Date of Disability. 
(4)  Where an Eligible Employee believes that she has suffered a Total and Permanent Disability, s/he shall notify the DSB Committee as soon as practicable based upon the Eligible Employee's condition after the injury or illness is incurred. In addition, where a City Commissioner has any employee in her/his Department that claims to be Totally and Permanently Disabled, the Commissioner shall immediately notify the Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources, who shall immediately notify the DSB Committee. The DSB Committee shall determine if the Employee is an Eligible Employee, and if so, shall conduct an investigation and make a written determination regarding whether the Eligible Employee is Totally and Permanently Disabled, whether the Disability arose in the line of duty, and whether the Eligible Employee Suffered a Catastrophic Injury in the Line of Duty. The written determination shall be issued within 90 days of the date on which the DSB Committee was informed of the disability claim. 
(5)  Where the DSB Committee determines that an Eligible Employee is Totally and Permanently Disabled, and the Eligible Employee receives a Disability Benefit, the DSB Committee shall have the right to conduct an annual review of the Eligible Employee's condition. A review may occur more often than one time per year if the DSB Committee reasonably believes that the Eligible Employee is no longer Totally and Permanently Disabled. The DSB Committee shall conduct its review and make its determination using the procedure set forth in Section 6-2(e)(2)(i) above. As part of this review, the DSB Committee shall have the right to require the Eligible Employee to submit to a medical examination. The purpose of the examination shall be to determine whether the Eligible Employee has recovered sufficiently such that s/he is able to return to a job or work position for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. If the DSB Committee determines that the Eligible Employee is no longer Totally and Permanently Disabled, the payment of the Long Term Disability Benefit shall be discontinued. The City or the Eligible Employee may appeal the DSB Committee's determination(s) pursuant to applicable law and the process established by the DSB Committee. 
(6)  All Employees who are not DB Plan Participants or "Eligible Employees" shall receive Long Term Disability Insurance coverage through their participation in the Retirement Plan." 
(f)  Survivor Benefit. 
(1)  A Survivor Benefit is established pursuant to this Section 6-2. The Survivor Benefit is paid to the designated beneficiary of an Eligible Employee if the Employee dies prior to retiring from the City, and the death occurs on or after November 1, 2011. The terms of calculating and providing the Survivor Benefit are set forth below in this Section 6-2(f). The Survivor Benefit is different from the survivor pension benefit established in and provided pursuant to the DB Plans. DB Plan Participants hired prior to September 1, 2011, except for DB Hybrid Participants, may not receive a Survivor Benefit, but shall be eligible to receive a Survivor Pension through the applicable DB Plan. 
(2)  The City of Atlanta will provide a Survivor Benefit that shall be paid monthly to the designated beneficiary or beneficiaries of an Eligible Employee at the time of her/his death, as calculated below in this Section 6-2(f), but only if the death occurs prior to the Eligible Employee's retirement. 
(3)  Each Eligible Employee must designate a primary beneficiary and, if desired, a secondary beneficiary for the purpose of receiving a Survivor Benefit. 
(i)  The primary beneficiary and secondary beneficiary (if any) must be a "Qualified Beneficiary," thereby meeting one of the following descriptions: 
(A)  The spouse or domestic partner (as defined in the Atlanta Code of Ordinances) of the Eligible Employee; and/or 
(B)  The child or children (natural or legally adopted) of the Eligible Employee who is/are unmarried, and is either younger than 18 years of age, or younger than 23 years of age and enrolled as a full-time student at an accredited secondary school, college or university. 
(ii)  The Eligible Employee may not designate the same Qualified Beneficiary as a primary and a secondary beneficiary. 
(iii)  The Eligible Employee may change her/his primary and or secondary beneficiary to another Qualified Beneficiary/Beneficiaries in the manner prescribed by the City. Such changes may be made at any time, provided that the Employee does not make changes more than one time per month. 
(iv)  If the primary beneficiary should no longer meet the definition of "Qualified Beneficiary" at the time of the Eligible Employee's death, the entire Survivor Benefit shall be provided to the secondary beneficiary (if any) provided that s/he is a Qualified Beneficiary. 
(4)  Upon the death of an Eligible Employee, her/his primary and/or secondary Beneficiary may apply to the Disability and Survivor Benefits Committee for a Survivor Benefit equal to 75% of the application of the following formula: 
(i)  For Eligible Employees who are sworn members of the Atlanta Police Department or Atlanta Fire Rescue Department and hired before November 1, 2011: Monthly Compensation, multiplied by Years of Service at the date of death, multiplied by 3%, multiplied by the Vesting Percentage (if any) set forth in Section 6-2(d)(4)(ii)(B) above. 
(ii)  For all non-sworn Eligible Employees hired before November 1, 2011: Monthly Compensation, multiplied by Years of Service at the date of death, multiplied by 2.5%, multiplied by the Vesting Percentage (if any) set forth in Section 6-2(d)(4)(ii)(B) above. 
(iii)  For all Eligible Employees hired on or after November 1, 2011: Monthly Compensation, multiplied by Years of Service at the date of death, multiplied by 2%, multiplied by the Vesting Percentage (if any) set forth in Section 6-2(d)(4)(ii)(B) above. 
(iv)  For the calculations above, where an Eligible Employee received a Disability Benefit during any portion of her/his Years of Service, the "Years of Service at the date of death" calculation shall include the years or parts thereof in which s/he received a Disability Benefit. 
(5)  The total monthly value of the Survivor Benefit shall be reduced by the monthly amount of the Eligible Employee's survivor pension benefit as calculated under the applicable DB Pension Plan as amended by this Section 6-2, such that the total monthly payment of the Survivor Benefit plus the survivor pension benefit shall not exceed 100% of the monthly value of the Survivor Benefit as calculated herein. 
(6)  Where an Eligible Employee dies as a result of injuries incurred in the line of duty, her/his primary Qualified Beneficiary may receive a monthly payment for two years following the date of the Employee's death, and such payment shall be equal to the Compensation to which such Eligible Employee would have been entitled had s/he remained in active service. At the expiration of the two-year period referred to herein, the Survivor Benefit due the primary beneficiary shall be computed in accordance with the formula described in Section 6-2(f)(4) above, except that the Eligible Employee's vesting percentage shall be calculated as 100%. The Survivor Benefit for a primary Qualified Beneficiary shall be paid to the secondary Qualified Beneficiary or Beneficiaries upon the death or ineligibility of the primary Qualified Beneficiary. 
(7)  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources shall immediately notify the Disability Survivor Benefit Committee upon the death of any employee in her/his Department. The DSB Committee shall determine if the Employee is an Eligible Employee, and if so, shall conduct an investigation and make a written determination regarding whether the Eligible Employee's death was incurred in line of duty. It shall also determine whether the primary and secondary beneficiaries are Qualified Beneficiaries. The written determination shall be issued within 90 days of the date on which the DSB Committee was informed of the death. The DSB Committee shall conduct its review and make its determination using the procedure set forth in Section 6-2(e)(2)(i) above. The City, the primary beneficiary and/or the secondary beneficiary may appeal the DSB Committee's determination pursuant to applicable law and the process established by the DSB Committee. 
(g)  DB Hybrid Option. 
(1)  Each DB Plan Participant hired prior to September 1, 2011 shall be given a choice about the Retirement Plan benefit package s/he receives on and after November 1, 2011. Specifically, each said DB Plan Participant may choose to: 1) continue in the Defined Benefit Plan pursuant to the terms being applied prior to November 1, 2011 as modified by this Section 6-2, and particularly as modified by Section 6-2(d)(2) that sets forth the increased employee contribution; or 2) receive a slightly modified version of the Retirement Plan benefit package provided to DB Plan Participants hired on and after September 1, 2011, as set forth below in this Section 6-2(g). In order to select the DB Hybrid Option, the DB Plan Participant must notify the City in writing in the manner and at the time prescribed by the City. Where the Employee does not provide written notification as prescribed by the City, the Employee will be deemed as choosing not to participate in the DB Hybrid Option. A decision of whether to participate in the DB hybrid Option is irreversible. 
(2)  Upon retirement, a DB Hybrid Participant shall receive the Pension Benefit s/he accumulated prior to November 1, 2011 (the calculation of which may include Compensation for work performed on or after November 1, 2011), plus the benefits accumulated from the Retirement Plan on and after November 1. 2011. 
(3)  For the Pension Benefit accumulated prior to November 1, 2011 by a DB Hybrid Participant, the amount of the Employee's pension ("Pre-Change Pension Benefit") shall be calculated as set forth below in Section 6-2(g)(6). 
(4)  Retirement Plan contributions by a DB Hybrid Participant on and after November 1. 2011 shall consist of 1) DB Plan Contributions as set forth in Section 6-2(d)(3) above; 2) DC Plan Mandatory Contributions as set forth in Section 6-2(c)(2) above; and may include 3) DC Plan Voluntary Contributions as set forth in Section 6-2(c)(5) above. 
(5)  A DB Hybrid Participant's Retirement Plan benefits for on and after November 1, 2011 shall be comprised of: 1) the Pension Benefit calculated as set forth above in Section 6-2(d)(4) as modified by Section 6-2(d)(6)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (vii) only. Provisions 6-2(d)(6)(v) and (vi) shall not apply to DB Hybrid Participants. The Retirement Age and Age Penalty shall be determined in the manner utilized for DB Members hired prior to September 1, 2011 who are not DB Hybrid Participants; 2) earnings from the Employee's Mandatory Contributions into the Section 401(a) portion of her/his Retirement Account and related City match contributions as described above in Section 6-2(c)(2); and earnings from the Employee's Voluntary Contributions into the Section 457(b) portion of her/his Retirement Account and related City match contributions as set forth in Section 6-2(c)(5). 
(6)  The calculation of the DB Hybrid Participant's Pre-Change Pension Benefit shall be as set forth in Section 6-2(d)(4) above, except for the following: 
(i)  The value of Years of Service in the DB Hybrid Participant's Pre-Change Pension Benefit Formula shall be the Years of Service between her/his date of hire and November 1, 2011. The value of the Years of Service factor in the DB Plan Participant's Pre-Change Benefit Formula shall be equal to the Years of Service accrued as of midnight on October 31, 2011. The DB Plan Participant will have a one-time opportunity to utilize her/his unused sick leave as of midnight October 31, 2011 to increase the Years of Service value in the Pre-Change Benefit Formula, provided that s/he retains no fewer than 80 hours of unused sick leave for future use. The increase shall be calculated as described in the applicable DB Plan, except that retirement shall not be required to apply the sick leave in this manner. The DB Plan Participant must designate the number of sick leave hours s/he wishes to apply to the Pre-Change Benefit Formula prior to November 1, 2011, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the City. Any sick leave hours used by the DB Plan Participant to enhance her/his Years of Service value may not be used in the future for sick leave or any other purpose 
(ii)  The value of Annual Compensation in the DB Hybrid Participant's Pre-Change Pension Benefit Formula shall be calculated based upon the highest Compensation received by the Employee over a consecutive 36 month period, regardless of whether all or a portion of the consecutive 36 months occurs prior to November 1, 2011. The Compensation amount may be increased by adding the value of unused annual leave as described in the applicable DB Plan. 
(7)  The Long Term Disability Benefits and Survivor Benefits afforded to DB Employees hired on or after November 1, 2011, as described in Sections 6-2(e) and (f) above, shall be provided to DB Hybrid Participants on and after November 1, 2011. 
(h)  The City will engage an accredited actuarial firm to provide annual actuarial valuations ("Actuarial Valuation") of the three Defined Benefit Plans. Each Actuarial Valuation shall include a calculation of the Actual Required Contribution ("ARC") owed by the City in the upcoming fiscal year. 
(1)  Where an Actuarial Valuation anticipates that the City's ARC for the next fiscal year will exceed 35% of the Total Payroll (the "Cap"), a Cost Recovery Plan shall be implemented. The Cost Recovery Plan shall consist of the following: 
(i)  The Mayor or her/his designee shall direct the actuary to present an analysis of the ARC's escalation and to provide additional information as requested by herself/himself or by the City Council. 
(ii)  The first fiscal year that the ARC exceeds the Cap, the City will pay the full amount of the Overage. The Overage shall be paid from the City's General Fund reserves, and the details of the payment will be set forth in duly enacted legislation. 
(iii)  During that first fiscal year, a committee shall be formed to identify potential methods and sources for mitigating and/or paying for the Overage in future fiscal years, and the committee shall provide recommendations to the City Council and the Mayor. These recommendations may include, without limitation, increasing employee and/or City DB contributions, modifying pension benefits, and/or utilizing alternative funding sources. The Committee shall be comprised of: the Mayor or her/his designee; the City Council President or her/his designee; the Chair of the Finance Executive Committee; the Chief Operating Officer; the Chief Financial Officer; the City Attorney; one elected representative from the General Employees' Pension Fund, from the Firefighters' Pension Fund, and from the Police Officers' Pension Fund; and the President or her/his designee of AFSCME, IAFF, IBPO and PACE, or the successor organization of any of these unions. No recommendation by the committee shall take effect unless and until it is authorized by duly enacted legislation. 
(iv)  In the event that the City fails to enact legislation directing how the Overage will be funded during the second and/or future years in which the CAP is exceeded, the cost of the Overage shall be shared equally by the City and the DB Plan Participants. The DB Plan Participants shall pay their portion of the Overage through increased contributions in a cumulative amount that is one half of the Overage, except that the amount of a Participant's increased contribution in any given fiscal year shall not exceed 5% of her/his Compensation. This increase amount shall be paid in addition to the Employee's current DB Plan contribution as set forth in Section 6-2(d)(2), (d)(3) or (g)(4). The City will pay the full amount of that portion of the Overage that exceeds 10% in any given fiscal year. In a fiscal year where no Overage exists, the Employee shall not pay an increased DB Plan contribution, but shall pay only her/his current DB Plan contribution as established by Section 6-2(d)(2), (d)(3) or (g)(4). 
(v)  In each fiscal year for which the City has failed to enact legislation directing how the Overage will be funded, the amount of the Employees' and the City's increased contributions shall be modified based upon the size of the Overage as set forth in the Actuarial Valuation. The amount of the increased contributions shall be calculated as set forth in the immediately preceding subsection (iv). For the avoidance of doubt, each DB Plan Participant's 5% of Compensation increase amount shall not escalate above the 5% total from year to year. 
(vi)  Where the Overage is eliminated in a fiscal year, but reappears within one or both of the next two fiscal years, the payment of the Overage shall be shared by the DB Plan Participants and the City as set forth in Subsections (iv) and (v) above, without the one year payment made solely by the City as set forth in Subsection (ii) above. Where the Overage is eliminated and the ARC remains lower than the CAP for more than 2 consecutive fiscal years, a new Cost Recovery Plan shall thereafter be implemented if and when the ARC exceeds the CAP. 
(2)  In the event that the unfunded liability amount reaches 15% or less, the City may reduce the DB Plan Participants' contribution amount through duly enacted legislation. 
(3)  If a Court with jurisdiction over this matter rules that this Section 6-2(i) is invalid, illegal or unenforceable, the validity, legality and enforceability of the remaining provisions of this Section 6-2 shall not be affected or impaired by said ruling. 
(i)  The City may modify one or more of the DB Plans, the DC Retirement Plan, and/or any other aspect of the Retirement Plan in a manner that is consistent with applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2011-27(11-O-0672), §§ 3—10, 6-29-11; Ord. No. 2013-10(13-O-0440), § 1, 4-24-13) 
Secs. 6-3—6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NONUNIFORMED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-36. - Establishment of funds. 
There shall be raised and established funds for the pension of all officers and employees now in active service and on the payrolls, and future officers and employees in all cities in Georgia having a population of more than 300,000, according to the United States decennial census of 1970, or any such future census. 
(1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, § 1; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 3801, § 1; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 3803, § 1) 
Sec. 6-37. - 1978 Pension Act. 
(a)  The pension benefits provided by this section and the several subsections hereof shall be in lieu of like pension benefits provided by the existing provisions of this Act [1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended]. 
(b)  (1) Any officer or employee coming under the terms of this Act who is in the employment of the city prior to the effective date of this amendment may elect to come under the provisions of this amendment by making written application to the board of trustees. The applicant must agree in writing to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment, in lieu of other pension benefits and obligations under this Act, as amended. 
All such officers and employees in the employment of the city on the effective date of this Act who do not in writing agree to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment shall have their rights and obligations determined under the law as it existed prior to this amendment, even though such provisions of law are specifically repealed as hereinafter set forth. 
All regular officers or employees of the city, eligible for participation in this Act, as amended, who shall be elected or employed after the effective date of this Act, shall be required to come under provisions of this Act, as now amended, and shall have all rights and duties provided in the amended Act. Temporary and casual employees shall not be required to participate in this Act, as amended. 
(2)  Pension Application; Procedure. Unless the pension applicant withdraws a pending application for pension benefits, or abandons his or her appeal from the denial of such application by the board of trustees, no new application for a different category of pension benefits shall be accepted by the board of trustees. Further, whenever an officer or employee has been granted a certain category of pension benefits, no new application for a different category shall be accepted by the board of trustees. (1981 Ga. Laws, page 4376, § 1) 
(c)  All officers and employees, who shall elect or required to come under the terms of this amendment, may as a matter of right retire from active service and receive a monthly pension benefit hereinafter set forth and referred to hereinafter as a "normal monthly pension benefit," provided such person shall have served 15 years in the active service of such city and shall have attained the age of 60 years prior to commencement of such benefit. Upon such officer or employee retiring as a matter of right, such person shall be paid thereafter a normal monthly pension benefit equal to two percent of such person's average monthly earnings multiplied by the number of such person's years, or fraction thereof, of creditable service and that normal pension benefit shall not exceed 100 percent of such person's average monthly earnings. Average monthly earnings shall be the average of the monthly earnings of the highest three consecutive years' salary or earnings during the term of employment. In computing the average monthly earnings, if the officer or employee shall have received a lump sum payment for compensation, accumulated vacation, sick leave bonus pay, or similar benefits, the amounts of such payments shall be equally distributed over the period of time in which such compensation or benefit was earned or accumulated. 
Effective September 1, 2005, the following employees shall be eligible to participate under the terms of this act: 
(1)  An employee of the City of Atlanta who was participating under the terms of this act on August 31, 2005; 
(2)  An employee of the City of Atlanta who transfers his account balance under the City of Atlanta Defined Contribution Plan to the fund established under this act pursuant to section 6-102; 
(3)  An employee of the City of Atlanta who commences or recommences permanent, full-time employment on or after September 1, 2005 as a classified employee, as defined in section 114-84 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta; 
(4)  An employee of the City of Atlanta who commences or recommences permanent, full-time employment on or after September 1, 2005 at payroll grade level 18 or below; 
(5)  A permanent, full-time employee of the City of Atlanta who is either a classified employee, as defined in section 114-84 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta, or employed at grade level 18 or below and who on or after September 1, 2005 ceases to be ineligible to participate under the terms of this act by reason of being a non-civilian employee in the Department of Fire Services or a sworn officer of the Department of Police Services; and 
(6)  An employee of the Atlanta Independent School System who is not covered under the Teachers Retirement System of Georgia. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an individual who is or at any time becomes a temporary or casual employee, an employee hired on a contract basis, an employee with an account balance under the City of Atlanta Defined Contribution Plan who has not elected to transfer his account balance to the fund established under this act pursuant to section 6-102, a non-civilian employee in the Department of Fire Services or a sworn officer of the Department of Police Services shall not be eligible to participate under the terms of this act while classified as one of the foregoing. Furthermore, civilian employees hired as police recruits or fire recruits in anticipation of becoming sworn officers of the Department of Fire or Department of Police shall be ineligible to participate under the terms of this act. All employees eligible to participate under this act shall be required to do so. 
(d)  All officers and employees, who shall elect or be required to come under the term of this amendment, may as a matter of right retire from active service and receive an early retirement benefit, hereinafter referred to as "early monthly retirement benefit," provided such person shall ha e served 15 years in the active service of such city. When such officer or employee shall elect early retirement as a matter of right, such person shall be paid thereafter an early monthly retirement benefit equal to a normal monthly pension benefit less one-half of one percent per month for each month not to exceed 60 months that the officer or employee lacks in being 60 years of age and one-fourth of one percent per month for each month in excess of 60 months that the officer or employee lacks in being 60 years of age. Provided, however, as to any officer or employee coming under the terms of this act who was in the employment of such city prior to the effective date of this amendment, such officer or employee may elect a monthly pension benefit, hereinafter referred to as a "reduced monthly pension benefit," provided such person shall have served 25 years and shall have attained the age of 55 years. Said reduced monthly pension benefit shall be equal to a normal monthly pension benefit less one-twelfth of two percent per month for each month the officer or employee lacks in being 60 years of age. 
(e)  (1) Whenever any officer or employee, electing to or having been required to come under the terms of this amendment, shall have completed at least five (5) years of active service with such city and not yet have reached the age of 60 years, then such person shall have the right to terminate such person's employment with such city upon completion of said five (5) years, or any time thereafter; elect not to withdraw or have paid to such person the amount which said person would have paid into the pension fund prior to terminating such employment; and upon subsequently attaining 60 years of age commence to receive at said time, and be paid thereafter a monthly pension benefit, hereinafter referred to as a "vested monthly pension benefit," as set forth below based upon the number of years of completed service: 
a.  Completion of 10 or more years of service—A normal monthly pension benefit (100% vested). 
b.  Completion of less than 10 years of service—-the vesting schedule is as follows: 
Completion of 9 years = 45% Completion of 8 years = 40% Completion of 7 years = 35% Completion of 6 years = 30% Completion of 5 years = 25% Completion of less than 5 years = 0% 
Should such person have provided for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary, as authorized by said Act, as amended, by making the required payment or contribution to the pension fund, then after terminating the employment with such city, thereby electing to exercise such person's vesting rights, and upon the death of such officer or employee, either before or after attaining 60 years of age, such beneficiary designated under the terms of this Act, as amended, shall be entitled to a beneficiary pension equal to three-fourths of the amount the pensioner was receiving or such person would have received in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Act, as amended. 
(2)  Pension Benefits; No Simultaneous Payment of Benefits and Salary; No Entitlement to Interest. 
a.  Whenever an officer or employee has been declared eligible for pension benefits, such pension benefits shall only commence the day following the last day of paid employment for such city. 
b.  In each and every instance where pension benefits shall become payable pursuant to this Act, as amended, such payments shall be limited to the statutorily required amount as provided by this Act, as amended, and shall be exclusive of interest or other amounts. (1981 Ga. Laws, page 4376, § 5) 
(f)  No department head who elects to come under the provision of this Act shall be entitled to receive any emeritus salary as provided by the governing authorities of any city coming within the provisions of this Act. 
(g)  (1) Any officer or employee who is a member of the pension fund shall be considered totally and permanently disabled by the board of trustees while the officer or employee is in a continuous state of incapacity due to illness or injury: 
a.  During the first 12 months which the officer or employee is prevented from performing his/her regular, assigned or comparable duties; and 
b.  Thereafter, if the condition continues to prevent the officer or employee from engaging in any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
(2) A member who is considered by the board of trustees to be totally and permanently disabled in accordance with subsection (g)(1)a. and b. on or after January 1, 1986, shall receive a monthly disability benefit which shall commence on the day following the officer's or employee's last date on the payroll and continue until the earlier of: 
a.  Cessation of total and permanent disability; 
b.  Attainment of age 60. 
(3) Such monthly disability benefit shall be equal to 50 percent of the officer's or employee's average monthly earnings during the highest three (3) consecutive years of service prior to the date of approval by the board of trustees or the officer's or employee's accrued normal retirement benefit, whichever is greater. 
(4) Upon the cessation of disability benefits pursuant to section (g)(2)a. or b. and the officer's or employee's failure to return to city employment, the officer or employee would be entitled to a pension benefit as calculated in accordance with subsection b., c. or d. of 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546, as applicable. Provided further, that the calculation of any such subsequent benefit shall include credit for all years and fractions thereof during the time disability pension benefits have been paid, but shall not include credit for any disability pension payments made. Provided further, that for the purposes of calculating any cost of living adjustments, the subsequent benefits shall be considered as a new pension with a new effective date. 
(5) Disability pension benefits shall be offset by worker's compensation payments so that the combination of payments shall not exceed 75 percent of the officer's or employee's salary at the time disability pension benefits are to commence or 60 percent of an officer's or employee's salary at the time of disability or death in the case of a beneficiary. However, this subsection shall not affect any cost-of-living adjustments as provided in subsection (h), nor prevent the restoration of disability pension benefits payable upon the reduction or termination of any such compensation benefits payable by the city under applicable worker's compensation laws. 
(6)  a. Pensions for beneficiaries designated under the terms of this Act, as amended, shall be three-fourths of the amount the pensioner was receiving, at the time of his death, as a result of retirement as a matter of right or because of total and permanent disability; or three-fourths of the amount such officer or employee would have been entitled to receive had such person retired prior to death. 
b.  The pension benefits for a primary beneficiary shall be continued to the secondary beneficiary, upon the death, or ineligibility for benefits, of the primary beneficiary. Provided, however, if such primary beneficiary was not receiving the maximum beneficiary payment provided for in this Act because of any provision of this Act reducing such amount, such maximum beneficiary amount shall be paid to the secondary beneficiary, notwithstanding any lesser amount previously paid to the primary beneficiary. 
c.  No spouse, designated as a beneficiary, shall be entitled to receive any of said service pension benefits unless such spouse shall have been legally married to such officer or employee of such city for a period of one (1) year prior to the death of such pensioner; provided the officer or employee has made payment for such benefits prior to retirement. No domestic partner, designated as a beneficiary, shall be entitled to receive any of said service pension benefits unless such domestic partner shall have been legally registered as a domestic partner for a period of one (1) year prior to the death of such pensioner; provided the officer or employee has made payment for such benefits prior to retirement. 
d.  In determining all pensions of officers or employees referred to above, fractional parts of years of service shall be counted and accumulated annual sick leave days credited to such officer or employee shall be counted as provided for in paragraph e. 
e.  In determining creditable service, accumulated, unused sick leave days credited to such officer or employee shall be added as work days to the creditable service otherwise provided by this Act, as amended. In determining average monthly earnings, such accumulated unused sick leave days shall be credited at the highest daily rate of regular salary or earnings during the highest three (3) consecutive years' salary or earnings; and all accumulated unused sick leave days shall be substituted for a like number of days at the lowest rate of regular salary or earnings during such highest three (3) consecutive years' salary or earnings during the term of employment. 
f.  Any person entitled to disability benefits under the provisions of this Act, as amended, may receive benefits after he/she has been in the active employment of the city for at least a period of five (5) years. Provided, however, said requirement shall not apply to an officer or employee disabled as a direct result of a traumatic event or events occurring during and as a result of the performance of an officer's or employee's regular or assigned duties and not the result of such officer's or employee's willful negligence. 
(7) Disability pensions; annual review. The retirement of a pension applicant by reason of permanent and total disability shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The board of trustees shall have the right to at least once a year require the pensioner to submit to a medical examination for the purpose of determining whether or not the pensioner has sufficiently recovered from his/her disability and is able to return to any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
b.  If the board, after such examination, determines that the pensioner is not actually totally and permanently disabled and is able to return to any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience, then the payment of such disability pension shall cease. (1981 Ga. Laws, page 4376, §§ 3, 7; Ord. No. 1985-94, § 1, 12-19-85; Ord. No. 1987-29, § 1, 4-8-87; Ord. No. 1994-45, § 1, 9-25-94; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1, 3-23-06; Ord. No. 2010-32(10-O-0911), §§ 1, 2, 6-29-10 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1987-29, § 2, provides as follows: "The provisions of this amendment shall apply only to all officers and employees who are not covered by the 1986 Amendment" i.e., this subsection (g). 
The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
(h)  Any person coming under the provisions of this amendment, either voluntarily or by compulsion, shall be entitled to cost-of-living adjustments as hereinafter set forth. As used herein, the following terms shall have the following meaning: 
(1) Current average cost-of-living index. The average of the monthly Consumer Price Index for the 12 month period from November 1 through October 31, prior to the annual adjustment date, as determined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor for all items and major groups, United States city average. 
(2) Pensioner base index. The average of the Consumer Price Index for the 12 month period ending two (2) months prior to the date of retirement for any participant who retires under the provisions of this amendment. In the event the base year used in computing the monthly Consumer Price Index should be changed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the board of trustees shall, with the advice of an independent actuary, adjust the pensioner base index of each retired pensioner and of each pensioner or beneficiary, with benefit payments commencing during the first year in which such change was made, so as to effect the original intent of this section in an equitable manner. 
(3) Adjusted pensioner index. The pensioner base index, adjusted, on a cumulative basis, for all percentage adjustments made in benefits prior to the current annual adjustment date. The adjusted pensioner index and the pensioner base index shall be applicable to any beneficiary becoming entitled to benefits under this amendment in the same manner as they would have been applicable to the pensioner had such pensioner continued in life. 
(4) Annual adjustment date. January 1 of each year. 
The board of trustees shall ascertain in the current average cost-of-living index as of January 1 each year, and the benefits being paid under this amendment shall be adjusted as of the annual adjustment date as follows: If the current average cost-of-living index is more than 100 percent of the adjusted pensioner index, the benefit shall be increased by a percentage equal to the difference between 100 percent and the percentage representing the current average cost-of-living index divided by such person's adjusted pensioner index. If the current average cost-of-living index is less than 100 percent of the adjusted pensioner index, such person's basic benefit shall be reduced by a percentage equal to the difference between 100 percent and the percentage representing the current average cost-of-living index divided by his adjusted pensioner index. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, no increase or decrease in the amount of the monthly retirement benefit due to changes in the current average cost-of-living index, effective at any annual adjustment date, shall be in excess of three percent (3%) of the amount of the monthly retirement benefit payable immediately prior to such date. Neither shall the provisions of this subsection be applied so as to reduce the amount of the benefits of a pensioner or beneficiary to an amount less than that to which such pensioner or beneficiary would be entitled to receive under the other provisions of this amendment. 
(i)  There shall be deducted from the total salary of any officer or employee electing to come under this amendment the sum of seven percent (7%), in the event such person does not provide for payment of a pension to such person's beneficiary, as authorized by this Act, as amended, or the sum of eight percent (8%) in the event such person does provide for the continuance of a pension to such person's beneficiary. Like deductions shall be made from the salary of future employees required to come under this amendment. 
(j)  (1) In addition to the payments required to be made in subsection (i) above, any officer or employee who becomes a participant under this amendment shall be entitled to all benefits and receive credit for all the years, or fraction thereof, of such person's creditable service, provided such person shall pay into the fund the sum of six percent (6%) of such person's total salary or earnings, received by such person during the years claimed for such creditable service, if such person does not provide for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary; and the sum of seven percent (7%) of such person's total salary or earnings, received during the years claimed for such creditable service, if such person does provide for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary. Payments previously made to the pension fund, not exceeding the amount due to the fund, shall be deducted from the total amount due in arriving at the total payment due, plus any additional sums as may be required by the following provisions for prior service credits. If any part of the creditable service consists of prior service, as defined by this Act, as amended, which was allowed and credited prior to this amendment, the percentages of salary or earnings, used in computing the sum to be paid for such prior service credit shall be twice those set forth above, and shall constitute both the employee and employer contributions. Provided further that payment for any such creditable service rendered on or after April 1, 1978, shall be twice the payment due as computed above. 
Any officer or employee electing to come under the provisions of this amendment within 15 months subsequent to the enactment of this amendment, shall have a period of 60 months from the date of such election in which to pay all back pension contributions, as provided in this subsection, without interest. Any officer or employee electing to come under the provisions of this amendment, subsequent to the expiration of 15 months after the enactment of this amendment, shall have a period of 60 months from the date of such election in which to pay all back pension contributions, as provided in this subsection, and shall be required to pay interest on said back pension contributions at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum from July 1, 1979, to the date of such payment. The board of trustees is authorized to establish rules and regulations for extending the period in which back pension contributions may be paid provided that interest in the amount of seven percent (7%) per annum shall be added to any amounts not paid within the above specified period. The board of trustees shall require as a prerequisite for the granting of such extension an assignment of life insurance in an amount sufficient to cover the outstanding obligation. 
(2) Employee Back Pension Contributions; Deductions From Benefits; Assignment of Group Life Insurance Proceeds. 
a.  In the event an officer or employee obligated to pay back pension contributions should retire or die before said payments into the fund are completed, the secretary of the retirement fund is authorized to deduct an appropriate amount, as determined by the board of trustees, from the monthly retirement or beneficiary benefits, or in lieu thereof, such lump sum amounts as the board, in its discretion, deems appropriate until the obligation is discharged. 
b.  In the event an officer or employee obligated to pay back pension contributions should retire before said payments into the fund are completed, the board of trustees shall require, in consideration of the payment of such indebtedness, an assignment of such officer's or employee's group life insurance in an amount sufficient to satisfy the outstanding obligation. (1981 Ga. Laws, page 4376, § 4) 
(k)  (1) Any officer or employee coming under the provisions of this amendment shall be entitled to all of the forms and types of prior service authorized under the Act approved August 20, 1927 (1927 Ga. Laws, page 265 et seq.) as amended, prior to this amendment. Provided, however, contributions for any such prior service shall be based on the salary or wages then being earned by such officer or employee as and when such person becomes eligible for such prior service and such is credited. 
To be eligible for such prior service credit, the officer or employee must have completed at least five (5) continuous years in the employment of the city, and must have filed, five (5) years prior thereto, an application with the board of trustees for such prior service credit. Thereafter prior service credit may be granted to such person eligible and continuing in the service of such city on a pay period basis (one (1) year of prior service credit, not to exceed a maximum of 10 years, for each year such person continues in the service of such city) upon the payment of contributions by such person for such prior service based on the wages or salary earned by such person at the time of such prior service being credited. 
The contributions to be paid by such officer or employee, herein referred to, shall be at the rates set forth in subsection (i) above, plus the rates of the employer's contribution set forth in subsection (m). 
(2) Credit for previous city service, contributions, payment. Any officer or employee claiming previous service credit for previous employment as a regular, temporary, or part-time employee of the city may be eligible for previous service credit immediately upon filing application for same, and upon payment of the contribution in accordance with the provisions set forth in subsection (I) of the 1978 Pension Act Amendment (1978 Ga. Laws, pages 4546, 4553) [subsection (j) of this section]; provided, however, the penalty provision of said subsection (I) shall be applicable only to such officers or employees who failed to elect enrollment under said 1978 Pension Act Amendment prior to July 1, 1979, and who terminated employment subsequent to April 1, 1978. The total amount of such required contributions shall be increased by a sum equal to the amount paid into the pension fund by a regular officer or employee and withdrawn upon termination of employment multiplied by an interest factor of seven percent (7%) per annum compounded from the date of termination to the date of filing of the application. The total amount of such required contributions, less a sum equal to the amount previously paid into the pension fund by a regular officer or employee and withdrawn upon termination of employment, shall be increased by an amount equal to such required contributions, less the said amount withdrawn multiplied by an interest factor of seven percent (7%) per annum compounded from the date of termination or July 1, 1979, whichever is later to the date of application. The total amount of such required contribution shall be decreased by the amount previously paid into the pension fund by a regular officer or employee and not withdrawn upon termination of employment plus an amount equal to seven percent (7%) per annum compounded of such amount not withdrawn from the date of termination to the date of filing of the application. As to credit for part-time or temporary service with the city, such previous service credit shall be on the basis of one (1) day for each day worked by such person as a temporary employee or on a part-time basis, except that the required contribution shall be based upon the gross salary of such person at the time of filing of the application for previous service credit. The payment of the contributions of previous service credit for previous employment as a regular, temporary, or part-time employee of the city may be paid upon the filing of the application for such credit or such officer or employee shall have a period of 60 months from the date of filing the application in which to pay such contributions; provided, however, the total amount of such contribution shall bear interest at seven percent (7%) per annum on the unpaid balance. 
The board of trustees is authorized to establish rules and regulations for extending the period in which back pension contributions may be paid provided that interest in the amount of seven percent (7%) per annum shall be added to any amounts not paid within the above-specified period. The board of trustees shall require as a prerequisite for the granting of such extension an assignment of life insurance in an amount sufficient to cover the outstanding obligation. 
(3) Credit for prior service with the Atlanta Housing Authority. Any person employed by the redevelopment division of the Atlanta Housing Authority whose position, duties or functions were transferred to the city effective either November 18, 1975, March, 1978 or February 1, 1981 and who remained an employee of the City until April 1, 1992, shall be eligible immediately to receive credit for all prior service rendered by such person as an employee of the redevelopment division of the Atlanta Housing Authority upon the following terms and conditions: 
a.  Such person shall make application for such credit and provide satisfactory proof of such service and earnings within ninety (90) days of the enactment of this amendment. 
b.  Such person must pay into the pension fund, an amount equal to the amount they would have paid had they been an employee of the City during this period, plus seven percent per annum simple interest on that amount from the first of their employment with the City of Atlanta through June 15, 1992. 
c.  Such payments for prior service credit may be paid upon filing an application for such credit or the person shall have a period of up to 84 months from the date of filing such application. Payments may be deducted from the employee's salary or from their pension benefits. Provided that the total amount due shall include interest at the rate of seven percent per annum on the unpaid balance. 
d.  Any employee who after receiving credit for service with the Atlanta Housing Authority was eligible to retire under the voluntary incentive program and who submitted a retirement application between April 1, 1992 and June 15, 1992, shall be entitled to retire retroactively to June 15, 1992. Provided, however, that pension benefits will be calculated without any credit for service, benefits and salary after June 12, 1992, and shall be paid commencing the day after the employee terminates employment with the City; such employee will receive a refund of their current pension contributions paid after June 12, 1992. 
e.  Entitlements specified under this subsection (3), shall be accorded to the aforementioned employees who are covered by pension provisions prior to the 1978 amendment. (Ord. No. 1992-73, § 1, 12-14-92) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
(l)  This section and the several subsections shall be effective as of April 1, 1978, except for the provisions of subsection (m) which shall be effective as of January 1, 1979. Payments required by subsection (i) above, as to those persons then employed and electing to come under this amendment, shall commence on April 1, 1978. As to such persons subsequently coming into the service of such city or subsequently electing to participate under the terms of this amendment, said payments shall begin with the date of employment or date of such election. 
(m)  (1)  In addition to the funds derived from deductions from salaries and wages, as required by subsection (i) of this amendment, it shall be the duty of the governing authority of such cities to appropriate and pay into the pension fund each year an amount which shall be equal to the actuarially determined percentage of members' salary and wages necessary to pay the normal cost contribution of benefits earned by members and to amortize the unfunded accrued liability of the pension fund on a closed 30-year schedule commencing July 1, 2011, after deducting contributions required of officers and employees required by subsection (i) of this amendment. 
For purposes of paying the required employer contributions provided above, the governing authority of such cities shall be authorized to levy ad valorem taxes payable to the pension fund sufficient to amortize the unfunded accrued liability under provisions of this amendment within a closed schedule of thirty (30) years commencing July 1, 2011, and upon the determination by an independent actuarial valuation as provided in subsection (n) below that such unfunded accrued liability has been amortized, such authorization to levy such ad valorem taxes shall cease. Should said pension fund at any time be insufficient to meet and pay the pension due to such officers and employees, the governing authority shall appropriate from current funds amounts sufficient to make up the deficiency as it relates to the respective officers and employees and deposit same into said pension fund. Should such actuarial valuation as provided in subsection (n) below result in a determination that the total required employer contribution would be less than the contribution required of members by subsection (i) of this amendment, then the contributions required of members by subsection (i) of this amendment shall be reduced and the required employer contributions in this subsection shall be increased so that the member contributions required by subsection (i) will not be greater than the required employer contributions under this subsection. 
(2)  Every three (3) years and prior to submitting the annual fiscal budget for that third year, the Chief Financial Officer for the City of Atlanta shall review and prepare for the chair of the finance executive committee and the boards of trustees a report on the effect the amortization schedule has upon the actuarial accrued liability for the pension funds. 
(n)  When any person covered by the provisions of this Act shall die as a result of injuries incurred in the line of duty, the compensation to which such person would have been entitled had such person continued in active service shall be continued for two years by such city and paid to the primary beneficiary designated by such officer or employee. Any compensation received by the member due to said injury shall be deducted from the two years compensation herein provided for. At the expiration of the two-year period referred to above, the pension benefits due to the beneficiary shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of this amendment. The pension benefits for a primary beneficiary shall be continued to the secondary beneficiaries upon the death or ineligibility of the primary beneficiary. 
The city employing any officer or employee coming under the provisions of this Act shall immediately notify the board of trustees upon the occurrence of the disability or death of any such officer or employee, and the board of trustees shall conduct an investigation within ninety (90) days of the date of the event which caused such disability or death. 
Thereafter, the board of trustees shall make a determination as to whether such disability or death was incurred in line of duty or not in line of duty. Should such city, or any person having an interest in said decision, disagree with such decision of the board then either such city or such person may appeal from such decision as provided by law. 
It shall also be the duty and responsibility of the board of trustees to employ an independent actuary to render an actuarial review of the pension fund at periodic intervals of no more than five (5) years, commencing with the enactment of this amendment. The term "independent actuary" as used herein means a fellow of the Society of Actuaries, or a member of the American Academy of Actuaries, or an organization of which one or more members is a fellow of the Society of Actuaries or a member of the American Academy of Actuaries, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 2009-27(09-O-0776), § 1, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2011-15(11-O-0674), § 1, 5-9-11) 
The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
(o)  The board of trustees is authorized to invest funds accumulated under this act in any manner permitted by the Public Retirement Systems Investment Authority Law, Ga. Stat. Ann. section 47-20-80, et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1992-45, § 2, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 1994-13, § 3, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 1996-37, § 3, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 2005-81, § 1, 11-22-05) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
(p)  Should an officer or employee in the employment of such cities transfer from a position of employment covered by another pension fund to a position of employment covered by this pension fund, the accumulated employee and employer contributions of such officer or employee paid to such other pension fund shall be transferred to this pension fund and such officer or employee shall be credited with all creditable service certified in such other pension fund as though such service had been rendered under this pension fund, and should an officer or employee in the employment of such cities subsequently become eligible for participation in the fund, the accumulated value of a defined contribution 401(a) plan may be applied towards the purchase of the full actuarial value of any prior years service credit that is eligible to such employee and such officer or employee shall be credited the full value of service as rendered under this fund in the amount of creditable service purchased based on the full actuarial value of such credit as determined by the fund's actuary, provided, however, that should such officer or employee retire as a matter of right within three (3) years subsequent to the date of such transfer. The service retirement benefits payable to such officer or employee shall be the lesser of the service retirement payable under the provisions of this Act, as amended, or the provisions of the pension fund from which such officer or employee transferred. 
In addition, should an officer or employee in the employment of such cities subsequently eligible for participation in the Fund, such officer or employee shall be entitled to purchase (at the actuarial value) any prior years service credit for employment with such city. Such employee and such officer or employee shall be credited the full value of service as rendered under this fund in the amount of creditable service purchased based on the full actuarial value of such credit as determined by the fund's actuary. 
(q)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Act, as amended, regarding the rights of officers or employees to designate beneficiaries of their pension benefits after their death, every male or female officer, coming under the provisions of this amendment, either voluntarily or by compulsion, having a spouse or unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under the age of 18 years, or domestic partner shall be compelled to make the necessary additional contributions in order to provide continued pension benefits for such spouse or unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under the age of 18 years, or domestic partner and designated as beneficiaries. 
Nothing herein provided shall prevent an officer or employee from designating a primary beneficiary (spouse or unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under 18 years of age) or domestic partner and a secondary beneficiary (either spouse or unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under 18 years of age or domestic partner and not named as primary beneficiary). If an officer or employee designates a beneficiary, and thereafter such beneficiary should cease to be qualified to receive a pension in the event of the member's death, then such officer or employee may at his or her option, designate some other beneficiary who does qualify for pension benefits under this amendment, and continue to make contributions for such beneficiaries, or should no qualified beneficiary exist, cease to make further contributions for beneficiaries, in which event contributions theretofore made for the benefit of a beneficiary shall not be refunded except insofar as refunds may be allowed by other provisions of this Act, as amended. 
Should any officer or employee become eligible for a service pension and thereafter remain in the service of such city, then upon the death of such person, without having retired, the spouse of such person or registered domestic partner may apply for a beneficiary pension as provided for in this amendment, which shall continue for the life of such spouse. In the event of the death or disqualification of a spouse to receive such beneficiary pension, then the unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under the age of 18 years shall succeed to the rights of such deceased or disqualified spouse, as above provided, and such beneficiary pension shall be continued to such child or children until the youngest living child shall reach the age of 18 years, die, or marry, whichever event should first occur. No child (natural or legally adopted) of such officer or employee shall be entitled to receive any benefits unless such child is less than 18 years of age and unmarried or unless such child is less than 23 years of age and enrolled as a full-time student at an accredited secondary school, college or university, and unmarried. 
Any officer or employee coming under the provisions of this amendment either voluntarily or by compulsion, who, at such time, has no qualified beneficiary, either spouse or unmarried child or children under 18 years of age or registered domestic partner, shall not be required to make the contributions necessary to provide for the continuation of pension benefits to a beneficiary. Provided, however, upon the occurrence of the event by which such officer or employee acquires a qualified beneficiary, then such officer or employee shall immediately commence making required contributions to provide benefits for such beneficiary and shall within a period of two (2) years thereafter, in addition to current requirements, pay into the pension find one percent (1%) of his total salary or earnings for all creditable service prior to the occurrence of such event. 
Any officer or employee, electing to come under the provisions of this Act, who prior thereto had a qualified beneficiary but who had not made the contributions to provide for the payment of continued pension benefits to such beneficiary, shall be required to pay to the pension fund the amount of such beneficiary contributions for the number of years of service with such city and during which such officer or employee had a qualified beneficiary, such payments to be at the rates and in the manner as set forth in subsection (j) hereof. 
In the event that a member dies after retirement, either before or after receiving retirement payments, the named beneficiary, or the member's estate in the absence of a named beneficiary, shall receive a refund in an amount equal to the amount such member paid into said pension fund less the total amount received by such member or beneficiaries in retirement benefits. (Ord. No. 1985-94, § 2, 12-19-85; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 2, 3-23-06) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
(r)  The board of trustees may pool any amount of the funds administered by them with the funds of any other pension or retirement fund for other employees of such city for the purpose of joint investments. When such pooling occurs, the pooled trust funds shall be accounted for in accordance with generally accepted principles of accounting in order to maintain the separate accountability of such pension funds. The board of trustees may employ an independent investment counselor who shall advise them on the best and most appropriate portfolio of investments. 
(s)  The city attorney shall, without extra compensation, render such legal service as the board of trustees created by this Act shall require. 
(t)  Any employee participating under the provisions of this act who terminates employment before retirement shall be entitled to a refund of all monies paid into the fund established under this act by said employee, including any amounts transferred by such employee to this fund from the City of Atlanta Defined Contribution Plan (the "Defined Contribution Plan") pursuant to section 6-102 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta that were vested under the terms of the Defined Contribution Plan at the time of the transfer but excluding any amounts so transferred that were not vested under the terms of the Defined Contribution Plan at the time of the transfer; provided, however, that such refunds shall be subject to withholding for all applicable taxes and deduction for any debts or amounts due to the employer by the employee. 
(u)  Subject to approval by the United States Internal Revenue Service in accordance with IRC section 414(h), employee contributions shall be treated as employer contributions in determining tax treatment effective with the following payroll periods in 1994: 

 
Such contributions shall not be included as gross income of the employee for tax purposes until such time as they are distributed or made available. The City of Atlanta and the Atlanta Board of Education shall reduce the compensation payable to a member in an amount of the contributions made on behalf of the employee. 
(v)  Any officer or employee who retires pursuant to this section between August 29, 1994, and October 15, 1994, and whose age and creditable service before credit for accrued unused sick leave equals at least 75 years, shall be entitled to a monthly pension benefit upon retirement without any reduction for any age or vesting penalties as would otherwise be applicable. Provided further that such officer or employee shall receive a benefit calculated by adding three (3) years to their service. 
Entitlements specified under subsection (v), above, shall be accorded to those officers and employees not covered by the aforesaid 1978 pension amendment, under applicable provisions of amendments to said law adopted prior to the 1978 amendment. 
This section shall become effective for eligible school members upon approval by the Atlanta Board of Education. Said board may set an alternate time period not to exceed 60 days. 
(w)  Any officer or employee whose age and creditable service before credit for accrued unused sick leave equals at least 73 years as of March 31, 1998, shall be entitled to a monthly pension benefit upon retirement without any reduction for any age or vesting penalties as would otherwise be applicable. 
All officers and employees eligible to retire pursuant to this section must make written application to the pension office between February 13, 1998 and March 31, 1998. 
This section shall become effective for eligible employees of the Atlanta Board of Education upon approval of the Board of Education. 
(x)  Any officer or employee who was eligible to elect coverage under the pension laws as amended by Ordinance No. 1985-94 and who failed to make such election may do so by making written application on forms provided by the pension office within 60 days of the effective date of this subsection. 
(y)  Involuntary separation. 
(1)  Any officer or employee who is a member of the General Employee Pension Fund, who shall have served at least 15 years in the active service of the City, and who is involuntarily separated due to or in association with a Reduction-in-Force (RIF), or in conjunction with the City's reorganization and downsizing of the City's workforce and budgetary needs, but not due to disciplinary action, between January 1, 2004 and December 31, 2005, may elect to take a monthly retirement benefit to be computed as follows: Said monthly retirement benefit shall be equal to a normal monthly pension benefit less one-fourth (¼) of one percent (1%) per month for each month not to exceed 60 months that the` officer or employee lacks in being 60 years of age, and one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of one percent (1%) for each month in excess of 60 months that the officer or employee lacks in being 60 years of age. 
(2)  Any former officer or employee eligible to retire pursuant to this ordinance who has been involuntarily separated due to or in association with a RIF, but not due to disciplinary action, between January 1, 2004 and December 31, 2005 in conjunction with the City's reorganization and downsizing of the City's workforce and budgetary needs, and has already applied for and/or has been granted a service pension, may make written application to the Pension Office within the two year reemployment rights period to receive the benefit authorized in subsection (a) of this Ordinance. 
(3)  Any former officer or employee eligible to retire pursuant to this ordinance who has been involuntarily separated due to or in association with a RIF, but not due to disciplinary action, between January 1, 2004 and December 31, 2005 in conjunction with the City's reorganization and downsizing of the City's workforce and budgetary needs, and has applied for and received a refund of his/her pension contribution, may, within the two year reemployment rights period, repay said contribution plus interest at a rate of seven (7) percent per annum from the date of withdrawal of his/her contribution, to the date that he/she makes written application to the Pension Office for the purpose of receiving the benefit authorized in subsection (a) of this Ordinance. 
(4)  This ordinance shall not apply to officers or employees who are rehired by the City of Atlanta or whose services are retained by the City pursuant to a contract; (ii) Nor shall this ordinance apply to officers or employees who reject or have rejected an offer of reemployment made by the City, to a position comparable to that from which the officer or employee was RIFFED or involuntarily separated in conjunction with the City's reorganization and downsizing of the City's workforce, budgetary needs or other purposes. For officers or employees who are RIFFED or so involuntarily separated subsequent to the enactment of this ordinance, said offer of reemployment must be made WITHIN SIX (6) MONTHS of the date of separation of any such officer or employee. For purposes of this subsection, a "comparable position " shall be defined as one for which the compensation is equal to or no less than 90% of the compensation earned by such officer or employee at the time of separation. 
(z)  [Catastrophic injury.] 
1.  Georgia Laws 1927, p. 265, particularly as amended by Georgia Laws 1978, p. 4546 (and as has been further amended) and codified at section 6-37, Related Laws Section of Volume I, City Charter and Code (General Employees Pension Fund) is hereby amended by providing that any City of Atlanta officers and employees who receives a catastrophic injury in the line of duty, will receive 100% of the top salary for the grade and position that he/she occupied at the time of his/her injury. 
2.  The determination of whether a disability is catastrophic shall be in the sole discretion of the board by a preponderance of the evidence and as supported by official medical records, qualified medical expert opinions, sworn testimony and/or other such reliable source accepted by the board in its discretion. For the purposes of this Code Section, a catastrophic injury is a sudden, violent, life-threatening injury sustained by a member who is or was employed by the City at the time of the injury, which injury is due to an externally-caused event or events, as supported by evidence, including, but not specifically limited to, one of the conditions described below: (1) loss of sight in one or both eyes; (2) loss of one or both feet at or above the ankle; (3) loss of one or both hands at or above the wrist; (4) an injury to the spine that results in permanent and complete paralysis of both arms, both legs, or one arm and one leg, or; (5) an externally caused traumatic physical injury to the brain or skull that renders one physically or mentally unable to perform two or more Activities of Daily Living (feeding oneself, dressing, continence, bathing, toileting and transferring, i.e. getting in and out of bed), driving a motor vehicle, etc. or catastrophically disabled includes a permanent severely disabling injury or disorder that compromises the ability to carry out the activities of daily living to such a degree that the individual requires personal or mechanical assistance to leave home or bed or requires constant supervision to avoid physical harm to self or others. 
3.  This ordinance shall be retroactive and those persons who have received catastrophic injuries in the line of duty, while employed as City of Atlanta officer or employee, shall be eligible for review and adjustment of their pension in accordance with this section. 
4.  The Chief Financial Officer of the City of Atlanta shall identify any and all funding required to implement this ordinance. 
5.  As expressed and referenced in Resolution 01-R-1940, Adopted on November 19, 2001, it is the intent of the City Council to increase the monthly benefit of General Employees as it relates to catastrophic injury, to provide that the eligibility for said increased monthly pension benefit shall be retroactive, but that the payment of said benefit shall be prospective from the effective date of the passage of an ordinance providing for such benefit, and also as referenced in Ordinance 01-O-0976, Adopted on September 17, 2001 where the definition of catastrophic injury is contained. 
(aa)  Any officer or employee who is a member of the General Employee Pension Fund, and whose creditable service before credit for accrued unused sick leave equals at least 30 years shall be entitled to a monthly pension benefit upon retirement without any reduction for any age or vesting penalties as would otherwise be applicable. 
(bb)  Effective May 8, 2006, an employee of the City of Atlanta who must contribute amounts to the pension fund established under this act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, to purchase credit for prior service with United Water Services Atlanta or previous service with the City of Atlanta pursuant to Ordinance 03-O-0193 may contribute eligible rollover distributions, as defined in the Internal Revenue Code (the "Code"), in payment of such amounts from (i) a plan described in Code sections 401(a) or 403(a) (excluding after-tax contributions); (ii) an annuity contract or custodial account described in Code section 403(b); (iii) an eligible plan described in Code section 457(b) that is maintained by a state, a political subdivision of a state or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state; and (iv) an individual retirement account or annuity described in Code sections 408(a) or 408(b) to the extent such distribution from an IRA is eligible to be rolled over and would otherwise be includible in gross income. The employee shall at all times be fully vested in any benefit attributable to such rollover contributions. 
[(cc)  Involuntarily separation due to or in association with the Reduction in Force (RIF) between June 1, 2007 and June 30, 2008.] 
(a)  Any officer or employee who is a member of the General Employees Pension Fund, who shall have served at least 15 years in the active service of the City, and who is involuntarily separated due to or in association with the Reduction in Force (RIF) between June 1, 2007 and June 30, 2008, may elect to take a monthly retirement benefit to be computed as follows: Said monthly retirement benefit shall be equal to a normal monthly pension benefit less one-fourth (¼) of one percent (1%) per month for each month not to exceed 60 months that the officer or employee lacks in being 60 years of age, and one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of one percent (1%) per month for each month in excess of 60 months that the officer or employee lacks in being 60 years of age. 
(b)  Any former officer or employee eligible to retire pursuant to this ordinance who has been involuntarily separated due to or in association with a RIF, but not due to disciplinary action, between June 1, 2007 and June 30, 2008 and has already applied for and/or has been granted a service pension, may make written application to the Pension Office within the two year reemployment rights period to receive the benefit authorized in subsection (a) of this Ordinance. 
(c)  Any former officer or employee eligible to retire pursuant to this ordinance who has been involuntarily separated due to or in association with a RIF, but not due to disciplinary action between June 1, 2007 and June 30, 2008 and has applied for and received a refund of his/her pension contribution, may, within the two year reemployment rights period, repay said contribution plus interest at a rate of (7%) seven percent annum from the date of withdrawal of his/her contribution, to the date that he/she makes written application to the Pension Office for the purpose of receiving the benefit authorized in subsection (a) of this Ordinance. 
(d)  (i)  This ordinance shall not apply to officers or employees who are rehired by the City of Atlanta or whose services are retained by the City pursuant to a contract; (ii) Nor shall this ordinance apply to officers or employees who reject or have rejected an offer of reemployment made by the City, to a position comparable to that from which the officer or employee was RIFFED or involuntary separated in conjunction with the budgetary needs or other purposes. For officers or employees who were RIFFED or so involuntarily separated prior to the enactment of this ordinance, said enactment hereof. For officers of employees who are RIFFED or so involuntarily separated prior to the enactment of this ordinance, said offer of reemployment must be made within six (6) months of the enactment hereof. For officers or employees who are RIFFED or so involuntarily separated subsequent to the enactment of this ordinance, said offer of reemployment must be made within six (6) months of the date of separation of any such officer or employee. For purposes of this subsection, a "comparable position" shall be defined as one for which the compensation is equal to or no less than 90% of the compensation earned by such officer or employee at the time of separation. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3606, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3613, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3625, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3633, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3637, § 1; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3852, §§ 1, 2; 1981 Ga. Laws, page 4376, § 8; Ord. No. 1985-49, § 2, 8-9-85; Ord. No. 1994-11, § 1, 3-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-37, § 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1998-2, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 1998-5, § 1, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 2004-43, § 1, 7-14-04; Ord. No. 2005-29, §§ 1—5, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 2005-53, § 1, 9-12-05; Ord. No. 2005-55, § 1, 9-12-05; Ord. No. 2005-81, § 1, 11-22-05; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 5-8-06; Ord. No. 2006-64, § 1, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2006-81, § 1, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 2007-31(07-O-0977), § 1, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 2007-59(07-O-1331), § 1, 10-10-17) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
It should be noted that, according to sections 4 and 5 of Ord. No. 1994-37, adopted 8-1-94, approved 8-1-94: 
"Based on the number of retirees, only a predeterminated number or percentage of those vacant positions can be filled and only at step one (1). To exceed this number or percentage mayor and council approval is required. 
The mayor is directed to present to council by the first meeting of December, 1994, not less than 25% and up to 50% of the number of general fund positions which were vacated as a result of this early retirement program for the purpose of abolishing the positions." 
Sec. 6-38. - 1978 recomputation benefits. 
Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the pension benefits of any person who on July 1, 1978, is receiving benefits which were calculated with monthly earnings being the average of the highest five (5) years' salary during the term of employment and who retired between the effective date of the 1962 amendatory Act, approved March 6, 1962 (1962 Ga. Laws, page 3140) and the effective date of the 1972 amendatory Act, approved April 3, 1972 (1972 Ga. Laws, page 3374), shall be recalculated and any such person shall receive as a matter of right a monthly pension equal to the applicable percentage for the calculation of benefits multiplied by his years of creditable service, with monthly earnings being the average of the highest three (3) years' salary during the term of employment. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 4013, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were enacted as an amendment to the legislation compiled in section 6-183(d). 
Sec. 6-39. - Consent by applicant to participate in system. 
The receipt of an applicant's executed enrollment or application card by the commissioner of finance or his agent shall constitute the irrevocable consent of the applicant to participate under the provisions of this Act, as amended, or as may hereafter be amended. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, page 3691, § 1) 
Sec. 6-40. - Refunds regulated. 
Except upon the separation of employment other than retirement or death of an employee, or in the case of bookkeeping, clerical or data processing errors, the refund of pension contributions paid by an employee shall be prohibited. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, page 3691, § 2) 
Sec. 6-41. - Transfer of funds where participant appointed or elected to position having pension system. 
Should any officer or employee of such city be elected by the people to hold any office or position with the State of Georgia or any political subdivision thereof which has its own pension system or systems; or should any such officer or employee be appointed, elected or transferred by the State of Georgia, any political subdivision or agency thereof to perform duties or functions on behalf of any political subdivision of the state, having its own pension system or systems, similar to the duties or functions which such officer or employee performed on behalf of said city; such officer or employee so elected, appointed or transferred, shall be entitled to receive a refund of all amounts deducted from his salary for pension purposes and/or credit to his account on the books of said city's pension fund, together with a like amount in matching funds from the funds held by the board of trustees of such pension funds. Provided, however, such refund shall be paid directly to the pension fund of the board or authority covering the office or position to which such employee or officer is elected, appointed or transferred and shall not be paid as a cash refund to the officer or employee. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 3083, § 1) 
Sec. 6-42. - Transfer of funds where hospitals taken over. 
In the event the hospitals of a municipality coming under the provisions of this article are taken over by a hospital authority or other political subdivision, the officers and employees of such hospitals who are members of this pension fund, at the time the hospitals were taken over by said authority or subdivision and who become officers and employees of the hospital authority or political subdivisions on taking over such hospitals and such authority or political subdivision sets up a pension or retirement system, the board of trustees of said pension fund shall transfer to the authorities in charge of the pension or retirement fund of the hospital authority or political subdivision taking over said hospitals the amount of contributions made to the pension fund by the officer or employee of such hospitals while a member of said municipal pension fund, as well as the amount contributed by the municipality to match the contributions made by such members. When said board of trustees pays said funds into the pension or retirement fund of the hospital authority or political subdivision, such board of trustees shall stand fully discharged from any further obligations to such former member or members. 
(1945 Ga. Laws, page 999, § 11) 
Sec. 6-43. - Deductions from salaries, wages. 
The sum of three per centum (3%) shall be deducted from the salaries or wages of all officers and employees of such cities as and when paid. This sum shall be retained by the city treasurer, and is hereby set apart as a pension fund free from the control of such cities for any other purpose or expenditure. 
(1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, § 5; 1935 Ga. Laws, page 445, § 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-44. - Additional deduction when wife is named beneficiary. 
After May 1, 1935, all persons coming within the provisions of this Act who have previously designated as beneficiary their wife, or who in the future may designate as their beneficiary their wife, shall pay into said fund the sum of one per centum (1%) more of their monthly salary than is specified in section two (2) of this amended Act. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 445, § 6) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-45. - Same; effect of objection to deductions from salaries and wages. 
In case any employee or officer objects to the deduction of said salary or wages of said two [three] per cent, or otherwise objects to the payment of said two [three] per centum, such officer or employee shall not be entitled to the pension provided by this Act. 
(1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, § 7) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-46. - Participation in fund compulsory; scope of provisions. 
Any and all officers and employees, except the mayor and members of the general council, members of board of education and department heads elected by the people, who shall become officers or employees of the City of Atlanta after April 1, 1945, shall be compelled to come under the provisions of this Act at the end of the first three (3) months of their service, other than those eligible for participation in existing firemen and police pension laws, and those employees whose base compensation is $75 or less per month, and shall pay into said fund the amount prescribed by this article. Provided, however, that this article shall not apply to casual employees whose work or employment is irregular and who receive a daily or hourly wage for such occasional work. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 445, § 7; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 999, § 2) 
Sec. 6-47. - Participation in fund upon attaining salary level. 
Whenever any employee who had been receiving salary of less than $100.00 per month shall have a salary increase to $100.00 per month or more, such employee, as of the first day on which he receives pay at said rate of $100 per month or more [shall] be required to join such pension fund and to contribute thereto thereafter pursuant to law, but such employee is given the right to obtain credit for period of service prior to such increase in salary for purposes of determining his eligibility for pension under the provisions of said Act by paying into said pension fund such proportions of his wages, prior to such date of joining such fund, the same to be computed as set forth in section 6-43 of this article as amended by this Act and as set forth in section 6-52 of this article; provided, however, that such employee shall have the right to pay said total amount in 24 equal installments to be paid over a period of 24 months, beginning as of the date of said employee's entrance into said pension fund. 
(1941 Ga. Laws, page 468, § 5) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-48. - Employees ineligible for participation. 
All officers and employees, eligible for participation in this Act, who shall be elected or appointed after the effective date of this amendment, except officers elected by the people, shall be compelled to come under the provisions of this Act as amended at the end of their first three (3) months' service, and shall contribute to the pension fund as provided by this Act as amended. The following classes of employees shall not be eligible for participation: 
(1)  Members of fire departments; 
(2)  Members of the police departments; 
(3)  Employees whose base compensation is less than $75 per month; and 
(4)  Casual employees whose work or employment is irregular and who receive a daily or hourly wage for such occasional work. 
(1955 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2822) 
Editor's note— Although this section is not specifically amendatory of the legislation compiled in section 6-46, to the extent the provisions of that section are in conflict they have been superseded. 
Sec. 6-49. - Eligibility of officers and employees of traffic court. 
All officers and employees of any traffic court which may be organized pursuant to law in any such city, shall be eligible for pension, disability and other benefits under this Act, as amended, to the same extent and under the same conditions as officers and employees of any such city. 
(1955 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2822, § 2) 
Sec. 6-50. - Eligibility of officers and employees of joint city-county board of tax assessors; conditions. 
(a)  Any officer or employee of any joint city-county board of tax assessors which has been created or which may be created pursuant to any law applicable to such city and the county in which such city may be located in whole or in part, shall be eligible for pension benefits, for himself and his beneficiaries, under this Act as amended, to the same extent and under the same conditions as officers and employees of any such city. 
(b)  Any such officer or employee of any such board of tax assessors now employed by any such board of tax assessors, may elect to come under the provisions of this amendment by making written application to the board of trustees within six (6) months after the approval of this Act. The applicant must agree in writing to accept the benefits and obligations under this Act as now or hereafter amended and to waive such benefits and obligations under any other pension Act applicable to the applicant. 
(c)  Any such officer or employee of any such board of tax assessors electing to come under this Act as now amended, who, at the time of the approval of this Act, is a participating member of any pension system of the county in which such city is located shall be given full credit for the time credited to such person by trustees of the county pension system for retirement rights. Thereupon, the board of trustees of the county system shall remit to the board of trustees of this pension system the full amount of contribution of such officer or employee, together with the matching fund, and all other reserves accumulated or received from any source as a contribution toward pension benefits of such officer or employee of such board of tax assessors. 
(1962 Ga. Laws, page 3011, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 6-51. - Member leaving, reentering service; payment required. 
Any officer or employee who was at any time a member of this pension fund and severed his connection with the city and withdrew the amount of money he paid into said fund, and who has reentered or may hereafter reenter the service of the city and desires to receive credit for the time of service represented by the payment previously made to such fund and which was withdrawn, may at any time receive credit for such previous service by paying back into the pension fund the full amount so withdrawn on leaving the employment of the city, together with four percent (4%) per annum simple interest thereon from the date of such withdrawal to the date of repayment. Such persons shall be given the privilege of repaying such amount in not more than 50 equal monthly payments. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 3114, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-52. - Same; notice required for employee reentering service. 
In the event that any employee coming within the provisions of this Act shall sever his connection with the city and withdraw the amount of money he has paid into the pension fund, and subsequently is reemployed by the city and desires to reenter said pension fund and receive credit for former years of service, he may do so and receive credit for such prior years of service by paying back into the pension fund the full amount so withdrawn on leaving the employment of the city, with four percentum (4%) interest from the date of such withdrawal. In order to entitle any employee to the benefit of this section he shall, within 60 days of his reemployment signify his desire in writing upon such forms as may be furnished by the board of trustees his desire to do so. The amount withdrawn by such employee may be divided into 12 or less equal installments and paid monthly after the reemployment. Such payments may be deducted from the salary paid to such person so reemployed. 
(1941 Ga. Laws, page 468, § 3; 1955 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2822, § 3) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-53. - Right to retirement; generally. 
Every regular officer and employee of such city, in active service at the time of the passage of this Act, now on the payroll, and future officers and employees, may as a matter of right retire from active service, provided he shall have served 25 years in active service of such city at the time of his retirement. 
(1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, § 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-54. - Same; compulsory retirement at age 70. 
All officers and employees who shall have reached their 70th birthday shall be compelled to retire at the end of the calendar year immediately following their 70th birthday, and any officer or employee who shall have reached his 65th birthday shall have the right to retire and shall be entitled to a pro rata pension when so retiring, whether he has served 25 years or not, which benefits shall be continued to his widow if she is otherwise entitled to a pension. For example, if such officer or employee has served 10 years, he shall be entitled to 10/25 ths of the pension that he would have been entitled to had he served 25 years. All officers and employees shall be given credit for fractional parts of years of service. Provided, however, that any officer who is elected for a term prior to his 70th birthday or any officer who was elected prior to the enactment of this Act, shall have the privilege of completing his term of office before he shall be compelled to retire. Provided, further, that the board of education shall be authorized to require employees of the school department to retire upon reaching 65 years of age and that the mayor and board of aldermen shall have like powers with respect to other employees covered by this Act. No officer elected by the people shall be compelled to retire. 
(1947 Ga. Laws, page 1638, § 6; 1955 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2057, § 2; 1958 Ga. Laws, page 2451, § 1; 1961 Ga. Laws, page 2028, § 1; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2889, § 1; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3005, § 1; 1975 Ga. Laws, page 3176, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-55. - Same; compulsory retirement provisions inapplicable to city attorney. 
The compulsory retirement provisions of this Act shall not apply to the position of assistant city attorney. 
(1961 Ga. Laws, page 2028, § 1) 
Sec. 6-56. - Same; rights of officers who are not reelected or reappointed or whose offices are abolished. 
(a)  This section shall be known and may be cited as The Equal Retirement Benefits Act of 1975 [sic]. 
(b)  Any officer elected or appointed for a definite term who is a member of said pension fund, who shall fail to be reelected or reappointed, or whose office shall be abolished, shall be entitled to a pension on the following basis: No such person shall be entitled to a pension until such person has either been elected or appointed for at least four (4) terms or has been in the employment of the city for a period of 15 years and who was a member of the pension fund at the time of his retirement. Such person shall thereafter be entitled to receive as a pension such percentage of the full pension provided for as his years of service bear to 25 years. Such pension shall be computed and paid in the manner provided in 1941 Ga. Laws, pages 468, 470, § 3, and 1945 Ga. Laws, pages 1003, 1004, § 6, now codified respectively as section 8 and section 9 of Appendix A of Part I of the Code of the City of Atlanta of 1953. Such officer shall otherwise be entitled to all the rights and benefits provided in said Act for officers and employees who may have provided for a beneficiary and/or who have or may become totally and permanently disabled. 
(c)  Provided, however, if such person or officer either voluntarily or by compulsion has come under the provisions of section 6-183, then the pension to which such person or officer may be entitled to, as hereinabove provided, shall be computed and paid in the manner provided in 1962 Ga. Laws, page 3140, § 1. Such officer shall otherwise be entitled to all the rights and benefits provided in said Act for officers and employees who have or may become totally and permanently disabled. 
(d)  This Act amending the Act approved April 7, 1972 (1972 Ga. Laws, pages 4125, 4126), and particularly sections 2 and 3 of this Act, shall not apply to nor affect any officer or person who, prior to the date of approval of this Act, had been elected or appointed for a definite term; and such officer or person shall continue to be entitled to the privileges and benefits of the Act approved April 7, 1972 (1972 Ga. Laws, pages 4125, 4126), the same as if said Act had not been repealed by this Act. 
(1965 Ga. Laws, page 3256, § 3; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 4125, §§ 1, 2; 1976 Ga. Laws, page 3257, §§ 1, 3, 4) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section pertaining to pensions for officers who fail to be elected are derived from 1976 Ga. Laws, page 3257, §§ 1, 3, 4. All other provisions were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. The legislation referred to in subsection (b) above was repealed by 1974 Ga. Laws, page 3540, §§ 2 and 3, referred to in subsection (d) above, cited earlier amendments to the provisions codified in this article. 
Sec. 6-57. - Rights of discharged persons. 
Whenever any member by reason of his service is eligible for pension, he may make application therefor at any time after the termination of his service and employment by the city. The manner of termination of service shall not impair his right to a pension. 
(1941 Ga. Laws, page 468, § 3; 1953 Ga. Laws, Nov.-Dec. Sess., page 2776, § 3; 1959 Ga. Laws, page 3087, § 1) 
Sec. 6-57.1. - Rights of those terminated through reduction in force between December 31, 2001 and December 31, 2003. 
(a)  Any officer or employee subject to the terms of the 1962 City of Atlanta Pension Amendment (Ga. L. 1962, p. 3140 et seq.) who has not yet attained the age of 55 years, who has at least 25 years of service with the City of Atlanta, and who has been involuntarily separated due to or in association with a Reduction-in-Force (RIF), or in conjunction with the city's reorganization and downsizing of the city's workforce and budgetary needs, but not due to disciplinary action, between December 31, 2001 and December 31, 2003, may elect to take a monthly retirement benefit with an age adjustment equal to one-half (½) of the age adjustment provided for in said 1962 Pension Amendment for officers and employees who have attained the age of 55 years of age. 
(b)  Any former officer or employee eligible to retire pursuant to this ordinance who has been involuntarily separated due to or in association with a RIF, but not due to disciplinary action, between December 31, 2001 and December 31, 2003 in conjunction with the city's reorganization and downsizing of the city's workforce and budgetary needs, and has already applied for and/or has been granted a service pension, may make written application to the Pension Office within the two-year reemployment rights period to receive the benefit authorized in subsection (a) of this ordinance. 
(c)  Any former officer or employee eligible to retire pursuant to this ordinance who has been involuntarily separated due to or in association with a RIF, but not due to disciplinary action, between December 31, 2001 and December 31, 2003 in conjunction with the city's reorganization and downsizing of the city's workforce and budgetary needs, and has applied for and received a refund of his/her pension contribution, may, within the two year reemployment rights period, repay said contribution plus interest at a rate of seven (7) percent per annum from the date of withdrawal of his/her contribution, to the date that he/she makes written application to the Pension Office for the purpose of receiving the benefit authorized in subsection (a) of this ordinance. 
(d)  This ordinance shall not apply to officers or employees who are rehired by the City of Atlanta or whose services are retained by the city pursuant to a contract; (ii) Nor shall this ordinance apply to officers or employees who reject or have rejected an offer of reemployment made by the city, to a position comparable to that from which the officer or employee was RIFFED or involuntary separated in conjunction with the city's reorganization and downsizing of the city's workforce, budgetary needs or other purposes. For officers or employees who were RIFFED or so involuntarily separated prior to the enactment of this ordinance, said offer of reemployment must be made within six (6) months of the enactment hereof. For officers and employees who are RIFFED or so involuntarily separated subsequent to enactment of this ordinance said offer of reemployment must be made within (6) months of the date of separation of any such officer or employee: For purposes of this subsection, a "comparable position" shall be defined as one for which the compensation is equal to or no less than 90% of the compensation earned by such officer or employee at the time of separation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-60, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 6-58. - Rights of officers, employees of annexed territory; service credit, contributions. 
Any person who was an officer or employee of a municipality or a teacher or employee of a county or independent school system which has been or may in the future be annexed or merged with a municipality coming under the provisions of this article who becomes an officer, employee or teacher of the annexing municipality shall be entitled to credit for the years of actual service they have rendered such annexed municipality or school system in the annexed unincorporated territory; provided, that employees now on the payroll who are entitled to credit for service rendered in annexed territory must advise the board of trustees in writing on or before September 1, 1945, that they desire credit for such service. Such persons shall pay into the pension fund the percentage of their monthly salary received from the annexed municipality or school system for the period subsequent to November 1, 1927 that they would have paid for such period if they had been employees of the annexing municipalities. The board of trustees may permit this arrearage to be paid in equal monthly installments not exceeding 24 months. Provided, the provisions of this section shall apply to the former officers, teachers, and employees of those municipalities which have heretofore been annexed to the municipality coming under the provisions of this article and all previous Acts of boards of trustees giving credit for such prior service are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
(1945 Ga. Laws, page 999, § 3) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-59. - Transferred officers, employees; transfer from one department to another; service credit; contributions. 
Whenever any officer or employee of such city is transferred from one department to another, he shall be entitled to become a member of the pension fund of the department to which he has been transferred and to receive credit for the years of service in the department from which he has been transferred by paying into the pension fund of the department to which he is transferred the amount of premiums he would have paid into said fund if he had been a member of said department for the number of years he claims credit for service in the other department. Such transferred employee shall have the right to have transferred from the pension fund the amount he had paid into such fund. The rights given in this Act shall be effective as to the officers and employees who have transferred prior to this Act, as well as future transferees. This Act shall apply to all the pension funds of such city, namely, the policemen's pension fund, the firemen's pension fund and the general employees' pension fund. 
(1947 Ga. Laws, page 1635, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-60. - Transferred officers, employees; transfer from city to county or from county to city. 
(a)  As used in this Act [section], the following terms shall have the following meanings unless a contrary meaning is clearly indicated by the context: 
(1)  County —shall mean any county of this state having a population in excess of 600,000 according to the 1970 United States Census or any future census. 
(2)  City —shall mean the largest city located in whole or in part in such county. 
(3)  Pension fund —shall mean a fund for the purpose of providing retirement benefits for an employee, maintained by either a city or a county, with contributions being made by both the employee and the employer. 
(b)  Whenever any city employee shall become a county employee or whenever any county employee shall become a city employee, such employee may transfer from the pension fund of his former employer to the pension fund of his new employer credit for all years of service which may have accrued to him while in the service of his former employer upon compliance with the provisions of this Act. 
(c)  Any employee wishing to obtain the benefits of this Act shall file a written statement to such effect with the secretaries of both the city and county pension fund. Thereupon it shall be the duty of the secretary of the pension fund of the former employer to certify to the secretary of the pension fund of the new employer the total number of years of service accrued to the credit of such employee, and the amount due such pension fund by said employee for such credit, if any. Said secretary shall also transfer all funds contributed by said employee, together with all employer matching fund contributions, to the secretary of the pension board of the new employer. In the event that such employee shall owe any sum for prior service credits, said sum shall be payable to the pension fund of the new employer. Upon such certification and transfer of funds, such employee shall become entitled to credit for all years of service which may have accrued to him with his former employer to the same extent as if such service had been rendered to his new employer, without the payment of additional contributions (other than amounts previously due for prior service credits). The employer matching contributions transferred in accordance with the terms of this Act shall become the property of the pension fund of the new employer. 
(d)  In the event that any employee shall have previously withdrawn the amounts contributed by him to the pension fund of his former employer, he shall not be entitled to any benefits under this Act. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 3277) 
Sec. 6-61. - Transfer from county to city; terms, conditions. 
Whenever an officer or employee of any county in which such a city is located is transferred to such city from such county, he shall have all the rights, privileges and benefits of any officer or employee of such city set forth in this Act, as amended, upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  There shall be paid into the pension fund of any such city an amount equal to the amount paid into the county pension fund by such county officer or employee and the matching fund required to be paid into such county pension fund by the county authorities; 
(2)  Such transferred officer or employee shall receive the same credit for service that he would have received under the pension plan applicable to such employee at the time of transfer from the county to the city. Every such officer and employee may, as a matter of right, retire from active service provided his service to the city, when added to his accumulated county credit, would have authorized him to retire under the county pension plan; 
(3)  Such transferred officer or employee, however, shall not have the privilege of retiring as a matter of right under the terms of this Act, as amended, until he shall have reached the age of 55 years; and 
(4)  Such transferred officer or employee shall have all other rights, privileges and benefits provided in this Act, as amended, and shall be required to contribute to the pension fund the same amounts required of other members of such cities. 
(1951 Ga. Laws, page 3014, § 1; 1952 Ga. Laws, page 2765, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-62. - Same; officers, employees reentering employment of political subdivision where employed prior to transfer to city. 
Any officer or employee who has heretofore left the employment of any city within the classification provided by this Act for the purpose of reentering the employment of any other political subdivision of Georgia where he was employed prior to transferring to the city, which has a pension fund and which requires employees to contribute thereto, the board of trustees of the pension fund of any such city shall pay into the pension fund of such other political subdivision of Georgia where said employee shall become reemployed, the full amount of contribution of such employee while an employee of such city, together with the matching funds paid by such city into the pension fund, and all other reserves accumulated or received from any source as a contribution toward said pension fund by reason of the service of such officer or employee, provided such officer or employee shall reenter the employment of the political subdivision of Georgia where he was formerly employed, within a period of not more than three (3) years from the date he left the service of such political subdivision of Georgia. 
(1956 Ga. Laws, page 2589, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-63. - Same; applicability to board of education. 
The term "officer or employee" of any county, as used in the amendment to said Act approved February 21, 1951 (1951 Ga. Laws, page 3014) [section 6-61] shall include officers or employees of the board of education of such county. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2824, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-64. - Same; rights of officers, employees of board of education. 
Such transferred officers or employees of the board of education of any such county shall have the further rights as hereinafter set out in this section: 
(1)  Where the transferred officer or employee has designated his wife and minor children as his beneficiaries under any applicable pension fund of the board of education of such county and has paid the required amounts into the pension fund, his minor child or children in existence at the time of his transfer to the city shall, if at the time of his death his wife is dead, be entitled to 60 percent of his said pension which shall be paid to the guardian of the minor child or children if there be such, until the youngest child reaches the age of 18 years. The interest of any minor child in such pension shall cease when he reaches the age of 18 years. 
(2)  Any such transferred officer or employee may, as a matter of right, retire from active service provided he shall have served: 
a.  At least 25 years in active service and has reached the age of 55 years; or 
b.  Has had 20 years' active service and has reached the age of 60 years. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2824, § 3) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-65. - Same; credit for service of officers and employees transferred to city from county or county board of education. 
Any officer or employee of the city, who was transferred to the city from the county or the board of education for the county, under the plan of improvement or as a result of the extension of the corporate limits of such city, may receive credit for any time of service which would have been creditable to his account under the pension law applicable to his service prior to his transfer to the city by giving written notice on or before June 30, 1956, to the secretary of the pension board of such city by which he is employed and by paying into the pension fund thereof a sum representing the contribution which he should have made had he been a member of its pension plan during the years in question, plus interest thereon at three percent (3%) per annum, which may be paid in 50 equal installments, bearing interest at the rate of three percent per annum. 
(1956 Ga. Laws, page 2990, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-66. - Same; transfer from city to county employment. 
The provisions of this section shall apply to any officer or employee who was transferred from the county or the board of education of the county, to the city, and who, prior to December 31, 1952, was transferred back to the county or to the board of education of the county. As to any such officer or employee, it shall be the duty of the treasurer or other person having possession of the funds belonging to the board of trustees to pay over to the board of trustees of the pension fund of the county or the board of education of the county the following funds: 
(1)  Any fund which may have been paid into the treasury of this pension fund by reason of the transfer of such officer or employee to the city; 
(2)  The amount which said employee contributed to the pension fund while employed by the city; 
(3)  Any matching funds, if any, which the city may have paid into the fund to match the amount deducted from such employee's salary. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2824, § 4) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-67. - Same; transfer of golf professional from city to county employment. 
(a)  Whenever any person employed by such city as a golf professional shall be transferred to the county in which such city is located in whole or in part and shall be employed by such county as a golf professional, it shall be the duty of the trustees of said pension fund to transfer to the trustees of the pension fund created for the benefit of officers, deputies and employees of such county, the funds and matching funds standing to the credit of such employee of such city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the trustees to pay over to the trustees of such county the said funds and matching funds upon being requested to do so by the trustees of the county pension fund. 
(1965 Ga. Laws, page 2932, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-68. - Same; credit for service of employee not previously authorized. 
(a)  Generally. County employees, county school district teachers and employees, and employees of the largest city located in whole or in part in counties of 300,000 or more by the last or any future United States decennial census and who are members of the pension plans of the respective subdivisions of government as of the date of approval of this amendment to said Act [April 12, 1968] and who may thereafter, by transfer of governmental function between such county or such city or through annexation and merger, be transferred to such city from such county or to such county from such city, shall be entitled to be credited on their pension time requirement by their respective pension boards, with all years of service not previously authorized and allowed, with which they were credited by any of said subdivisions of government at the time of separation from its service; provided, however, that school teachers in the employ of the largest city located in whole or in part in such counties shall be credited for years of teaching in other counties or cities of the state only if they become members of the city pension plan by reason of the annexation of territory to said largest city. 
(b)  Certifications of secretaries of pension boards in connection with years of employment, contributions to funds. It shall be the duty of the secretaries of the several pension boards of the subdivisions of government referred to in section 1 [subsection (a)] of this Act [section] to certify to the secretary of any other of said pension plan or board on written request of such secretary, the years, and fractions thereof, of employment with which any member was credited at the time of his separation from employment with the corresponding subdivision of government, showing thereon any matching fund or contribution which stood to his credit in the pension fund of said subdivision of government; provided, however, that no credit for years of teaching in other counties or cities shall be certified to in case of school teachers employed by the largest city located in whole or in part in such counties unless they became employed by said city as a result of the annexation of territory to said largest city. 
(c)  Transfer of funds upon separation from one agency and employment by another. It is the legislative determination that any contributions or matching funds found to the credit of an employee on the books of the pension plan at the time of his separation from employment with the corresponding subdivision of government belongs to and is the property of the pension fund of the subdivision of government to which such employee is transferred and by which such employee is subsequently employed. 
(d)  Method of receiving credit under new fund for prior years of service where portion of contribution was withdrawn from old fund. Any member of any pension plan referred to in section 1 [subsection (a)] of this Act [section] who has withdrawn any portion of his contribution from any pension fund with any of said subdivisions of government from which he seeks credit for prior years of service or fraction thereof, shall not be allowed such credit unless he gives written notice, within 90 days from the date of the employee's transfer, to the secretary of the pension board of the government by which he is employed, that he desires to receive credit for such prior years of service and pays into the pension fund of the subdivision of government by which he is employed, the sum withdrawn and unpaid, plus interest at the rate of four percent (4%) per annum; said payment may be in 50 equal monthly installments bearing interest at the rate of three percent (3%) per annum. 
(e)  Credit under new fund where employee was not member of pension plan of former employer. Any member of the pension plan of any subdivision of government referred to in section 1 [subsection (a)] of this Act [section] shall be given credit for years of employment with any of said subdivisions of government or with the State of Georgia not previously granted or allowed by giving written notice within 90 days from the date of the transfer of the employee to the secretary of the pension board of the subdivision of government by which he is employed and by paying into the pension fund thereof a sum representing the contribution which he should have made had he been a member of its pension plan during the years in question or the sum which he should have paid to the pension fund of the subdivision of government by which he was employed during those years, whichever of said sums is the larger, plus interest at the rate of four percent (4%) per annum; said payment may be made in 50 equal monthly installments, bearing interest at the rate of four percent (4%) per annum; provided, however, that no credit for years of employment with the State of Georgia shall be allowed in the pension plan of the largest city located in whole or in part in such counties. 
(f)  Method whereby nonparticipating employees may become members. Any employee of any of said subdivisions of government who is not a member of the pension fund or some part thereof, by reason of having chosen not to participate within the time provided by law, may become a member of said pension plan or part thereof, as the case may be, and obtain the benefits under this Act [section] by notifying the secretary of the pension plan of said subdivision of government in writing within 90 days from the date of the transfer of such employee, that he wishes to become a member of said plan or part thereof, as the case may be, and subject to the obligations and benefits and by paying into said pension plan a sum equal to the contribution he would have paid had he chosen to participate within the time originally provided, plus interest at four percent (4%) per annum. Said payment may be made in 50 equal monthly installments, bearing interest at the rate of four percent (4%) per annum. 
(g)  Purpose. It is hereby declared to be the legislative determination that in counties and subdivisions of government described in section 2 [subsection (b)] of this Act [section], consolidations in governmental functions between such subdivisions of government and the incident transfer or change of employment, make it in the interest of the employees, subdivisions of government, the pension funds thereof and of general public that these employees be not deprived of, but be given credit on their pensions for all years of service with the several subdivisions of government. It is the legislative purpose of this Act [section] to give authority for and to require that the credits for prior and present employment be given and allowed to the extent and in the manner provided in this Act [section], by the respective pension boards or plans named in section 1 [subsection (a)] of this Act [section]. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Nov.-Dec. Sess., page 3000, §§ 1—7; 1968 Ga. Laws, page 3702, §§ 1—5) 
Sec. 6-69. - Service requirements—Persons employed on or after April 1, 1945; applicability. 
Effective April 1, 1945, any person employed on or after that date must attain the age of 55 years and have served 25 years before being eligible to retire on a pension; provided, however, that the provisions of this section as to age limit shall not apply to any person claiming a pension by reason of permanent disability, nor to any officer or employee on the payroll of the city as of March 31, 1945. 
(1945 Ga. Laws, page 999, § 3) 
Sec. 6-70. - Service credits; employees working nine months per year. 
Whereas, in certain departments of the City of Atlanta certain regular employees are required to work only nine (9) months out of each calendar year, it is hereby enacted that such employees who, in the ordinary conduct of the business of their particular department are required to work only nine (9) months out of each year, shall be credited with a full year in determining their period of service for eligibility to a pension. Provided, however, such employees shall be entitled to receive such credit only at the expiration of the year for which said credit is being given, and not at the expiration of the nine (9) months worked of each year. 
(1941 Ga. Laws, page 468, § 3; 1968 Ga. Laws, page 3707, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 6-71. - Same; service in the armed forces; terms, conditions. 
Service in the armed forces of the United States, under the Department of Defense, or service in the Coast Guard of the United States, shall, for the purpose of service pension rights established by this Act, be considered service to any such city, upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Such officer or employee must have been inducted into such armed forces, either voluntarily or involuntarily, under any Act applicable thereto, when there is at the time of such induction an actual conflict or such induction is mandatory under the applicable law; 
(2)  Such officer or employee must have been on the payrolls of any such city and in good standing at the time of such induction; 
(3)  Such officer or employee shall not voluntarily extend his term of service beyond the termination of the conflict or beyond the time when he could retire from such service; 
(4)  Such officer or employee shall make application for reemployment to his former position within the time required by the charter of any such city for the reemployment of such officers or employees; 
(5)  Dishonorable discharge from such armed forces shall terminate all rights under this amendment; 
(6)  Such officer or employee, upon his return to the service of such city from service in the armed forces, shall make the same contributions to the said pension fund for the time served in the armed forces as he would have made if he had been in active service of the city, but shall be permitted to make such contributions in equal monthly installments within a period of time equal to the time served in such armed forces; and 
(7)  In the event such officer or employee dies while performing "qualified military service" as defined in U.S. Internal Revenue Code Section 414(u), on or after January 1, 2007, such officer or employee shall be considered to have been rehired on the day prior to the date of death, and the survivors of such officer or employee shall be entitled to any additional benefits required to be paid pursuant to U.S. Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(37). 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2267, § 1; Ord. No. 2015-06(14-O-1633), § 1, 2-26-15 ) 
Sec. 6-72. - Same; rights of officers, employees inducted into armed forces. 
(a)  All officers and employees of cities and of departments in cities in this state, having a population of not less than 150,000 inhabitants who have been or shall be, inducted into the armed forces of the United States, either voluntarily, or involuntarily, under the Selective Service and Training Act or otherwise, and being such persons as come within the provisions of the Soldiers and Sailors Relief Act of Congress, shall be entitled to receive under all pension acts and civil service acts, credit for their time of service in the armed forces of the United States, which time of service shall, for the purposes of such pension and civil service acts, be considered as service to such cities, on the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Such officer or employee must have been or must be, on the payrolls of such city or a department thereof, in good standing at the time of such induction. 
(2)  He shall not voluntarily extend his term of service beyond the termination of the present conflict. 
(3)  He shall return to service in such city promptly upon his discharge from the armed forces. 
(4)  Any such person receiving a dishonorable discharge from such armed forces shall not be entitled to the benefits of this Act. 
(5)  The amount of his payments for such pension shall not become in arrears more than 90 days. If, during his service to the federal government such payments become in arrears as hereinbefore set forth, such person shall have the privilege of paying up all back payments when or before he returns to his employment with the city and thereupon shall be reinstated to full benefits under said pension system. 
(b)  All such officers and employees who were inducted in the armed forces of the United States prior to March 19, 1943 (the date of said amendment), who become members of such pension fund under section 34 of said Act as amended by this Act or any prior Act, shall have credit for the time served in the armed forces of the United States in the computation of the time required before becoming eligible to retire on a pension. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 551, § 6; 1947 Ga. Laws, page 1635, § 8) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. Section 34, cited in subsection (b) above, was added as a temporary provision by 1945 Ga. Laws, page 999, § 3 and is no longer in force. 
Sec. 6-73. - Same—officers and employees serving in Korean conflict, or subsequent thereto. 
Any officer or employee who was inducted into service in the armed forces of the United States under the Department of Defense, or service in the Coast Guard of the United States, either during the Korean conflict, or subsequent thereto, or shall have served in the Navy in connection with such service, shall be given full credit for the time served in such service as though he were actually employed during that time by the city and shall not be required to make any contribution to the pension fund for such period of service provided such employee meets the conditions set forth in section 6-71 except he shall not be required to make contributions, as provided in subsection (f) thereof. 
(1956 Ga. Laws, page 3376, § 2; 1959 Ga. Laws, page 3088, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-74. - Credit for prior service; terms, conditions. 
Any person, made eligible for pension benefits by the Act approved on August 20, 1927 (1927 Ga. Laws, page 265 et seq.), now employed, or who may hereafter become employed by the city and who, prior to employment with city, was employed by the State of Georgia or political subdivision thereof to render service within the county in which such city is located in whole or in part, or who was employed as a teacher in a public school system or in a public or private college or university or in an American dependent school, or who was previously employed by the city as a temporary employee or on a part-time basis, may receive credit for such service for pension benefits under this Act, as amended, upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  No credit may be given for part-time or temporary service unless such part-time or temporary service was rendered while being so employed by the city. 
(2)  Such person may be eligible for prior service credit after having been continuously employed by such city for the period of five (5) years and after having filed application with the board of trustees for prior service credit for a period of five (5) years; provided, however, the person claiming prior service credit for prior employment as a regular, temporary, or part-time employee of the city may be eligible for such prior service credit immediately upon filing application for same. 
(3)  Prior service credit may be granted to such person eligible and continuing in the service of such city commencing six (6) years from the date of the application for prior service credit for each year, such person shall continue in the service of such city until a maximum of 10 years of prior service credit is given such person. In the event of compulsory retirement, fractional parts of years of prior service credit will be credited such person based upon fractional parts of years served with such city and credited for pension purposes prior to compulsory retirement. As to credit for part-time or temporary service with the city, such prior service credit shall be on the basis of one (1) day for each day worked by such person as a temporary employee or on a part-time basis, and such credit for prior service shall be credited to such person immediately upon application and the payment of the amount of money as provided for and determined hereinafter in paragraph (4) of section 1 of 1969 Ga. Laws, page 2625 [this section], as amended, except that the amount required to be paid into the retirement system of the city shall be based upon gross salary of such person at the time such person makes application for credit for prior service. 
(4)  In order to receive such prior service credit, such person must pay into the retirement system of such city, based upon the gross salary of such person at the time of employment or reemployment as a regular employee with the city, as the case may be, an amount of money equal to the amount such person would have been required to pay had he been employed by such city at said gross salary during the prior service; and in addition thereto such person shall pay an amount equal to the amount such city would have been required to pay had such person been employed by such city at said gross salary during the prior service, except, however, if such person is being reemployed by such city as a regular employee and claiming credit for prior service as a regular employee with such city, itself, then, as to the amount which the city would have been required to pay, such person shall only be required to pay an amount equal to the amount such city would have been required to pay had such person been employed by such city at said gross salary during the prior service with an employer other than such city. Provided, however, that such persons, other than teachers, claiming prior service with school systems outside the State of Georgia ("teachers" being defined as meaning any person employed as a classroom teacher or in the supervision of the public schools of any such city, and shall include administrative officials therein), employed on or before April 1, 1969, and otherwise fulfilling the requirements provided for in this Act, shall not be required to pay an amount of money equal to that which would have been paid by the city had such person, other than teachers, been employed by such city during the prior service. The board of trustees shall formulate rules and regulations as they deem necessary for the payment of such funds and may provide for deferred payments with interest at six percent (6%) per annum. 
(5)  Persons employed on or before April 1, 1969 who have had at least five (5) years continuous service with such city shall receive prior service credit upon application made in writing to the board of trustees on or before October 1, 1969 and said prior service shall be credited to such person immediately upon application and payment of the amount said person would have been required to pay had such person been employed by such city during the prior service. Said prior service shall be credited to such person on the basis of one (1) year and fractional parts of years prior service credit for one (1) year and fractional parts of the years served with such city and credited for pension purposes. Persons employed after April 1, 1969 shall make application in writing to the board of trustees for such prior service credit which shall be credited in accordance with the provisions of sections 3 and 4 of this Act [amendment]. 
(6)  Credits for prior service, under the terms of this amendment, shall be treated as credit for service rendered while a member of the retirement system established by this Act, as amended, in the determination of the right to retire and the amount of the retirement benefits. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 2625, § 1; 1974 Ga. Laws, page 3540, §§ 2—4) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-75. - Credit for government service. 
(a)  Any person qualified for pension benefits under this Act, as amended, who was employed by the United States government, prior to his employment by such city, to perform duties for such city within the county similar to the duties subsequently performed as an employee of such city, may receive credit for such service for pension benefits under this Act, as amended, upon the same terms and conditions as set out in section 6-43 and the subsections of section 6-74. 
(b)  Any person qualified for such benefits under this Act, as amended, who was given a "special military leave" to do wartime duty in the American Red Cross, may receive credit for such service for pension benefits under this Act, as amended, upon the same terms and conditions as set out in section 6-43 and the subsections of section 6-74. 
(1962 Ga. Laws, page 2893, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-76. - Closing of schools, effect on employees of board of education. 
In the event that the closing of any school or schools in said city shall become compulsory by federal, state or city order, and by reason thereof the board of education of said city fails to pay the salaries due any teacher or employee who comes under the provisions of this Act, then and in that event said board of education shall grant to such teacher or employee an indefinite leave of absence subject to the following terms and conditions: 
Such leave of absence shall be terminated when the school or schools reopen and the payment of the salary of the teacher or employee is resumed; provided, however, that upon resumption of active employment, such teacher or employee shall have the same civil service, contractual, and pension rights as were effective at the time said leave of absence was granted, and that no rights or benefits shall be impaired by reason of such interruption of active employment. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2100, § 3) 
Sec. 6-77. - Credit for prior service as member of General Assembly. 
Any person now or hereafter employed by any political subdivision or elected to an office therein, who, by reason of such office or employment, is eligible for pension benefits under any local system and who, prior to such employment, was a member of the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, shall receive credit for time served in the General Assembly in the computation of the service required to become eligible to retire and receive a pension. In computing such credit, such person shall be credited for a full year for each year's membership in the General Assembly of Georgia. 
(1962 Ga. Laws, page 595, § 1) 
Sec. 6-78. - Prior service credit for cafeteria employees of board of education. 
Any person employed by the board of education by any such city in connection with the operation of its cafeteria system may receive credit for prior service rendered by such person in connection with the private operation of such cafeteria for the use and benefit of the public school system of any such city, upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Such person shall make application for such credit and provide satisfactory proof of such service to the board of trustees within 60 days after his employment by the board of education. 
(2)  Such employee, as a condition precedent, must pay into the retirement system established by this Act as amended an amount equal to the amount he would have paid had he been an employee of the city during such period of time. 
(3)  Said payments may be divided into 36 equal installments, which may be deducted from the wages or salaries due such employee or from his pension benefits. 
(1962 Ga. Laws, page 3071, § 1) 
Sec. 6-79. - Dependents of officers, employees; designation as beneficiary of pension benefits. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Act as amended regarding the rights of officers or employees to designate beneficiaries of their pension benefits after their death, every male or female officer or employee having a spouse or unmarried child or children under the age of 18 years shall have the right at any time to designate such spouse or such child or children as beneficiary of such officer's or employee's pension benefits, the amount of such pension benefits to be the same as provided for beneficiaries elsewhere in this Act as amended, and provided that the additional contributions for beneficiaries required in this Act as amended are made; provided, however, that as to every male officer or employee hereafter elected or employed participation for the benefit of such officer's or employee's wife or unmarried child or children under the age of 18 years shall be compulsory. Any and all provisions of this Act, as amended, conferring benefits or placing restrictions on the wife or widow, as beneficiary, of male officers or employees, shall apply equally and in the same manner to the husband or widower as beneficiary of female officers or employees. Whenever, in said Act, as amended, a beneficiary is designated as a wife or widow, such shall also include the husband or widower of a female officer or employee, if such should be the case. A child or children of a female officer or employee, who has provided for payment of a pension to her beneficiary, shall be entitled to the same benefits and subject to the same restrictions as may now or hereafter apply to the child or children of a male officer or employee, as provided in said Act, as amended. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2598, § 2; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 3170, § 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-80. - Light-duty status. 
(a)  In the event that it has been medically determined that an officer or employee of the city is unable to perform his or her regularly assigned duties by reason of physical or mental incapacity or impairment, and where the officer or employee has applied for disability pension, whether in line of duty or not in line of duty, and upon the confirmation and certification of two (2) or more licensed and practicing physicians of Georgia that such officer or employee is capable of performing less strenuous employment duties with such city, such duties to be designated as "light-duty status"; and where such less strenuous employment duties are available and are offered to such officer or employee, the officer or employee may, in the discretion of the appointing authority of such city, be placed into such "light-duty status" and thereby continue to be carried on the payroll of such city with no change in salary status or pension fund membership, pending a further medical determination by two (2) or more licensed and practicing physicians of Georgia that such officer or employee is no longer capable of functioning in such "light-duty status." 
(b)  The board of trustees of the pension fund shall be authorized to make all rules necessary in carrying out the provisions set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)  This amendment shall only apply to officers and employees who become members of the pension fund on or after the effective date hereof [April 6, 1981]. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, page 3569, § 1) 
Sec. 6-81. - Effect of disqualification of beneficiary. 
(a)  If an officer or employee designates a beneficiary, and thereafter such beneficiary should cease to be qualified to receive a pension in the event of the member's death, then such officer or employee may at his or her option designate some other beneficiary who does qualify for pension benefits under this Act as amended and continue to make contributions for such beneficiary, or cease to make further contributions for beneficiaries, in which event contributions theretofore made for the benefit of a beneficiary shall not be refunded except insofar as refunds may be allowed by other provisions of this act as amended. 
(b)  Nothing herein provided shall prevent an officer or employee from designating a primary beneficiary (spouse or children under 18 years of age) and a secondary beneficiary (either spouse or children under 18 years of age and not named as primary beneficiary). 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2598, § 3; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 3170, § 3) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-82. - Notice of election to participate for benefit of beneficiary, required. 
At such time as an officer or employee elects participation for the benefit of a beneficiary such officer or employee shall give written notice of such election to the board, and shall within a period of two (2) years thereafter, in addition to current requirements, pay into the pension fund such additional percentage of such member's monthly salary as will equalize the contributions of such electing member with the contributions of other officers and employees made during the same prior years and months of eligible service for the same benefits, together with three percent (3%) interest thereon for the months during which other members currently made their contributions for the same benefits. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2598, § 4) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-83. - Widows' rights; generally. 
The pensions set up and provided for in said act shall, in case of the death of the pensioner, if he leaves a widow, be continued to such widow during the remainder of her life, except such widow's pension shall cease in case of her remarriage; in case the officer or employee could have secured a pension on account of services but failed to do so and continued in the service and employment of the city, and dies without having a pension set apart for him, his widow may apply for such pension and have same set apart to her during her life of widowhood. 
(1929 Ga. Laws, page 312, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-84. - Same; amount to be received. 
The maximum amount to be paid to any widow, under any of the provisions of this act, shall be the sum of $75 per month, and provided further that all widows now receiving pensions under the provisions of this act in excess of $75 shall after May 1, 1935 only receive an amount of $75 as specified herein. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 456, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 1935 Ga. Laws, page 456, § 1, added the above provision to 1929 Ga. Laws, page 312, § 1, codified as section 6-83. The provisions have been codified as separate sections to facilitate reference and use. 
Sec. 6-85. - Same; computation, payment of benefits. 
The pensions set up and provided for in this act shall, in the case of death of the pensioner if said pensioner has complied with all the requirements of this act as to designating the surviving widow, if such pensioner shall leave a surviving widow, be a sum equal to three-fourths (¾) of the amount the pensioner would have received and shall be paid to such widow during the remainder of her life except that such widow's pension shall be discontinued in case of her remarriage. In case the officer or employee could have secured a pension on account of his services but failed to do so and continued in the service of the city and died without having a pension set apart to said widow subject to the restrictions herein named and provided the pensioner has paid for such privilege, such widow may apply for and receive a pension of three-fourths (¾) of the amount equal to what her deceased husband would have been entitled to and have the sum of said pension, set apart to her during her life of widowhood. Provided, however, in order to entitle the widow to a pension under this act, she must have been the wife of the officer or employee of such cities for a period of one (1) year prior to the retirement of such pensioner or for one (1) year prior to the death of an officer or employee who was entitled to retire but failed to do so, as provided by the terms of this act. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 445, § 8; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 999, § 7; 1959 Ga. Laws, page 2633, § 1; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 3150, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-86. - Spendthrift provisions. 
None of the funds herein provided for shall be subject to attachment, garnishment, or judgment, nor shall they be assigned, but shall be paid to the pensioner only or on his order. 
(1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, § 9) 
Sec. 6-87. - Reemployment of pensioners; eligibility, conditions, applicability. 
(a)  Any officer or employee of such cities or of the board of education thereof who has applied for and been granted a service pension shall be eligible for reemployment or reappointment to any position in the government of such cities or the board of education thereof, provided such person has not reached the age of 70 years, such reemployment in any position to terminate at the end of the year in which said person reaches age 70. Such reemployment shall be made under the provisions relating to reemployment of former employees as now provided by law or ordinance, except that such reemployed person shall not acquire any civil service rights or any further pension rights during such period of reemployment, shall not be paid a pension during such period and shall not be required to make any contribution to the pension fund during such period of reemployment. The payment of his pension shall be resumed as of the date of termination of such period of reemployment. No such reemployment shall be effective until the person to be reemployed under the provisions of this section shall execute and deliver to the comptroller of any such cities a contract agreeing to the conditions hereof. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent any retired officer or employee of such cities or of the board of education thereof from holding any position which is filled by an election by the people. No additional pension or civil service rights or privileges shall accrue to such officer or employee during such period. 
(c)  The provisions of this act as amended shall not in any way affect or restrict the rights, powers and privileges of an emeritus officer of such cities who now or shall hereafter hold an emeritus office pursuant to the provisions of any law or ordinance establishing same. 
(d)  Whenever by contract with a city or one (1) of its agencies, boards or commissions, a retired person, regardless of age and as an independent contractor, agrees to perform a special or particular service, as may be now or hereafter allowed by law or ordinance, then such person, during the term of such contract which shall not exceed one (1) calendar year, shall be entitled to continue to receive his or her regular pension payments, but shall not acquire any civil service rights or any further pension rights, and shall not be required to make any contribution to the pension fund; provided, however, no such contract shall be effective until a fully executed copy of such contract, in which such retired person agrees to the conditions hereof, has been delivered by such person to the secretary of the board of trustees of the pension fund. 
(1961 Ga. Laws, page 2542, §§ 1—3; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3195, § 1; 1970 Ga. Laws, page 2349, § 1) 
Sec. 6-88. - Effect on workers' compensation laws. 
Except as provided in subsection (F) of 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 et seq., this Act shall not affect nor be affected by any workers' compensation law, or other similar laws. Further, no decisions of the State Board of Workers' Compensation shall be entered as evidence with a pension application before the Board of Trustees of said pension fund, nor shall said Board consider any evidence pertaining to the applicant's previously determined entitlement to workers' compensation in any hearing upon a pension application. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, page 4376, § 6; 1982 Ga. Laws, page 4385, § 4) 
Sec. 6-89. - Effect on other pensions; effect of receipt of other pensions. 
This act does not repeal nor in anywise affect any benefit or pension now being paid under some previous ordinance or act, but no pensioner shall receive two (2) pensions. Those already receiving pensions are not eligible to pensions under this act. 
(1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, § 10) 
Sec. 6-90. - Computations of time; fractional parts of years to be counted. 
Whenever this law, or any amendment of this law, requires a computation, for any purpose, of the years of creditable service of any active or retiring officer or employee, fractional parts of years of service shall be counted. 
(1927 Ga. Laws, page 265 et seq.; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 318) 
Sec. 6-91. - Salary and earnings. 
For the purposes of determining any benefit or contribution under this act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, the "salary," "earnings" or "wages" or "total" "salary," "earnings" or "wages" of an officer or employee of the City of Atlanta for any period shall include the base wages or salary paid to such officer or employee (including lump-sum payments thereof); amounts contributed or deferred by the officer or employee and not includable in gross income under sections 125, 132(f) or 457 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the "Code"); amounts contributed by the officer or employee to a governmental qualified retirement plan and treated as employer contributions under Code section 414(h); and amounts credited to the officer or employee for furlough hours. Such salary, earnings or wages shall not include the following amounts: disability insurance payments to an officer or employee; travel, mileage or automobile-related allowances or reimbursements; bonuses (other than sick-leave bonuses) or performance awards; overtime or premium payments; or any other special, unusual or nonrecurring payment. 
For the purposes of determining any benefit or contribution under this act, the "salary," "earnings" or "wages" or "total" "salary," "earnings" or "wages" of an officer or employee of the Atlanta Independent Public School System for any period shall include the regular pay, shift differential pay and salary-prorated or retroactive regular pay paid to such officer or employee; adjustments to earnings paid to an officer or employee under the payroll code "premium pay," the officer's or employee's elective deferrals as defined in Code section 402(g)(3); amounts contributed or deferred by the officer or employee and not includable in gross income under Code sections 125, 132(f) or 457; and amounts contributed by the officer or employee to a governmental qualified retirement plan and treated as employer contributions under Code section 414(h). Notwithstanding the foregoing, such salary, earnings or wages shall not include the following amounts: disability insurance payments to an officer or employee; travel, mileage or automobile-related allowances or reimbursements; bonuses or performance awards; overtime or premium payments; or any other special, unusual or nonrecurring payment. 
The City of Atlanta may amend this provision at any time to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1985-71, § 1, 11-12-85; Ord. No. 2004-84, § I(1), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-87, § 1, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 2004-87 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2004. 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-92. - Distribution Requirements. 
(a)  The requirements of this section shall apply to the distribution of all benefits under this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, and will take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of this Act. 
(b)  All distributions required under this section will be determined and made in accordance with section 401(a)(9) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the 'Code'), including the incidental death benefit requirements of Code section 401 (a)(9)(G), and the regulations thereunder. 
(c)  The entire benefit of an officer or employee under this act will be distributed beginning not later than his required beginning date over the life of such officer or employee or, if applicable, over the lives of such officer or employee and a designated beneficiary. `Required beginning date' shall mean April 1 of the calendar year following the later of (1) the calendar year in which the officer or employee attains age 70½ or (2) the calendar year in which the officer or employee terminates employment. 
(d)  If the distribution of a benefit has begun in accordance with subsection (c) above and the officer or employee dies before his entire benefit has been distributed to him, the remaining portion of such benefit will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used as of the date of his death. 
(e)  If an officer or employee dies before the distribution of his benefit has begun in accordance with subsection (c) above, his interest will be distributed to his designated beneficiary (as defined in Code section 401(a)(9)(E)) over a period not extending beyond the life or life expectancy of such beneficiary, beginning not later than December 31 of the calendar year following the calendar year of the officer's or employee's death. If such benefit is payable to (or for the benefit of) his or her surviving spouse or domestic partner, the date on which the distributions are required to begin shall not be earlier than December 31 of the calendar year in which the officer or employee would have attained age 70½. If the spouse or domestic partner dies before the distribution to such spouse or domestic partner is made or begun, this subsection (e) shall be applied as if the surviving spouse or domestic partner were the officer or employee. 
(f)  If an officer or employee dies before the distribution of his benefit has begun in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section and the officer or employee does not have a designated beneficiary (as defined in Code section 401(a)(9)(E)), the officer's or employee's benefit, if any, shall be distributed in a single lump-sum payment by December 31 of the year in which occurs the five-year anniversary of the officer's or employee's death." 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § I(2), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-87, § 2, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 3, 3-23-06) 
Note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 2004-87 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 1997. 
Sec. 6-93. - Limitation on benefits. 
(a)  Basic limitation. Notwithstanding any provision of this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, to the contrary, the amount of an officer's or employee's annual retirement benefit, calculated as a single life annuity commencing before age 62 or after age 65, shall not exceed $160,000.00, as adjusted as of the first day of each limitation year to the dollar limitation determined by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue pursuant to regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury under the authority granted by section 415(d) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the "Code") (the "Maximum Permissible Dollar Amount"). For purposes of this section, the term 'limitation year' shall mean the calendar year. 
As of each January 1, the dollar limitation as determined by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue for that calendar year will become effective as the maximum permissible dollar amount for that calendar year. The dollar limitation applicable to officers and employees who have commenced distribution of their benefit shall be adjusted annually to reflect any changes to the maximum permissible dollar amount. 
Employee contributions treated as employer contributions made pursuant to section 6-37(u) shall be considered a part of the benefit subject to the limitations of this section. Officer or employee contributions for prior service with certain other employers shall be subject to the rules of section 6-94. Employee contributions not made pursuant to section 6-37(u) and not made for credit for prior service with certain other employers shall be converted to an annual benefit amount pursuant to Code section 411(c)(2)(B) and shall be subtracted from the total annual benefit subject to the limitations of this subsection (a), provided that such contributions shall be considered to be a separate defined contribution plan maintained by the City of Atlanta and subject to the limitations of Code section 415(c). 
If the form of payment under the act is other than a straight-life annuity (with no ancillary benefits), or if the officer or employee has made mandatory or voluntary contributions or rollover contributions, or if any portion of the payment is attributable to assets transferred to the fund from another qualified plan not maintained by the City of Atlanta, the benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to a straight-life annuity with no ancillary benefits. For purposes of adjusting any benefit, the actuarially equivalent amount shall be the greater, of: (i) the annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any) payable to the officer or employee under the act commencing at the same annuity starting date as the form of benefit payable to the officer or employee; or (ii) the annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the form of benefit payable to the officer or employee, computed using a five percent interest rate and the applicable mortality table. No actuarial adjustment shall be required to reflect the value of any of the following: (A) that portion of any joint and survivor annuity that constitutes a qualified joint and survivor annuity (as defined in Code section 417), (B) benefits that are not directly related to retirement benefits, such as pre-retirement disability and death benefits and post-retirement medical benefits; and (C) post-retirement cost-of-living increases made in accordance with Code section 415(d) and the regulations thereunder. 
The provisions of this section 6-93 shall be applied in accordance with the rules of Code section 415 and the regulations thereunder, and the relevant provisions of the regulations are incorporated by reference herein. If payments to or on behalf of an officer or employee begin on multiple dates, the rules of this Section 6-93 shall be applied on each such date to the relevant portion of the benefit. 
(b)  Exception to basic limitation. If the annual retirement benefit payable to an officer or employee under this act does not exceed $10,000.00 for the limitation year with respect to which a determination is being made or any prior limitation year, and the City of Atlanta has not at any time maintained a defined contribution plan (as determined pursuant to the Code section 415(d) regulations) in which the officer or employee has participated, the limitation otherwise imposed by subsection (a) shall not apply. For purposes of determining whether any officer or employee has ever participated in a defined contribution plan, mandatory employee contributions to any defined benefit plan maintained by the City of Atlanta are not to be treated as a separate defined contribution plan maintained by the City of Atlanta. 
(c)  Reduction for fewer than ten years of participation. If an officer or employee has participated under the provisions of this act for fewer than ten years, the maximum permissible dollar amount shall be adjusted by multiplying such limitation by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the officer's or employee's years of participation as of such date (and any fraction thereof) and the denominator of which is ten. The foregoing reduction shall not apply to (1) disability retirement benefits received by an officer or employee under this act or (2) death benefits received by an officer's or employee's beneficiary under this act. 
(d)  Actuarial adjustment when benefits commence before age 62 or after age 65. If an officer's or employee's annual retirement benefit commences before he attains age 62, the maximum permissible dollar amount for the limitation year shall be reduced so that it is the actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible dollar amount that would be applicable if the retirement benefit had commenced at age 62. 
The actuarially equivalent amount shall be equal to the lesser of (A) the maximum permissible dollar amount multiplied by the ratio of the annual retirement benefit payable under the act at the time payments are scheduled to commence, without regard to the limits of this section 6-93, to the annual retirement benefit commencing at age 62, without regard to the limits of this section 6-93, and (B) the actuarially equivalent amount using a five percent interest rate and the applicable mortality table. To the extent that benefits will not be forfeited upon the death of the officer or employee, the mortality decrement shall be ignored for purposes of determining any reduction in the dollar limitation. If any benefits are forfeited upon death, the full mortality decrement shall be taken into account. If an officer's or employee's annual retirement benefit commences after age 65, the maximum permissible dollar amount for the limitation year shall be increased so that it is the actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible dollar amount at age 65. The actuarially equivalent amount shall be equal to the lesser of: (A) the maximum permissible dollar amount multiplied by the ratio of the annual retirement benefit under the act at the time payments are scheduled to commence, disregarding accruals after age 65 and without regard to the limits of this section 6-93, to the annual retirement benefit commencing at age 65, without regard to the limits of this section 6-93, and (B) the actuarially equivalent amount determined using a five percent interest rate and the applicable mortality table. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the maximum permissible dollar amount shall not be reduced by reason of the commencement of annual retirement benefits before age 62 for (1) any full-time officer or employee with at least 15 years of full-time service with any police or fire department that is organized and operated by the City of Atlanta, (2) disability retirement benefits paid to an officer or employee pursuant to this act or (3) a death benefit paid to a beneficiary pursuant to this act. 
(e)  Applicable mortality table. On or after January 1 2008, "Applicable mortality table" shall mean the mortality table specified by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to Code section 417(e)(3)(B). Before January 1, 2008, "Applicable mortality table" shall mean the mortality table prescribed by Revenue Ruling 2001-62, 2001-2C.B. 632, or any successor revenue ruling, notice or other guidance provided by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue that establishes a replacement mortality table pursuant to Code section 415(b)(2)(E)(v). 
(f)  Preservation of old law benefits. In the case of an officer or employee who participated in one or more defined benefit plans of the City of Atlanta as of the first day of the first limitation year beginning after December 31, 1994, the application of the limitations of this section shall not cause the maximum permissible benefit for such officer or employee under all such defined benefit plans to be less than the officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit. 
For officers or employees with RPA '94 Old-Law Benefits, for purposes of determining whether an officer's or employee's benefit exceeds the limitations of this section after December 31, 1999 (the "RPA '94 Freeze Date"), an officer's or employee's total annual benefit under the act calculated as a straight life annuity shall be determined, and this benefit shall not exceed the maximum permissible dollar amount applicable to the officer or employee. Where an officer's or employee's benefit must be adjusted to an actuarially equivalent straight life annuity, such adjustment shall be calculated as provided under subsection (a) above. 
In no event shall an officer or employee receive less than the officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit. For purposes of determining that an officer or employee receives no less than the officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit, the limitation applicable to the officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit ("Old-Law Limitation") shall be determined, and the officer or employee shall receive the RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit to the extent it does not exceed such old-law limitation. Before January 1, 2000 (the "final implementation date"), adjustments to the old-law limitation for benefits that commence before age 62 or after age 65 shall be calculated as provided under Code section 415(b)(2)(E) and the terms of the act as in effect on December 7, 1994. On or after the final implementation date, adjustments to the old law limitation for commencement of benefits before age 62 or after age 65 shall be calculated as provided in subsection (d) above. In no event, however, may an officer's or employee's old-law benefit exceed the officer's or employee's old-law benefit as of the RPA '94 Freeze Date. 
For the purposes of this subsection, the term "RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit" shall mean the officer's or employee's accrued benefit under the terms of the act as of the RPA '94 Freeze Date, for the annuity starting date and optional form and taking into account the limitations of Code section 415 as in effect on December 7, 1994, including the participation requirements under Code section 415(b)(5). In determining the amount of an officer's or employee's RPA Old-Law Benefit, the following shall be disregarded: (1) any ordinance or amendment to the act increasing benefits adopted after the RPA '94 Freeze Date, and (2) any cost-of-living adjustments that become effective under Code section 415(d) after the RPA '94 Freeze Date. 
If, at any date after the RPA '94 Freeze Date, the officer's or employee's total benefit under the act, before the application of Code section 415, is less than the officer's or employee's old-law benefit, the RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit will be reduced to a benefit equal to the officer's or employee's total benefit. 
The use of a different interest rate and mortality table may not increase an officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit to an amount greater than such benefit as of the RPA '94 Freeze Date. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § I(3), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-87, § 3, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2010-67(10-O-1893), § 1, 12-15-10) 
Note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 2004-87 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2002. 
Sec. 6-94. - Treatment of employee contributions for prior service with certain other employers. 
(a)  Basic Limitation. If an officer or employee makes one or more contributions under this act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, to purchase permissive service credit on or after January 1, 1998, the requirements of section 6-93 shall be treated as satisfied if either: 
(1)  The requirements of section 415(b) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the 'Code') are satisfied, determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all contributions under this act for permissive service credit as an annual benefit for purposes of Code section 415(b), provided, however, that the reduced limit under Code section 415(b)(2)(C) (as described in section 6-93(d)) shall not be exceeded solely by reason of this section 6-94; or 
(2)  The requirements of Code section 415(c) are satisfied, determined by treating all contributions under this act for permissive service credit as an annual addition for purposes of Code section 415(c), provided, however, that the percentage limitation under Code section 415(c)(1)(B) shall not be exceeded solely by reason of this section 6-94. 
(b)  Limitation on Nonqualified Service. Notwithstanding the foregoing, not more than five years of permissive service credit attributable to nonqualified service shall be taken into account for purposes of this section, and no permissive service credit shall be taken into account before the officer or employee has participated under the provisions of this act for at least five years. 
(c)  Definitions. 
(1)  Permissive Service Credit. For purposes of this section, the term `permissive service credit' shall mean service credit that (A) is recognized under this act for purposes of calculating an officer's or employee's benefit, (B) such officer or employee has not received under this act and (C) such officer or employee may receive only by making a voluntary additional contribution in an amount determined under this act that does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service credit. 
(2)  Nonqualified Service. For purposes of this section, the term 'nonqualified service' means service for which permissive service credit is allowed, other than: 
(A)  service (including parental, medical, sabbatical and similar leave) as an employee of the Government of the United States, any State or political subdivision thereof or any agency or instrumentality of any of the foregoing (other than military service or service for credit that was obtained as a result of a repayment under Code section 415(k)(3)); 
(B)  service (including parental, medical, sabbatical and similar leave) as an employee (other than as an employee described in clause (A) above) of an educational organization described in Code section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii) that is a public, private or sectarian school providing elementary or secondary education (through grade 12), as determined under the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(C)  service as an employee of an association of employees who are described in clause (A), above; or 
(D)  military service (other than qualified military service under Code section 414(u)) recognized under this act. 
In the case of service described in clauses (A), (B) or (C), such service will be nonqualified service if recognition of such service would cause an officer or employee to receive a retirement benefit for the same service under more than one retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § I(4), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-87, § 4, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 2004-87 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2002. 
Sec. 6-95. - Limitation on monthly earnings. 
For the period from January 1, 1996 to December 31, 2001, the annual compensation of each officer and employee taken into account for determining all benefits provided under this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, for any year shall not exceed $150,000.00, as adjusted for the cost of living in accordance with Section 401(a)(17)(B) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the "Code"). For years beginning on and after January 1, 2002, the annual compensation of each officer and employee taken into account for determining all benefits provided under this Act for any year shall not exceed $200,000.00, as adjusted for the cost of living in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17)(B). 
If compensation for any prior year is taken into account in determining the benefits of an officer or employee, the compensation for such prior year shall be subject to the applicable annual compensation limit in effect under Code Section 401(a)(17) for that prior year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective January 1, 2002, the limit on compensation taken into account with regard to years before January 1, 2002 shall be increased to $200,000.00, and the monthly benefit of officers and employees who have terminated employment, including officers and employees who have commenced receiving a benefit, shall be recalculated to reflect such increase. 
The annual compensation of an officer or employee who commenced participation under this Act before January 1, 1996 shall not be limited by the terms of this section. 
For the purposes of compliance with the requirements of Code Section 415, on or after January 1, 2009, the definition of "compensation" shall include differential wage payments within the meaning of Code Section 414(u)(12). 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § I(5), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-87, § 5, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2015-06(14-O-1633), § 2, 2-26-15 ) 
Note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 2004-87 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 1996. 
Sec. 6-96. - Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with section 414(u) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § I(6), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-87, § 6, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 2004-87 provided for an effective date for this section of Dec. 12, 1994. 
Sec. 6-97. - Supplemental benefit arrangement. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Supplemental Benefit Arrangement is to provide officers and employees participating under the provisions of this act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, with the full amount of benefit intended under the act, without regard to the limitations imposed by section 415 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the `Code'). 
(b)  Benefits. If the annual retirement benefit of an officer or employee under the act is reduced as a result of the limitations in Code section 415 (as described in sections 6-93 and 6-94) such officer or employee shall receive an amount from the Supplemental Benefit Arrangement equal to the difference between (i) the amount that would have been payable under the terms of the act without the application of Code section 415 and (ii) the amount payable under the terms of the act determined with the application of the limitations in Code section 415. 
(c)  Elective Deferrals Not Permitted. Officers and employees shall not be permitted to defer compensation either directly or indirectly under the Supplemental Benefit Arrangement at any time. 
(d)  Subfund. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Act, the benefits payable under this section shall be paid from the assets of a subfund established under the existing fund, provided that such subfund shall be maintained solely for the purpose of providing benefits under the Supplemental Benefit Arrangement. The assets of the fund (other than the subfund) shall not be used to pay benefits under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § I(7), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-87, § 7, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 2004-87 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2004. 
Sec. 6-98. - Eligible rollover distributions. 
(a)  General rule. The distributee of any eligible rollover distribution made under this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, may elect, in the manner and at the time specified by the board of trustees, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Distributee. For purposes of this section, a "distributee" shall include any current or former officer or employee who has a right to a benefit under this act. In addition, a 'distributee' shall include the current or former officer's or employee's surviving spouse, as well as the current or former officer's or employee's current or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order as defined in Code section 414(p). Effective January 1, 2010, a "distributee" shall include a non-spouse beneficiary who is a designated beneficiary within the meaning of Code section 401(a)(9)(E). 
(2)  Eligible rollover distribution. For purposes of this section, an 'eligible rollover distribution' is any distribution from the fund established under the act of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the 'Code'); and any hardship distribution. All or a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the distribution includes after-tax employee contributions that are not includible in gross income, provided, however, that such amounts may only be paid to a plan that constitutes an eligible retirement plan with respect to a distribution or portion of a distribution constituting after-tax contributions, as defined below. 
(3)  Eligible retirement plan. For purposes of this section, an 'eligible retirement plan' is an individual retirement account or annuity described in Code sections 408(a) or 408(b); a qualified trust described in Code section 401(a); an annuity plan described in Code section 403(a); an annuity contract described in Code section 403(b); and an eligible deferred compensation plan described in 457(b) that is maintained by a state, a political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and that agrees to account separately for amounts transferred into such plan from this fund; and effective January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA described in Code section 408A. With respect to that portion of an eligible rollover distribution that consists of after-tax contributions that are not includible in gross income, an eligible retirement plan shall include only an individual retirement account or annuity described in Code sections 408(a) or (b) or a qualified defined contribution plan described in Code sections 401(a) or 403(a) that agrees to account separately for the amounts so transferred, including separate accounting for that portion of such distribution that is not includible in gross income. In the case of a distribution to a non-spouse beneficiary, the term eligible retirement plan shall include only an inherited individual retirement account described in Code section 408(a) or an inherited individual retirement annuity described in Code section 408(b). 
(c)  Mandatory distributions. Effective January 1, 2006, if with respect to any mandatory distribution in excess of $1,000.00 that is an eligible rollover distribution a distributee does not make an election pursuant to subsection (a) above and does not elect to receive the distribution directly, the amount of the distribution shall be transferred to an individual retirement plan as described in Code section 408(a) or 408(b) of a designated trustee or issuer, and the distributee shall be notified in writing that the distribution may be transferred to such an individual retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § I(8), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-87, § 8, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 4, 3-23-06; Ord. No. 2010-67(10-O-1893), § 2, 12-15-10) 
Note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 2004-87 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2002. 
Sec. 6-99. - Employees of the Atlanta Independent School System. 
Employees of the Atlanta Independent School System, or any predecessor entity, who are not participating in the Teachers Retirement System of Georgia, shall be eligible to participate under the provisions of this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, under the same terms and conditions that are applicable to officers and employees of the City of Atlanta, and service with the Atlanta Independent School System, or any predecessor entity, shall be treated as service with the City of Atlanta for the purpose of determining an employee's benefits under this Act. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § I(9), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-87, § 9, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 2004-87 provided that the provisions of section 9 of said ordinance shall be effective as of the date on which the Atlanta Independent School System, or any predecessor entity, first employed the individual. 
Sec. 6-100. - Exclusive benefit. 
At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to officers and employees participating under the provisions of this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, and their beneficiaries shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund established under this act be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of such officers, employees and beneficiaries, except that a contribution by an employer to the fund established under this act [Act] made under a mistake of fact may be returned to such employer within one year after the payment of the contribution. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § I(10), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-87, § 10, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 2004-87 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 1997. 
Sec. 6-101. - Minimum vesting standards. 
Upon the termination of the fund established under this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, or upon complete discontinuance of contributions under the act [Act], the rights of all officers and employees to benefits accrued to the date of such termination or discontinuance, to the extent then funded, shall be nonforfeitable. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § I(11), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-87, § 11, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 2004-87 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 1997. 
Sec. 6-102. - Credit for service while covered by the City of Atlanta Defined Contribution Plan. 
(a)  Effective September 1, 2005, a participant in the City of Atlanta Defined Contribution Plan (the "Defined Contribution Plan") who (i) is a permanent, full-time employee of the City of Atlanta, (ii) is either a classified employee, as defined in section 114-84 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta, or an employee whose payroll grade level is 18 or below and (iii) either has never received a distribution from the Defined Contribution Plan or has repaid to the Defined Contribution Plan the full amount of any prior distribution pursuant to the terms of such plan, may elect at any time before January 31, 2005 to transfer his vested and unvested account balance under the Defined Contribution Plan, excluding any amounts attributable to rollover contributions from other plans and voluntary after-tax employee contributions made under the Defined Contribution Plan, to the fund established under this act [Act], 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, and shall be credited with (A) such service and monthly earnings as the employee would have been credited if he had participated under the terms this act [Act] during the period that he participated in the Defined Contribution Plan and (B) if such employee previously participated under the terms of this act [Act] and elected to transfer the actuarial present value of his benefit under this act [Act] to the Defined Contribution Plan pursuant to Ordinance No. 02-0-0791, such service and monthly earnings as were used to determine the amount so transferred. 
(b)  Effective January 1, 2018, a participant in the City of Atlanta Defined Contribution Plan (the "Defined Contribution Plan") on December , 2017 (date of passage of Ordinance No. 17-O- ) who: 
(i)  is a permanent, full-time employee of the City of Atlanta who was hired between January 1, 2001 and December 31, 2005, and 
(ii)  either has never received a distribution from the Defined Contribution Plan or has repaid to the Defined Contribution Plan the full amount of any prior distribution pursuant to the terms of such plan, and 
(iii)  has executed a payment plan, which shall not exceed five (5) years from the date that it is signed, to contribute all additional sums that such employee would have contributed to the General Employees' Pension Fund. Specifically, an additional 1-2 percent of salary for any period of employment between January 1, 2001 and September 1, 2011; and an additional 6-7 percent of salary for any period of employment between September 1, 2011 and January 1, 2018 as applicable. 
Such employees may elect at any time before April 30, 2018 to transfer their vested and unvested account balance under the Defined Contribution Plan, excluding any amounts attributable to rollover contributions from other plans and voluntary after-tax employee contributions made under the Defined Contribution Plan, to the fund established under this act [Act], 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, and shall be credited with (A) such service and monthly earnings as the employee would have been credited if they had participated under the terms this act [Act] during the period that they participated in the Defined Contribution Plan and (B) if such employee previously participated under the terms of this act [Act] and elected to transfer the actuarial present value of his benefit under this act to the Defined Contribution Plan pursuant to Ordinance No. 02-O-0791, such service and monthly earnings as were used to determine the amount so transferred. 
(Ord. No. 2005-81, § 1, 11-22-05; Ord. No. 2017-92(17-O-1826), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
Sec. 6-103. - Thirty-year retirement. 
(a)  Any officer or employee who is a member of the General Employees Pension Fund, and whose creditable service before credit for accrued unused sick leave equals at least 30 years shall be entitled to a monthly pension benefit upon retirement without any reduction for any age or vesting penalties as would otherwise be applicable. 
(b)  The Mayor or its designee is authorized to abolish any position that becomes vacant as a result of this 30 years or more service retirement program. 
(c)  The Chief Financial Officer or its designee is authorized to transfer expenses between various departments' personnel line items to accommodate the inequity from savings realized between departments. 
(d)  The Chief Financial Officer or its designee is authorized to transfer funds to the General Employees' Fund as needed and as savings accrue, to reduce the transfers accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2005-72, §§ 1—4, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 6-104. - Application of Pension Modification pursuant to City Related Laws Section 6-2. 
There has been raised and established funds for the relief and pensioning of members of nonuniformed officers and employees of the City of Atlanta who were in active service on or after the date of the passage of this act ("General Employees' Pension Fund"). The terms of the General Employees' Pension Fund have been modified by City Related Laws Section 6-2. The terms of the General Employees' Pension Fund shall be as set forth in City Related Laws Sections 6-36 through 6-140, as amended by Related Laws Section 6-2. The retirement plan and benefits of the following members of the General Employees' Pension Fund shall not be impacted by Related Laws Section 6-2: 1) members who were active service City Employees on November 1, 2011 who were hired by the City and joined the General Employees' Pension Fund prior to January 1, 1984, and had continuous City service, or had had a break in service and purchased the interim pension benefits upon rehire: and 2) members who retired before November 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 2011-27(11-O-0672), § 13, 6-29-11) 
Secs. 6-105—6-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Sec. 6-141. - Board of trustees; constituted, membership, duties. 
(a)  There is hereby established one board of trustees whose duty it shall be to implement the provisions of this act [Act] with respect to the City of Atlanta's General Employees' Pension Fund, Police Officers' Pension Fund and Firefighters' Pension Fund and to ensure that the funds of each pension fund are maintained and accounted for separately, except as provided in Section 6-37(r), Section 6-222(q) and Section 6-367(q). The board of trustees shall be authorized to adopt such rules, procedures and policies that it deems necessary to perform its duties; provided, however, that any such rules, procedures and policies are consistent with the provisions of this act [Act] and with all other applicable laws. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall be known as the City of Atlanta Defined Benefit Pension Plan Investment Board (the "Investment Board") and shall be comprised as follows: 
(1)  Chair . The Investment Board shall have an independent chair, who shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Atlanta to one term of five years, with relevant financial services industry experience, preferably in the area of investments. The Investment Board chair shall have no familial or business ties to the City of Atlanta or the Atlanta Public Schools 
(2)  Vice Chair. The vice chair of the Investment Board shall be the Mayor of the City of Atlanta or her/his designee. 
(3)  Three members of the Atlanta City Council, who shall be appointed annually by the Mayor of the City of Atlanta. 
(4)  Two members of the Atlanta City Council, who shall be appointed annually by the President of the Atlanta City Council. 
(5)  One member who shall be appointed annually by the Atlanta Board of Education. 
(6)  One member who shall be appointed annually by the Mayor and who shall be a participant in one of the three City of Atlanta Defined Benefit Pension plans. 
(7)  The Chief Financial Officer of the City of Atlanta. 
(8)  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources of the City of Atlanta. 
(9)  One member elected every three years by active and retired City of Atlanta participants in the City of Atlanta General Employees' Pension Fund (the "General Employee Trustee") 
(10)  One member elected every three years by active and retired participants in the Atlanta Public Schools portion of the City of Atlanta General Employees' Pension Fund (the "Atlanta Public Schools Trustee") 
(11)  One member elected every three years by the active and retired participants in the City of Atlanta Firefighters' Pension Fund (the "Fire Department Trustee"). 
(12)  One member elected every three years by the active and retired participants in the City of Atlanta Police Officers' Pension Fund (the "Police Department Trustee"). 
(c)  Trustee qualifications . To qualify as a Trustee, a candidate must demonstrate no less than 24 hours of training, education, experience, or a combination of the three, regarding the following core competencies: 
(1)  Understanding of governance and administration of a public pension fund, including benefits administration and disability. 
(2)  Basic knowledge of fiduciary responsibility and liability. 
(3)  Basic understanding of investment structures and strategies. 
(4)  Basic understanding of financial controls and audits. 
(5)  Understanding of ethical standards of behavior, including conflicts of interest and disclosures. 
(6)  Basic knowledge of applicable Georgia Law, including the Open Records Act and Open Meetings Act. 
(d)  Committees . The Board shall create the following committees: 
(1)  Administration Committee . There shall be three separate Administration Committees to manage the administrative duties, including the selection of a third party administrator, and make all pension award decisions for each of the three separate pension plans. The three committees shall be as follows: 
A.  The City of Atlanta and Atlanta Public Schools General Employees' Administration Committee shall be comprised of: 
i.  The General Employees' Pension Plan elected representative to the Investment Board. 
ii.  The Atlanta Public Schools' Pension Plan elected representative to the Investment Board. 
iii.  One member elected every three years by active City of Atlanta participants in the City of Atlanta General Employees' Pension Fund. 
iv.  One member elected every three years by retired City of Atlanta participants in the City of Atlanta General Employees' Pension Fund. 
v.  One member elected every three years by active participants in the Atlanta Public Schools portion of the City of Atlanta General Employees' Pension Fund. 
vi.  One member elected every three years by retired participants in the Atlanta Public Schools portion of the City of Atlanta General Employees' Pension Fund. 
vii.  The Chief Financial Officer or her/his designee. 
viii.  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources or her/his designee. 
B.  The Police Officers' Administration Committee shall be comprised of: 
i.  The Police Officers' Pension Plan elected representative to the Investment Board. 
ii.  One member elected every three years by active participants in the City of Atlanta Police Officers' Pension Fund. 
iii.  One member elected every three years by retired participants in the City of Atlanta Police Officers' Pension Fund. 
iv.  The Chief Financial Officer or her/his designee. 
v.  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources or her/his designee. 
C.  The Firefighters' Administration Committee shall be comprised of: 
i.  The Firefighters' Pension Plan elected representative to the Investment Board. 
ii.  One member elected every three years by active participants in the City of Atlanta Firefighters' Pension Fund. 
iii.  One member elected every three years by retired participants in the City of Atlanta Firefighters' Pension Fund. 
iv.  The Chief Financial Officer or her/his designee. 
v.  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources or her/his designee. 
(2)  Governance Committee . The Governance Committee shall be responsible for implementation of the qualification requirements listed in paragraph (b) above. The Governance Committee shall also review and address conflicts of interest and compliance issues related to trustees and investment managers. The Governance Committee shall be comprised of: 
A.  The Chair of the Investment Board. 
B.  Three Administration Committee members, each appointed from one of the three Administration Committees. Such appointees may be a member of the respective Administration Committee or an individual selected by the members of that Administration Committee. 
C.  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources or her/his designee. 
(3)  Audit Committee. The Audit Committee shall oversee audits of the three pension plans and review the financial statements for each pension plan. The Audit Committee shall be comprised as follows: 
A.  The Chair of the Investment Board. 
B.  Three members elected by the combined membership of the three Administration Committees. Such members shall be elected from the active and retired participants of all three pension plans. 
C.  The Chief Financial Officer or her/his designee. 
(1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, § 4; 1952 Ga. Laws, page 2765, § 2; 1953 Ga. Laws, Nov.-Dec. Sess., page 2770, § 3; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 3061, §§ 1, 2; 1964 Ga. Laws, page 2407, §§ 1, 2; 1974 Ga. Laws, page 3546, § 1; 1982 Ga. Laws, page 4385, § 1A; Ord. No. 1985-49, § 1, 8-9-85; Ord. No. 1992-45, § 1, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 1992-58, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 1994-13, § 1, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 1999-76, § 1, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 2017-95(17-O-1589), § 1, 12-15-17 ) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-142. - Appeals from decisions of board of trustees; procedure. 
(a)  A majority of the board of trustees shall control on all disputed questions. 
(b)  A decision of the board of trustees to award or deny a service pension or a disability pension must be appealed to the board of trustees in writing within 14 days of the decision being appealed. Upon the receipt of a written appeal, the board of trustees will schedule a hearing to receive testimony from the appealing party or parties. Such hearing shall be conducted informally by the examination of witnesses who may be represented by legal counsel if they so desire. The board of trustees shall be authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and procedures, not inconsistent with general legal principles, governing the manner in which such hearings shall be conducted. The decision of the board of trustees after the hearing shall be final and shall be provided to the individual appealing in writing; provided, however, that such final decision shall be subject to review by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. The secretary of the board of trustees shall be authorized to acknowledge service of any such writ and shall, within the time provided by law, certify and cause to be filed with the clerk of the Fulton County Superior Court, a record of the proceedings before the board of trustees, including a copy of the pension application, the decision of the board and the notice of the board's action as provided to the pension applicant. Where appeals are taken by a pension applicant as provided herein, the board of trustees shall be the respondent and the city shall be the defendant. 
(c)  The method of appeal as provided herein shall also serve as the method by which all other disputed pension award questions shall be appealed. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, page 4376, §§ 2, 10; 1982 Ga. Laws, page 4385, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-95(17-O-1589), § 1, 12-15-17 ) 
Sec. 6-143. - Investment of excess funds. 
In the event there should accumulate more funds than are needed for immediate use, the board of trustees are empowered to invest such excess funds as authorized by applicable laws, including but not limited to, the provisions of this act [Act] and the Georgia Investment Authority Law, § 47-20, Article 7, et seq. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 3331, § 1; Ord. No. 1985-49, § 2, 8-9-85; Ord. No. 1992-45, § 2, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 1994-13, § 2, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 2017-95(17-O-1589), § 1, 12-15-17 ) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-144. - Actuarial investigation. 
The board of trustees of this retirement system shall have the system's actuary make an actuarial investigation every three (3) years or more often as the board, in its discretion may deem proper. Such actuarial investigation shall include the results of any actuarial investigation into the then current assumptions as to rates of interest, mortality, disability, withdrawal and retirement. The actuarial investigation shall also include consideration of the experience of the retirement system under its assumptions and a comparison of results with the previous actuarial investigations and may also include such other studies as may be necessary or desirable for the completeness and accuracy of the actuarial investigation. The actuarial investigation shall also include a valuation of the contingent assets and liabilities of the retirement system and a determination of the payment necessary to amortize over a stated period any unfunded accrued liability disclosed. As an exhibit to the actuarial investigation, the retirement system board of trustees shall attach a copy of all the provisions of the plan for the retirement system, including the requirements and conditions for qualifying to participate, the nature of benefits under the plan, and the manner in which the local retirement system is funded. The board of trustees of the retirement system shall file with the state auditor a copy of each actuarial investigation. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 4504, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3627, § 1) 
Secs. 6-145—6-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BENEFITS 

Sec. 6-171. - Amount of pension, maximum designated. 
When such officer or employee shall retire as a matter of right, he shall be paid one-half (½) of the salary he was receiving at the time of his retirement, for the rest of his life, to be paid monthly. The maximum amount to be paid to any officer or employee as a pension, under this act, shall be the sum of $100 per month, except as otherwise provided herein. Provided, however, the amount of the pension shall be increased five dollars ($5.00) per month for each full year's service not in excess of 10 years, rendered by the officer or employee after the time when he might have retired as a matter of right. The records, kept in the office of the comptroller of such city, shall be conclusive as to the time served. 
(1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, § 3; 1935 Ga. Laws, page 445, § 1; 1947 Ga. Laws, page 1635, § 3; 1952 Ga. Laws, page 2765, § 3) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-172. - Reduction of certain pensions. 
All pensioners now receiving pension under the provisions of this act, shall after May 1, 1935, receive pensions in accordance with these provisions and any pensioners now drawing pensions in excess of the maximum herein fixed, shall be reduced to the maximum herein specified so that no person now on pension rolls under this act will after May 1, 1935, receive a pension in excess of the amount of $100. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 445, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-173. - Employees dying with not less than 10 years' service; benefits payable. 
Where any employee participating in the provisions of this act shall die while in active service and after having had not less than five (5) years of active service prior to his death, his beneficiary as defined in this act, shall be entitled to receive a pension representing three-fourths (¾) of the amount that said member would have been entitled to receive in the future had such member not died but had become as of the date of his death totally and permanently disabled within the provisions of this act. In other words, the amount paid to such beneficiary shall represent three-fourths (¾) of the amounts that such member would have received had such member not died but on the other hand had become, as of the date of death, totally and permanently disabled within the provisions of this act, and as provided in section 9 below. Fractional parts of years shall be counted in determining the amount of the pension to be paid to the beneficiary of an employee who shall die while in the active service of the city and after having had not less than five (5) years of active service prior to his death. 
(1941 Ga. Laws, page 468, § 3; 1953 Ga. Laws, Nov.-Dec. Sess., page 2776, § 2; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3002, § 1; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 3768, § 1) 
Sec. 6-174. - Employee killed in line of duty; benefits payable. 
Whenever any officer or employee coming within the provisions of this act, as amended, shall be killed in the line of duty during the first five (5) years of his employment, the beneficiary of such officer or employee shall be paid five twenty-fifths ( 5/25 ) of a full 25 year service pension. If such officer or employee is killed in line of duty after having served five (5) years in the service of said city, his said beneficiary shall receive a pro rata part of a full service pension, to be calculated in the manner provided herein. Fractional parts of years shall be counted in determining the pro rata part of a full service pension when the officer or employee is killed in the line of duty after having served five (5) years in the service of said city. 
(1962 Ga. Laws, page 3138, § 1; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3002, § 2) 
Sec. 6-175. - Disability benefits; generally. 
(a)  Any person entitled to disability benefits under the provisions of this act, as amended, other than as a result of an injury sustained in the line of duty, may receive such benefits after he has been in the active employment of the city for a period of five (5) years. 
(b)  Whenever any officer or employee coming within the provisions of this act, as amended, shall become totally and permanently disabled as a result of an injury sustained in the line of duty during the first five (5) years of his employment, such officer or employee shall receive a pension amounting to five twenty-fifths ( 5/25 ) of a total service pension throughout the remainder of his life. If such officer or employee shall become totally and permanently disabled as the result of any injury sustained in the line of duty at any time after five (5) years service, he shall receive for the remainder of his life a pro rata pension to be calculated in the manner provided herein. Fractional parts of years shall be counted in determining the pro rata pension when the officer or employee has become totally and permanently disabled by result of injuries sustained in the line of duty at any time after five (5) years service. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 3272, § 6; 1962 Ga. Laws, page 3138, § 2; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3057, § 1; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 3768, § 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-176. - Refunds of employees dying. 
Where any employee participating in the provisions of this act shall die, any and all refunds of amounts paid by him into said fund to which he would have been entitled as of the date of his death shall be paid to his estate. 
(1941 Ga. Laws, page 468, § 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-177. - Right to designate recipient of refund in event of death; failure to make designation. 
A member may designate someone, whether related to him or not, who would be entitled to a refund of the amount he has paid into the pension fund if such member should die before retirement, and in the event he does not name a person to whom a refund is to be made, such refund shall be made to his estate. In the event that a member dies after retirement, and either before or after receiving retirement payments, the named beneficiary, or the member's estate in the absence of a named beneficiary, shall receive a refund in an amount equal to the amount such member paid into said pension fund less the total amount received by such member or beneficiary in retirement benefits. 
(1945 Ga. Laws, page 999, § 8; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 3061, § 4; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 1169) 
Sec. 6-178. - Refunds of employees leaving city employ. 
Any member participating in the provisions of this act who leaves the employ of said city before being eligible for retirement shall have refunded to him an amount equal to the amount paid into the said fund less one-half of one per centum (0.5%) per year to cover each year that the member had paid into the fund and received protection under this act. To illustrate, if at the end of the first year, the member has paid into said fund $10 and leaves the services of the city or withdraws from the pension fund, he shall be entitled to a refund of said $10 less one-half of one per centum (0.5%) or if at the end of 24 years, he has paid into said fund $240, he would be entitled to a refund of $240 less 12 per centum. If such member should die before being awarded a pension and should leave no beneficiary entitled to a pension as such under this act, the refund shall be made to his estate. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 445, § 4; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 999, § 4; 1952 Ga. Laws, page 2765, § 4; 1953 Ga. Laws, Nov.-Dec. Sess., page 2776, § 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. To the extent the provisions of the above section are in conflict with corresponding provisions of section 6-179, the provisions hereof are superseded. 
Sec. 6-179. - Refunds when leaving employment prior to retirement. 
Any employee participating in the provisions of this act, as amended, who leaves the employ of such city prior to retirement shall have refunded to him an amount equal to the amount which he has paid into said fund. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 3272, § 3) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-180. - Increase of pensions for over 25 years of service. 
Pension payments due to former officers and employees who have retired as a matter of right and have been awarded pensions under the terms of this act, as amended, and all such officers and employees who may hereafter retire as a matter of right shall, in addition to the basic pension provided by said act, receive five dollars ($5.00) per month for each full year's active service in excess of 25 years. The record kept in the office of the comptroller or other chief finance officer of such city shall be conclusive to the time served. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 3272, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. Section 7 of the 1957 act from which the above section is derived provided that it shall be liberally construed. Although this act did not expressly so provide, the provisions thereof superseded similar provisions of 1955 Ga. Laws, page 2057, § 5, and has been codified accordingly. 
Sec. 6-181. - Funds for increased benefits provided by section 6-180. 
The increased pension benefits provided by this amendment shall be paid by the board of trustees from funds available to them for the payment of pensions. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 3272, § 10) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-182. - Recomputation of pensions for certain retired officers, employees. 
(a)  Pension payments due all former officers and employees who have retired prior to April 1, 1955, and have been awarded a pension under the provisions of this act, who have reached 65 years of age, or who shall hereafter reach 65 years of age, shall be recomputed upon the following basis: The total pension benefits shall be a sum equal to one-half (½) of the average monthly salary of such former employee during the last three (3) years of his active service to such city, but shall not exceed the sum of $150 per month. The pension payments due to persons who were retired because of disability or for a period of service less than 25 years shall be increased in the same proportion. All such persons shall receive a minimum of four dollars ($4.00) per month for each full year of active service to such city subject to the limitations set out in this act as amended. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall permit any officer or employee who is eligible for pension benefits or increased pension benefits under this act as amended and who is not now making the required contributions for such benefits, to become a member of such pension fund and to participate in the increased benefits provided by this act as amended provided such officer shall pay into the pension fund of such city an amount which would be equal to the amounts which he would have been required to pay had he exercised his privileges upon becoming eligible for such benefits. These payments shall be increased by four percent (4%) per annum from the dates such payments would have been due and may be paid over a period of 50 months. The board of trustees shall by rules provide for the exercise of the options herein authorized. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 3272, § 2; 1958 Ga. Laws, page 3019, §§ 1, 2; 1962 Ga. Laws, page 3015, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. The 1962 act has been editorially treated as superseding prior provisions. 
Sec. 6-183. - Benefits in lieu of existing benefits. 
(a)  The pension benefits provided by this section and the several subsections shall be in lieu of like pension benefits provided by existing provisions of this act. 
(b)  Any officer or employee coming under the terms of this act who is in the employment of the city prior to the effective date of this amendment may elect to come under the provisions of this amendment by making written application to the pension board. The applicant must agree in writing to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment, in lieu of other pension benefits and obligations under this act, as amended. The election to accept the benefits of this amendment shall not prejudice the officers and employees of any such city to participate in the Federal O.A.S.I. program if they should be qualified for benefits under said program. And, notwithstanding any conditions which might originally have been attached to such election, the benefits of this act shall in no event be reduced as a consequence of participation in said program. 
All such officers and employees in the employment of the city on the effective date of this act who do not in writing agree to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment shall have their rights and obligations determined under the law as it existed prior to this amendment. 
All regular officers or employees of the city, eligible for participation in this act, as amended, who shall be elected or employed after the effective date of this act, shall be required to come under the provisions of this act, as now amended, and shall have all rights and duties provided in the amended act. Temporary employees shall not be required to participate in this act, as amended. 
(c)  All officers and employees, who shall elect to come under the terms of this amendment, must attain the age of 60 years and shall have served 25 years, before being eligible to retire and receive the benefits, as provided by this amendment; provided, however, that any officer or employee who has served 25 years and who has attained the age of 55 years may elect to retire on a reduced pension, said reduction to be one-twelfth of two percent (2%) per month for each month the officer or employee lacks in being 60 years of age; provided, further, that the provisions of this section as to age limit shall not apply to any person claiming a pension by reason of total and permanent disability. 
(d)  When such officer or employee shall retire as a matter of right, he shall be paid thereafter a monthly pension equal to two percent (2%) of his monthly earnings up to and including $300 and one and one-half percent (1½%) of his monthly earnings in excess of $300 multiplied by his years of creditable service. Monthly earnings shall be the average of the highest three (3) years' salary during the term of employment. 
(e)  In no event shall the total pension benefits payable under this amendment exceed 75 percent of the average monthly salary used in computing the pension benefits under the terms of this amendment. No department head who elects to come under the provisions of this act shall be entitled to receive any emeritus salary as provided by the governing authorities of any city coming within the provisions of this act. Provided, however, that whenever monthly earnings, as defined in this act as amended particularly by the 1962 Ga. Laws, page 3140, multiplied by years of creditable service at the time of retirement or death, shall entitle any officer or employee, coming under the provisions of this act as amended particularly by the 1962 Ga. Laws, page 3140, to a pension in excess of the maximum pension allowable hereunder, said officer or employee at the time of retirement, or beneficiary in case of death of said officer or employee prior to retirement, shall be refunded all contributions made by him on monthly earnings in excess of monthly earnings necessary to arrive at the maximum pension allowable. 
(f)  (1) Any officer or employee who is a member of the pension fund shall be considered totally and permanently disabled by the board of trustees while the officer or employee is in a continuous state of incapacity due to illness or injury: 
a.  During the first 12 months which the officer or employee is prevented from performing his/her regular, assigned or comparable duties; and 
b.  Thereafter, if the condition continues to prevent the officer or employee from engaging in any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
(2)  A member who is considered by the board of trustees to be totally and permanently disabled in accordance with subsection (f)(1)a. and b. on or after January 1, 1986, shall receive a monthly disability benefit which shall commence on the day following the officer's or employee's last date on the payroll and continue until the earlier of: 
a.  Cessation of total and permanent disability; 
b.  Attainment of age 60. 
(3)  Such monthly disability benefit shall be equal to 50 percent of the officer's or employee's average monthly earnings during the highest three (3) consecutive years of service prior to the date of approval by the board of trustees or officer's or employee's accrued normal retirement benefit, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Upon the cessation of disability benefits pursuant to section (f)(2)a. or b., and the officer's or employee's failure to return to city employment, the officer or employee would be entitled to a pension benefit as calculated in accordance with subsection b. or c. of 1962 Ga. Laws, page 3140, as applicable. Provided further, that the calculation of any such subsequent benefit shall include credit for all years and fractions thereof during the time disability pension benefits have been paid, but shall not include credit for any disability pension payments made. Provided further, that for the purposes of calculating any cost-of-living adjustments, the subsequent benefits shall be considered as a new pension with a new effective date. 
(5)  Disability pension benefits shall be offset by worker's compensation payments so that the combination of payments shall not exceed 75 percent of the officer's or employee's salary at the time disability pension benefits are to commence or 60 percent of an officer's or employee's salary at the time of disability or death in the case of a beneficiary. However, this subsection shall prevent the restoration of disability pension benefits payable upon the reduction or termination of any such compensation benefits payable by the city under applicable worker's compensation laws. 
(6)  a.  Pensions for beneficiaries designated under the terms of this act, as amended, shall be one-half of the amount the pensioner was receiving, at the time of his death, as a result of retirement as a matter of right or because of total and permanent disability; or one-half of the amount such officer or employee would have been entitled to receive had such person retired prior to death. 
b.  The pension benefits for a primary beneficiary shall be continued to the secondary beneficiary, upon the death, or ineligibility for benefits, of the primary beneficiary. Provided, however, if such primary beneficiary was not receiving the maximum beneficiary payment provided for in this act because of any provision of this act reducing such amount, such maximum beneficiary amount shall be paid to the secondary beneficiary, notwithstanding any lesser amount previously paid to the primary beneficiary. Provided, further, that if said beneficiary, primary or secondary, receiving beneficiary benefits as widow or widower of the pensioner is more than five (5) years younger than the pensioner, there shall be deducted from such pension one-twelfth of two percent (2%) per month for each month such beneficiary is more than five (5) years younger than the pensioner. 
c.  No spouse, designated as a beneficiary, shall be entitled to receive any of said service pension benefits unless such spouse shall have been legally married to such officer or employee of such city for a period of one (1) year prior to the death of such pensioner; provided the officer or employee has made payment for such benefits prior to retirement. 
d.  In determining all pensions of officers or employees referred to above, fractional parts of years of service shall be counted and accumulated annual sick leave days credited to such officer or employee shall be counted as provided for in paragraph e. 
e.  In determining creditable service, accumulated, unused sick leave days credited to such officer or employee shall be added as work days to the creditable service otherwise provided by this act, as amended. In determining average monthly earnings, such accumulated unused sick leave days shall be credited at the highest daily rate of regular salary or earnings during the highest three (3) consecutive years' salary or earnings; and all accumulated unused sick leave days shall be substituted for a like number of days at the lowest rate of regular salary or earnings during such highest three (3) consecutive years' salary or earnings during the term of employment. 
f.  Any person entitled to disability benefits under the provisions of this act, as amended, may receive benefits after he/she has been in the active employment of the city for at least a period of five (5) years. Provided, however, said requirement shall not apply to an officer or employee disabled as a direct result of a traumatic event or events occurring during and as a result of the performance of an officer's or employee's regular or assigned duties and not the result of such officer's or employee's willful negligence. 
(7)  Disability pensions; annual review. The retirement of a pension applicant by reason of permanent and total disability shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The board of trustees shall have the right to at least once a year require the pensioner to submit to a medical examination for the purpose of determining whether or not the pensioner has sufficiently recovered from his/her disability and is able to return to any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
b.  If the board, after such examination, determines that the pensioner is not actually totally and permanently disabled and is able to return to any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience then the payment of such disability pension shall cease. (Ord. No. 1985-94, § 3, 12-19-85) 
(f1)  (a)  Any officer or employee subject to the terms of the 1962 City of Atlanta Pension Amendment (Ga. L. 1962, p. 3140 et seq.) who has not yet attained the age of 55 years, who has at least 25 years of service with the City of Atlanta, and who has been involuntarily separated due to or in association with a Reduction-in-Force (RIF), or in conjunction with the city's reorganization and downsizing of the city's workforce and budgetary needs, but not due to disciplinary action, between December 31, 2001 and December 31, 2003, may elect to take a monthly retirement benefit with an age adjustment equal to one-half (½) of the age adjustment provided for in said 1962 Pension Amendment for officers and employees who have attained the age of 55 years of age. 
(b)  Any former officer or employee eligible to retire pursuant to this ordinance who has been involuntarily separated due to or in association with a RIF, but not due to disciplinary action, between December 31, 2001 and December 31, 2003 in conjunction with the city's reorganization and downsizing of the city's workforce and budgetary needs, and has already applied for and/or has been granted a service pension, may make written application to the Pension Office within the two year reemployment rights period to receive the benefit authorized in subsection (a) of this ordinance. 
(c)  Any former officer or employee eligible to retire pursuant to this ordinance who has been involuntarily separated due to or in association with a RIF, but not due to disciplinary action, between December 31, 2001 and December 31, 2003 in conjunction with the city's reorganization and downsizing of the city's workforce and budgetary needs, and has applied for and received a refund of his/her pension contribution, may, within the two-year reemployment period, repay said contribution plus interest at a rate of seven (7) percent per annum from the date of withdrawal of his/her contribution, to the date that he/she makes written application to the Pension Office for the purpose of receiving the benefit authorized in subsection (a) of this ordinance. 
(d)  This ordinance shall not apply to officers or employees who are rehired by the City of Atlanta or whose services are retained by the city pursuant to a contract; (ii) Nor shall this ordinance apply to officers or employees who reject or have rejected an offer of reemployment made by the city, to a position comparable to that from which the officer or employee was RIFFED or involuntary separated in conjunction with the city's reorganization and downsizing of the city's workforce, budgetary needs or other purposes. For officers or employees who were RIFFED or so involuntarily separated prior to the enactment of this ordinance, said offer of reemployment must be made within six (6) months of the enactment hereof. For officers and employees who are RIFFED or so involuntarily separated subsequent to enactment of this ordinance said offer of reemployment must be made within (6) months of the date of separation of any such officer or employee: For purposes of this subsection, a "comparable position" shall be defined as one for which the compensation is equal to or no less than 90% of the compensation earned by such officer or employee at the time of separation. 
(g)  There shall be deducted from the total salary of any officer or employee electing to come under this amendment the sum of five percent (5%), in the event he does not provide for payment of a pension to his beneficiary, as authorized by this act, as amended, or the sum of six percent (6%), in the event he does provide for the continuance of the pension to his beneficiary. Like deductions shall be made from the salaries of future employees required to come under this amendment. 
(h)  In addition to the payments required to be made in subparagraph (g) above, any officer or employee who may become a participant under this amendment shall be entitled to all benefits and receive credit for all the years of his creditable service, provided he shall pay into the fund the sum of five percent (5%) of his total salary from the time his salary exceeded $300 per month, if he does not provide for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary; and the sum of six percent (6%) of his total salary from the time his salary exceeded $300 per month, if he does provide for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary. Payments previously made to the pension fund not exceeding the amount due the fund shall be deducted from the total amount due in arriving at the total sum of five percent (5%) or six percent (6%). 
Said total amount due may be paid at the time the officer or employee elects to come under the terms of this amendment or in 60 monthly installments from the date of his participation under this amendment. Provided, however, that the board of trustees of the fund, as created under this act, as amended, may at their discretion allow additional time for such payments to be made. 
Any officer or employee who does not elect to participate under this amendment within six (6) months of the effective date of this amendment, but who later elects to participate, shall be required to pay interest at the rate of four percent (4%) per annum from the effective date of this amendment to the date he elects to participate. In the event the officer or employee should retire or die before said payments into the fund are completed, the secretary of the retirement fund is authorized to deduct the monthly payments from retirement or beneficiary benefits until the obligation is discharged. 
(i)  This section and the several subsections shall be effective the first day of the month following the passage and approval of this act, and the payments required by subsection (g) above, as to those then employed and electing to come under this amendment, shall begin with that date. As to those subsequently coming into the service of the city or subsequently electing to participate under the terms of this amendment, said payments shall begin with the employment or date of such election. 
(j)  In addition to the fund derived from deductions from salaries and wages, as required by subsection (g) of this amendment, it shall be the duty of the governing authorities and the board of education of such cities to appropriate and pay into the pension fund an amount which shall equal the total amount of deductions from the salaries and wages paid to officers and employees of said governing authorities and said boards of education, including the amounts paid into said fund by said officers and employees for prior creditable service, as required by subparagraph (h). Provided, however, such governing authorities and boards of education of such cities may delay the matching of additional contributions caused by the enactment of this amendment to the January 1st next following the effective date of this amendment; and provided, further, that said governing authorities and board of education of such cities may match the payments for prior creditable service, as provided for in subparagraph (h) in annual installments over a period not to exceed 20 years from the January 1 next following the effective date of this amendment. Should said pension fund at any time be insufficient to meet and pay the pensions due to such officers and employees, such governing authorities and boards of education shall appropriate from current funds amounts sufficient to make up the deficiency as it relates to their respective officers and employees. 
(k)  When any person covered by the provisions of this act shall die as a result of injuries incurred in the line of duty, the compensation to which he would have been entitled shall be continued for one (1) year and paid to his widow, or minor children (natural or legally adopted), if no widow. Any compensation received by the member due to said injury shall be deducted from the one-year's compensation herein provided for. At the expiration of the one-year period referred to above, the pension benefits for widow shall be computed by the same formula as set forth in subsection (f) above. The pension benefits for widow provided by this amendment shall be continued to the minor child or children (natural or legally adopted) upon the death of the widow until the youngest child shall have become 18 years of age. 
(1962 Ga. Laws, page 3140, § 1; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2903, § 1; 1964 Ga. Laws, page 3050, § 1; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3106, § 1; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 3374, § 1; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 3803, §§ 3, 4; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2841, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1985-94, § 4, 12-19-85; Ord. No. 2003-85, § 1, 7-12-03) 
Editor's note— Except as stated in this note, the provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. The following provisions were not repealed by such act: 
(1)  Subsection (j), based on 1962 Ga. Laws, page 3140, § 1; and 
(2)  Subsections (b) and (e), based on 1972 Ga. Laws, page 3803, §§ 3, 4. 
The language of the 1972 act, while not specifically repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546, was effectively superseded by that act. 
The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-184. - Deferred pension benefits. 
(a)  When any person coming within the provisions of this act, as amended, shall have completed 20 years of active service with such city and not yet have reached the age of 65 years, then such person shall have the right to terminate his employment with such city upon completion of said 20 years, or at any time thereafter; elect not to withdraw or have paid to such person the amount which such person would have paid into the pension fund prior to terminating such employment; and upon subsequently attaining 65 years of age commence to receive at said time the benefits to which such person would have been entitled had such person otherwise retired as a matter of right in accordance with the applicable provisions of this act, as amended. 
(b)  Should such person have provided for the payment of a pension to the beneficiary of such person, as authorized by said act, as amended, by making the required payments or contributions to the pension fund, then after terminating the employment with such city and upon the death of such person, either before or after attaining 65 years of age, such person's beneficiary designated under the terms of this act, as amended, shall be entitled to all of the benefits provided for such beneficiary as set forth in the relevant and applicable sections of this act, as amended. 
(c)  Should such person, after having left the employment with such city after 20 years of active service, become reemployed by such city, then such person at such time shall have the right to continue under the provisions of the amendments to said act which such person was under prior to the termination of such employment, or may elect to come under any amendments to said act enacted subsequently to the termination of such person's employment and as may exist and be in effect at the time of said reemployment, upon there being made such payments or contributions to the pension fund, through deductions from salary or otherwise, as might be required by said act, as amended. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2939, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4546 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-185. - Deduction from benefits for unrepaid advanced sick leave. 
(a)  In the event that an officer or employee who has been granted advanced sick leave should retire or die prior to having repaid any and all amounts due such city for the advanced sick leave, an appropriate amount, as determined by the board of trustees, may be deducted from the monthly retirement or beneficiary benefits, or in lieu thereof, such lump sum amounts as the board, in its discretion, deems appropriate until the obligation is discharged. 
(b)  The provisions of this act shall apply only to officers or employees who become members of the pension fund on or after the effective date of this act. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 3887, §§ 1, 4) 
Sec. 6-186. - Statement of accumulated benefits. 
An accurate statement, including the amount the employee has accumulated in the pension fund for the current year and the total amount the employee has accumulated in the pension fund from date of employment to the present date, shall be sent to each employee within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 3175, § 1) 
Secs. 6-187—6-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-221. - Establishment of funds. 
There shall be raised and established funds for the relief and pensioning of members of the police departments in said cities, who are in active service at the time of the passage of this act, and whose names are now on the payroll of such departments, and future members of such departments and their dependents, in all cities in the State of Georgia having a population of 300,000 or more, according to the United States Decennial Census of 1970, or any such future census. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 1; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2832, § 4; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2882, § 2) 
Sec. 6-222. - 1978 Pension Act. 
(a)  The pension benefits provided by this section and the several subsections hereof shall be in lieu of like pension benefits provided by the existing provisions of this act [1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, as amended]. 
(b)  (1) Any officer or employee coming under the terms of this act who is in the employment of the city prior to the effective date of this amendment may elect to come under the provisions of this amendment by making written application to the board of trustees. The applicant must agree in writing to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment, in lieu of other pension benefits and obligations under this act, as amended. 
All such officers and employees in the employment of the city on the effective date of this act who do not in writing agree to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment shall have their rights and obligations determined under the law as it existed prior to this amendment, even though such provisions of law are specifically repealed as hereinafter set forth. 
All regular officers or employees of the city, eligible for participation in this act, as amended, who shall be elected or employed after the effective date of this act, shall be required to come under provisions of this act, as now amended, and shall have all rights and duties provided in the amended act. Temporary and casual employees shall not be required to participate in this act, as amended. 
(2) Pension Application; Procedure. Unless the pension applicant withdraws a pending application for pension benefits, or abandons his or her appeal from the denial of such application by the board of trustees, no new application for a different category of pension benefits shall be accepted by the board of trustees. Further, whenever an officer or employee has been granted a certain category of pension benefits, no new application for a different category shall be accepted by the board of trustees. (1981 Ga. Laws, page 4381, § 1) 
(c)  All officers and employees who shall elect or are required to come under the terms of this amendment, may as a matter of right retire from active service and receive a monthly pension benefit hereinafter set forth and referred to hereinafter as a "normal monthly pension benefit," provided such person shall have served 15 years in the active service of such city and shall have attained the age of 60 years prior to commencement of such benefit. Upon such officer or employee retiring as a matter of right, such person shall be paid thereafter a normal monthly pension benefit equal to two percent of such person's average monthly earnings multiplied by the number of such person's years, or fraction thereof, of creditable service and that normal pension benefit shall not exceed 100 percent of such person's average monthly earnings. Average monthly earnings shall be the average of the monthly earnings of the highest three consecutive years' salary or earnings during the term of employment. In computing the average monthly earnings, if the officer or employee shall have received a lump sum payment for compensation, accumulated vacation, sick leave bonus pay, or similar benefits, the amounts of such payments shall be equally distributed over the period of time in which such compensation or benefit was earned or accumulated. 
(d)  All officers and employees, who shall elect or be required to come under the terms of this amendment, may as a matter of right retire from active service and receive an early retirement benefit, hereinafter referred to as "early monthly retirement benefit," provided such person shall have served 15 years in the active service of such city. When such officer or employee shall elect early retirement as a matter of right, such person shall be paid thereafter an early monthly retirement benefit equal to a normal monthly pension benefit less one-half of one percent per month for each month not to exceed 60 months that the officer or employee lacks in being 55 years of age and one-fourth of one percent per month for each month in excess of 60 months that the officer or employee lacks in being 55 years of age. Provided, however, as to any officer or employee coming under the terms of this act who was in the employment of such city prior to the effective date of this amendment, such officer or employee may elect a monthly pension benefit, hereinafter referred to as a "reduced monthly pension benefit," provided such person shall have served 25 years and shall have attained the age of 50 years. Said reduced monthly pension benefit shall be equal to a normal monthly pension benefit less one-twelfth of three percent per month for each month the officer or employee lacks in being 55 years of age. 
(e)  (1) Whenever any officer or employee, electing to or having been required to come under the terms of this amendment, shall have completed at least five (5) years of active service with such city and not yet have reached the age of 60 years, then such person shall have the right to terminate such person's employment with such city upon completion of said five (5) years, or any time thereafter; elect not to withdraw or have paid to such person the amount which said person would have paid into the pension fund prior to terminating such employment; and upon subsequently attaining 60 years of age commence to receive at said time, and be paid thereafter a monthly pension benefit, hereinafter referred to as a "vested monthly pension benefit," as set forth below based upon the number of years of completed service: 
a.  Completion of 10 or more years of service-A normal monthly pension benefit (100% vested). 
b.  Completion of less than 10 years of service—-the vesting schedule is as follows: 
Completion of 9 years = 45% 
Completion of 8 years = 40% 
Completion of 7 years = 35% 
Completion of 6 years = 30% 
Completion of 5 years = 25% 
Completion of less than 5 years = 0% 
Should such person have provided for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary, as authorized by said act, as amended, by making the required payments or contribution to the pension fund, then after terminating the employment with such city, thereby electing to exercise such person's vesting rights, and upon the death of such officer or employee, either before or after attaining 60 years of age, such beneficiary designated under the terms of this act, as amended, shall be entitled to a beneficiary pension equal to three-fourths (¾) of the amount the pensioner was receiving or such person would have received in accordance with the applicable provisions of this act, as amended. 
(2) Pension Benefits; No Simultaneous Payment of Benefits and Salary; No Entitlement to Interest. 
a.  Whenever an officer or employee has been declared eligible for pension benefits, such pension benefits shall only commence the day following the last day of paid employment for such city. 
b.  In each and every instance where pension benefits shall become payable pursuant to this act, as amended, such payments shall be limited to the statutorily required amount as provided by this act, as amended, and shall be exclusive of interest or other amounts. (1981 Ga. Laws, page 4381, § 5) 
(f)  No department head who elects to come under the provisions of this act shall be entitled to receive any emeritus salary as provided by the governing authorities of any city coming within the provisions of this act. 
(f1)  Any City of Atlanta police officer who receives a catastrophic injury in the line of duty, will receive 100% of the top salary for the grade and position that he/she occupied at the time of his/her injury. 
This ordinance shall be retroactive and those persons who have received catastrophic injuries in the line of duty, while employed as City of Atlanta police officers, shall be eligible for review and adjustment of their pension in accordance with this section. 
The Chief Financial Officer of the City of Atlanta shall identify any and all funding required to implement this ordinance. 
(g)  (1) Any officer or employee who is a member of the pension fund shall be considered totally and permanently disabled by the board of trustees while the officer or employee is in a continuous state of incapacity due to illness or injury: 
a.  During the first 12 months which the officer or employee is prevented from performing his/her regular assigned or comparable duties; and 
b.  Thereafter, if the condition continues to prevent the officer or employee from engaging in any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
(2) A member who is considered by the board of trustees to be totally and permanently disabled in accordance with subsection (g)(1)a. and b. on or after January 1, 1986, shall receive a monthly disability benefit which shall commence on the day following the officer's or employee's last date on the payroll and continue until the earlier of: 
a.  Cessation of total and permanent disability; 
b.  Attainment of age 55. 
(3) Such monthly disability benefit shall be equal to 50 percent of the officer's or employee's average monthly earnings during the highest three (3) consecutive years of service prior to the date of approval by the board of trustees or the officer's or employee's accrued normal retirement benefit, whichever is greater. 
(4) Upon the cessation of disability benefits pursuant to section (g)(2)a. or b., and the officer's or employee's failure to return to city employment, the officer or employee would be entitled to a pension benefit as calculated in accordance with subsection b., c. or d. of Ga. Laws 1978, page 4527, as applicable. Provided further, that the calculation of any such subsequent benefit shall include credit for all years and fractions thereof during the time disability pension benefits have been paid, but shall not include credit for any disability pension payments made. Provided further, that for the purposes of calculating any cost-of-living adjustments, the subsequent benefits shall be considered as a new pension with a new effective date. 
(5) Disability pension benefits shall be offset by worker's compensation payments so that the combination of payments shall not exceed 75 percent of the officer's or employee's salary at the time disability pension benefits are to commence or 60 percent of an officer's or employee's salary at the time of disability or death in the case of a beneficiary. However, this subsection shall not affect any cost-of-living adjustments as provided in subsection (h), nor prevent the restoration of disability pension benefits payable upon the reduction or termination of any such compensation benefits payable by the city under applicable worker's compensation laws. 
(6)  a. Pensions for beneficiaries designated under the terms of this act, as amended, shall be three-fourths of the amount the pensioner was receiving, at the time of his death, as a result of retirement as a matter of right or because of total and permanent disability, or three-fourths of the amount such officer or employee would have been entitled to receive had such person retired prior to death. 
b.  The pension benefits for a primary beneficiary shall be continued to the secondary beneficiary, upon the death, or ineligibility for benefits, of the primary beneficiary. Provided, however, if such primary beneficiary was not receiving the maximum beneficiary payment provided for in this act because of any provision of this act reducing such amount, such maximum beneficiary amount shall be paid to the secondary beneficiary, notwithstanding any lesser amount previously paid to the primary beneficiary. 
c.  No spouse, designated as a beneficiary, shall be entitled to receive any of said service pension benefits unless such spouse shall have been legally married to such officer or employee of such city for a period of one (1) year prior to the death of such pensioner; provided the officer or employee has made payment for such benefits prior to retirement. No domestic partner, designated as a beneficiary, shall be entitled to receive any of said service pension benefits unless such domestic partner shall have been legally registered as a domestic partner for a period of one (1) year prior to the death of such pensioner; provided the officer or employee has made payment for such benefits prior to retirement. 
d.  In determining all pensions of officers or employees referred to above, fractional parts of years of service shall be counted and accumulated annual sick leave days credited to such officer or employee shall be counted as provided for in paragraph e. 
e.  In determining creditable service, accumulated, unused sick leave days credited to such officer or employee shall be added as work days to the creditable service otherwise provided by this act, as amended. In determining average monthly earnings, such accumulated unused sick leave day shall be credited at the highest daily rate of regular salary or earnings during the highest three (3) consecutive years' salary or earnings and all accumulated unused sick leave days shall be substituted for a like number of days at the lowest rate of regular salary or earnings during such highest three (3) consecutive years' salary or earnings during the term of employment. 
f.  Any person entitled to disability benefits under the provisions of this act, as amended, may receive benefits after he/she has been in the active employment of the city for at least a period of five (5) years. Provided, however, said requirement shall not apply to an officer or employee disabled as a direct result of a traumatic event or events occurring during and as a result of the performance of an officer's or employee's regular or assigned duties and not the result of such officer's or employee's willful negligence. 
(7) Disability pensions; annual review. The retirement of a pension applicant by reason of permanent and total disability shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The board of trustees shall have the right to at least once a year require the pensioner to submit to a medical examination for the purpose of determining whether or not the pensioner has sufficiently recovered from his disability and is able to return to any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
b.  If the board, after such examination, determines that the pensioner is not actually totally and permanently disabled but is able to return to any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience, then the payment of such disability pension shall cease. (1981 Ga. Laws, page 4381, § 3; Ord. No. 1985-94, § 9, 12-19-85; Ord. No. 1987-28, § 1, 4-8-87; Ord. No. 1994-45, § 1, 9-25-94; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 3-23-06; Ord. No. 2010-42(10-O-0909), §§ 1, 2, 6-29-10) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
(8)  Catastrophic disability sustained in the line of duty. A sworn employee who has been injured in the line of duty, and whose permanent injury is severe or catastrophic, may make an application to the board through the City of Atlanta Department of Finance, Division of Employee Benefits. The board is thereafter authorized to make a finding, by a simple majority vote, that such in the line of duty injury is catastrophic such that the employee is disabled. In connection therewith: 
a.  The determination of whether a disability was incurred "In The Line Of Duty" or "Not In The Line Of Duty" shall be made by the board in accordance with the board of trustees' investigation procedures as provided in subsection (n) hereof, below. 
b.  The determination of whether a disability is catastrophic shall be in the sole discretion of the board by a preponderance of the evidence and as supported by official medical records, qualified medical expert opinions, sworn testimony and/or other such reliable source accepted by the board in its discretion. For the purposes of this Code section, a catastrophic injury is a sudden, violent, life-threatening, injury sustained by a member who is or was employed as a sworn employee by the city at the time of the injury, which injury is due to an externally caused event or events, as supported by evidence, including, but not specifically limited to, one of the conditions described below: (1) loss of sight in one or both eyes; (2) loss of one or both feet at or above the ankle; (3) loss of one or both hands at or above the wrist; (4) an injury to the spine that results in permanent and complete paralysis of both arms, both legs, or one arm and one leg, or; (5) an externally caused traumatic physical injury to the brain or skull that renders one physically or mentally unable to perform two or more activities of daily living (feeding oneself, dressing, continence, bathing, toileting and transferring, i.e. getting in and out of bed), driving a motor vehicle, etc. or catastrophically disabled includes a permanent severely disabling injury, disorder, that compromises the ability to carry out the activities of daily living to such a degree that the individual requires personal or mechanical assistance to leave home or bed or requires constant supervision to avoid physical harm to self or others. 
c.  Upon a finding by the board that an officer or employee covered by the provisions of this Act meets the criteria under this subsection, the officer or employee covered by the provisions of this Act shall be entitled to receive compensation or other income from third-party sources while receiving disability pension payments and/or other benefits without suffering any penalty or otherwise forfeiting or waiving any right to continue receiving disability pension benefits the officer or employee would otherwise be entitled to receive pursuant to the pension plan. 
d.  Should any individual or department of the city having an interest in the board's decision pursuant to this subsection disagree with such decision of the board, then such department may appeal from such decision as provided in subsection (n), hereof, below, and as otherwise provided by law. 
e.  Any finding by the board that an individual meets the criteria of this subsection shall be subject to periodic review in accordance with subsection (g)(7)a., and any such finding may be rescinded review in accordance with subsection (g)(7)b. and only upon motion properly brought forth by a duly authorized member of the board. 
f.  Any claimed injury to the mind or emotional well-being of an individual shall not serve as basis for a finding that the injury satisfies the criteria of section 1(A) but shall be presumed to be governed by existing provisions regarding non-catastrophic injuries. Any such presumption shall be considered rebuttable. 
g.  The provisions of this ordinance amendment shall be retroactive to 1986. 
(h)  Any person coming under the provisions of this amendment, either voluntarily or by compulsion, shall be entitled to cost-of-living adjustments as hereinafter set forth. As used herein, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Current average cost-of-living index. The average of the monthly Consumer Price Index for the 12 month period from November 1 through October 31, prior to the annual adjustment date, as determined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor for all items and major groups, United States city average. 
(2)  Pensioner base index. The average of the Consumer Price Index for the 12 month period ending two (2) months prior to the date of retirement for any participant who retires under the provisions of this amendment. In the event the base year used in computing the monthly Consumer Price Index should be changed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the board of trustees shall, with the advice of an independent actuary, adjust the pensioner base index of each retired pensioner and of each pensioner or beneficiary, with benefit payments commencing during the first year in which such change was made, so as to effect the original intent of this section in an equitable manner. 
(3)  Adjusted pensioner index. The pensioner base index, adjusted, on a cumulative basis, for all percentage adjustments made in benefits prior to the current annual adjustment date. The adjusted pensioner index and the pensioner base index shall be applicable to any beneficiary becoming entitled to benefits under this amendment in the same manner as they would have been applicable to the pensioner had such pensioner continued in life. 
(4)  Annual adjustment date. January 1 of each year. The board of trustees shall ascertain the current average cost-of-living index as of January 1 each year, and the benefits being paid under this amendment shall be adjusted as of the annual adjustment date as follows: If the current average cost-of-living index is more than 100 percent of the adjusted pensioner index, the benefit shall be increased by a percentage equal to the difference between 100 percent and the percentage representing the current average cost-of-living index divided by such person's adjusted pensioner index. If the current average cost-of-living index is less than 100% of the adjusted pensioner index, such person's basic benefit shall be reduced by a percentage equal to the difference between 100 percent and the percentage representing the current average cost-of-living index divided by his adjusted pensioner index. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, no increase or decrease in the amount of the monthly retirement benefit due to changes in the current average cost-of-living index, effective at any annual adjustment date, shall be in excess of three percent (3%) of the amount of the monthly retirement benefit payable immediately prior to such date. Neither shall the provisions of this subsection be applied so as to reduce the amount of the benefits of a pensioner or beneficiary to any amount less than that to which such pensioner or beneficiary would be entitled to receive under the other provisions of this amendment. 
(i)  There shall be deducted from the total salary of any officer or employee electing to come under this amendment the sum of seven percent (7%), in the event such person does not provide for payment of a pension to such person's beneficiary, as authorized by this act, as amended, or a sum to be actuarially determined pursuant to the most recent actuary study, sufficient to cover the cost of providing a continuing pension benefit to such person's beneficiary. Like deductions shall be made from the salary of future employees required to come under this amendment. 
(j)  (1) In addition to the payments required to be made in subsection (i) above, any officer or employee who becomes a participant under this amendment shall be entitled to all benefits and receive credit for all the years, or fraction thereof, of such person's creditable service, provided such person shall pay into the fund the sum of six percent (6%) of such person's total salary or earnings, received by such person during the years claimed for such creditable service, if such person does not provide for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary; and the sum of seven percent (7%) of such person's total salary or earnings, received during the years claimed for such creditable service, if such person does provide for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary. Payments previously made to the pension fund, not exceeding the amount due to the fund, shall be deducted from the total amount due in arriving at the total payment due, plus any additional sums as may be required by the following provisions for prior service credits. If any part of the creditable service consists of prior service, as defined by this act, as amended, which was allowed and credited prior to this amendment, the percentages of salary or earnings, used in computing the sum to be paid for such prior service credit shall be twice those set forth above, and shall constitute both the employee and employer contributions. Provided further that payment for any such creditable service rendered on or after April 1, 1978, shall be twice the payment due as computed above. 
Any officer or employee electing to come under the provisions of this amendment within six (6) months subsequent to the enactment of this amendment, shall have a period of 60 months from the date of such election in which to pay all back pension contributions, as provided in this subsection, without interest. Any officer or employee electing to come under the provisions of this amendment, subsequent to the expiration of six (6) months after the enactment of this amendment, shall have a period of 60 months from the date of such election in which to pay all back pension contributions, as provided in this subsection, and shall be required to pay interest on said back pension contributions at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum from October 1, 1978, to the date of such payment. The board of trustees is authorized to establish rules and regulations for extending the period in which back pension contributions may be paid provided that interest in the amount of seven percent (7%) per annum shall be added to any amounts not paid within the above specified time period. The board of trustees shall require as a prerequisite for the granting of such extension an assignment of life insurance in an amount sufficient to cover the outstanding obligation. 
(2) Employee Back Pension Contributions, Deductions From Benefits; Assignment of Group Life Insurance Proceeds. 
a.  In the event an officer or employee obligated to pay back pension contributions should retire or die before said payments into the fund are completed, the secretary of the retirement fund is authorized to deduct an appropriate amount, as determined by the board of trustees, from the monthly retirement or beneficiary benefits, or in lieu thereof, such lump sum amounts as the board, in its discretion, deems appropriate until the obligation is discharged. 
b.  In the event an officer or employee obligated to pay back pension contributions should retire before said payments into the fund are completed, the board of trustees shall require, in consideration of the payment of such indebtedness, an assignment of such officer's or employee's group life insurance in an amount sufficient to satisfy the outstanding obligation. (1981 Ga. Laws, page 4381, § 4) 
(k)  (1) Any officer or employee coming under the provisions of this amendment shall be entitled to all of the forms and types of prior service authorized under the act approved August 20, 1927 (1927 Ga. Laws, page 265 et seq.) as amended, prior to this amendment. Provided, however, contributions for any such prior service shall be based on the salary or wages then being earned by such officer or employee as and when such person becomes eligible for such prior service and such is credited. 
To be eligible for such prior service credit, the officer or employee must have completed at least five (5) continuous years in the employment of the city, and must have filed, five (5) years prior thereto, an application with the board of trustees for such prior service credit. Thereafter prior service credit may be granted to such person eligible and continuing in the service of such city on a pay period basis (one (1) year of prior service credit, not to exceed a maximum of 10 years, for each year such person continues in the service of such city) upon the payment of contributions by such person for such prior service credit based on the wages or salary earned by such person at the time of such prior service being credited. 
The contributions to be paid by such officer or employee, herein referred to, shall be at the rates set forth in subsection (i) above, plus the rates of the employer's contribution set forth in subsection (m). 
(2) Credit for previous city service, contributions, payment. Any officer or employee claiming previous service credit for previous employment as a regular, temporary, or part-time employee of the city may be eligible for previous service credit immediately upon filing application for same, and upon payment of the contribution in accordance with the provisions set forth in subsection (I) of the 1978 Pension Act Amendment (Ga. Laws 1978, pages 4527, 4534) [subsection (j) of this section]; provided, however, the penalty provision of said subsection (I) shall be applicable only to such officers or employees who failed to elect enrollment under said 1978 Pension Act Amendment prior to October 1, 1978, and who terminated employment subsequent to April 1, 1978. The total amount of such required contributions shall be increased by a sum equal to the amount previously paid into the pension fund by a regular officer or employee and withdrawn upon termination of employment multiplied by an interest factor of seven percent (7%) per annum compounded from the date of termination to the date of filing of the application. The total amount of such required contributions, less a sum equal to the amount previously paid into the pension fund by a regular officer or employee and withdrawn upon termination of employment, shall be increased by an amount equal to such required contributions, less the said amount withdrawn multiplied by an interest factor of seven percent (7%) per annum compounded from the date of termination or October 1, 1978, whichever is later to the date of application. The total amount of such required contribution shall be decreased by the amount previously paid into the pension fund by a regular officer or employee and not withdrawn upon termination of employment plus an amount equal to seven percent (7%) per annum compounded of such amount not withdrawn from the date of termination to the date of filing of the application. As to credit for part-time or temporary service with the city, such previous service credit shall be on the basis of one (1) day for each day worked by such person as a temporary employee or on a part-time basis; except that the required contribution shall be based upon the gross salary of such person at the time of filing of the application for previous service credit. The payment of the contributions of previous service credit for previous employment as a regular, temporary, or part-time employee of the city may be paid upon the filing of the application for such credit; or such officer or employee shall have a period of sixty (60) months from the date of filing the application in which to pay such contributions; provided, however, the total amount of such contribution shall bear interest at seven percent (7%) per annum on the unpaid balance. 
The board of trustees is authorized to establish rules and regulations for extending the period in which back pension contributions may be paid provided that interest in the amount of seven percent (7%) per annum shall be added to any amounts not paid within the above-specified period. The board of trustees shall require as a prerequisite for the granting of such extension an assignment of life insurance in an amount sufficient to cover the outstanding obligation. 
(l)  This section and the several subsections shall be effective as of April 1, 1978, except for the provisions of subsection (m) which shall be effective as of January 1, 1979. Payments required by subsection (i) above, as to those persons then employed and electing to come under this amendment, shall commence on April 1, 1978. As to such persons subsequently coming into the service of such city or subsequently electing to participate under the terms of this amendment, said payments shall begin with the date of employment or date of such election. 
(m)  (1)  In addition to the funds derived from deductions from salaries and wages, as required by subsection (i) of this amendment, it shall be the duty of the governing authority of such cities to appropriate and pay into the pension fund each year an amount which shall be equal to the actuarially determined percentage of members' salary and wages necessary to pay the normal cost contribution of benefits earned by members and to amortize the unfunded accrued liability of the pension fund on a closed 30-year schedule commencing July 1, 2011, after deducting contributions required of officers and employees required by subsection (i) of this amendment. 
For purposes of paying the required employer contributions provided above, the governing authority of such cities shall be authorized to levy ad valorem taxes payable to the pension fund sufficient to amortize the unfunded accrued liability under provisions of this amendment within a closed schedule of thirty (30) years commencing July 1, 2011, and upon the determination by an independent actuarial valuation as provided in subsection (n) below that such unfunded accrued liability has been amortized, such authorization to levy such ad valorem taxes shall cease. Should said pension fund at any time be insufficient to meet and pay the pension due to such officers and employees, the governing authority shall appropriate from current funds amounts sufficient to make up the deficiency as it relates to the respective officers and employees and deposit same into said pension fund. Should such actuarial valuation as provided in subsection (n) below result in a determination that the total required employer contribution would be less than the contribution required of members by subsection (i) of this amendment, then the contributions required of members by subsection (i) of this amendment shall be reduced and the required employer contributions in this subsection shall be increased so that the member contributions required by subsection (i) will not be greater than the required employer contributions under this subsection. 
(2)  Every three (3) years and prior to submitting the annual fiscal budget for that third year, the Chief Financial Officer for the City of Atlanta shall review and prepare for the chair of the finance executive committee and the boards of trustees a report on the effect the amortization schedule has upon the actuarial accrued liability for the pension funds. 
(n)  When any person covered by the provisions of this act shall die as a result of injuries incurred in the line of duty, the compensation to which such person would have been entitled had such person continued in active service shall be continued for two years by such city and paid to the primary beneficiary designated by such officer or employee. Any compensation received by the member due to said injury shall be deducted from the two-years' compensation herein provided for. At the expiration of the two-year period referred to above, the pension benefits due the beneficiary shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of this amendment. The pension benefits for a primary beneficiary shall be continued to the secondary beneficiaries upon the death or ineligibility of the primary beneficiary. 
The city employing any officer or employee coming under the provisions of this Act shall immediately notify the board of trustees upon the occurrence of the disability or death of any such officer or employee, and the board of trustees shall conduct an investigation within ninety (90) days of the date of the event which caused such disability or death. 
Thereafter, the board of trustees shall make a determination as to whether such disability or death was incurred in line of duty or not in line of duty. Should such city, or any person having an interest in said decision, disagree with such decision of the board then either such city or such person may appeal from such decision as provided by law. 
It shall also be the duty and responsibility of the board of trustees to employ an independent actuary to render an actuarial review of the pension fund at periodic intervals of no more than five (5) years, commencing with the enactment of this amendment. The term "independent actuary" as used herein means a fellow of the Society of Actuaries, or a member of the American Academy of Actuaries, or an organization of which one or more members is a fellow of the Society of Actuaries or a member of the American Academy of Actuaries, or both. 
(o)  The board of trustees is authorized to invest funds accumulated under this act in any manner permitted by the Public Retirement Systems Investment Authority Law, Ga. Stat. Ann. section 47-20-80, et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1992-45, § 2, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 1994-13, § 9, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 1996-37, § 1, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 2005-81, § 2, 11-22-05; Ord. No. 2009-27(09-O-0776), § 2, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2011-15(11-O-0674), § 2, 5-9-11) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
(p)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this act, as amended, regarding the rights of officers or employees to designate beneficiaries of their pension benefits after their death, every male or female officer, coming under the provisions of this amendment, either voluntarily or by compulsion, having a spouse or unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under the age of 18 years or domestic partner shall be compelled to make the necessary additional contributions in order to provide continued pension benefits for such spouse or unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) or under the age of 18 years, and designated as beneficiaries domestic partner. 
Nothing herein provided shall prevent an officer or employee from designating a primary beneficiary (spouse or unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under 18 years of age) or domestic partner and a secondary beneficiary (either spouse or unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under 18 years of age or domestic partner and not named as primary beneficiary). If an officer or employee designates a beneficiary, and thereafter such beneficiary should cease to be qualified to receive a pension in the event of the member's death, then such officer or employee may at his or her option, designate some other beneficiary who does qualify for pension benefits under this amendment, and continue to make contributions for such beneficiaries, or should no qualified beneficiary exist, cease to make further contributions for beneficiaries, in which event contributions theretofore made for the benefit of a beneficiary shall not be refunded except insofar as refunds may be allowed by other provisions of this act, as amended. 
Should any officer or employee become eligible for a service pension and thereafter remain in the service of such city, then upon the death of such person, without having retired, the spouse or domestic partner of such person may apply for a beneficiary pension as provided for in this amendment, which shall continue for the life of such spouse or domestic partner. In the event of the death or disqualification of a spouse or domestic partner to receive such beneficiary pension, then the unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under the age of 18 years shall succeed to the rights of such deceased or disqualified spouse or domestic partner, as above provided, and such beneficiary pension shall be continued to such child or children until the youngest living child shall reach the age of 18 years, die, or marry, whichever event should first occur. No child (natural or legally adopted) of such officer or employee shall be entitled to receive any benefits unless such child is less than 18 years of age and unmarried or unless such child is less than 23 years of age and enrolled as a full-time student at an accredited secondary school, college or university, and unmarried. 
Any officer or employee coming under the provisions of this amendment either voluntarily or by compulsion, who, at such time, has no qualified beneficiary, either spouse or unmarried child or children under 18 years of age or domestic partner, shall not be required to make the contributions necessary to provide for the continuation of pension benefits to a beneficiary. Provided, however, upon the occurrence of the event by which such officer or employee acquires a qualified beneficiary, then such officer or employee shall immediately commence making required contributions to provide benefits for such beneficiary and shall within a period of two (2) years thereafter, in addition to current requirements, pay into the pension fund one percent (1%) of his total salary or earnings for all creditable service prior to the occurrence of such event. 
Any officer or employee, electing to come under the provisions of this act, who prior thereto had a qualified beneficiary but who had not made the contributions to provide for the payment of continued pension benefits to such beneficiary, shall be required to pay to the pension fund the amount of such beneficiary contributions for the number of years of service with such city and during which such officer or employee had a qualified beneficiary, such payments to be at the rates and in the manner as set forth in subsection (j) hereof. 
In the event that a member dies after retirement, either before or after receiving retirement payments, the named beneficiary, or the member's estate in the absence of a named beneficiary, shall receive a refund in an amount equal to the amount such member paid into said pension fund less the total amount received by such member or beneficiaries in retirement benefits. (Ord. No. 1985-94, § 10, 12-19-85; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 3-23-06) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the 
location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
(q)  The board of trustees may pool any amount of the funds administered by them with the funds of any other pension or retirement fund for other employees of such city for the purpose of joint investments. When such pooling occurs, the pooled trust funds shall be accounted for in accordance with generally accepted principles of accounting in order to maintain the separate accountability of such pension funds. The board of trustees may employ an independent investment counselor who shall advise them on the best and most appropriate portfolio of investments. 
(r)  Should an officer or employee in the employment of such cities transfer from a position of employment covered by another pension fund to a position of employment covered by this pension fund, the accumulated employee and employer contributions of such officer or employee paid to such other pension fund shall be transferred to this pension fund and such officer or employee shall be credited with all creditable service certified in such other pension fund as though such service had been rendered under this pension fund, provided, however, that should such officer or employee retire as a matter of right within three (3) years subsequent to the date of such transfer, the service retirement benefits payable to such officer or employee shall be the lesser of the service retirement payable under the provisions of this act, as amended, or the provisions of the pension fund from which such officer or employee transferred. 
(s)  Any employee participating in the provisions of the act approved February 15, 1933 (Ga. Laws 1933, page 213 et seq.) [this section], or of the several acts amendatory thereof, who leaves the employ of such municipality prior to retirement shall be entitled to a refund of all monies paid into such fund by said employee; provided, however, that such refunds shall be subject to withholding or deduction for any debts owed or amounts due to such municipality by such ex-employee. 
(t)  The terms of this amendment to said act shall apply to any member who meets the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Any officer who has received an in-line-of-duty disability pension from the police officer's pension fund prior to November 13, 1987; and 
(2)  Thereafter has been reemployed by the city in the police department. 
(3)  Any such employee meeting the aforementioned conditions shall make application for such credit within 90 days of the enactment of this amendment or within 90 days of their return to work, whichever is later. 
(4)  Such employee may receive credit toward retirement for the years they received and in-line-of-duty disability pension. 
(5)  The maximum credit to be received under this amendment at the time of retirement is limited to the number of years an employee works after being reemployed. (Ord. No. 1993-41, § 1, 9-7-93) 
(u)  Subject to approval by the United States Internal Revenue Service in accordance with IRC section 414(h), employee contributions shall be treated as employer contributions in determining tax treatment effective with the following payroll periods in 1994: 

 
Such contributions shall not be included as gross income of the employee for tax purposes until such time as they are distributed or made available. The City of Atlanta shall reduce the compensation payable to a member in an amount of the contributions made on behalf of the employee. 
(v)  Any officer or employee who retires pursuant to this section between August 15, 1994, and September 30, 1994, and whose age and creditable service before credit for accrued unused sick leave equals at least 75 years, shall be entitled to a monthly pension benefit upon retirement without any reduction for any age or vesting penalties as would otherwise be applicable. Provided further that such officer or employee shall receive a benefit calculated by adding three (3) years to their service. 
Entitlements specified under subsection (v), above, shall be accorded to those officers and employees not covered by the aforesaid 1978 pension amendment, under applicable provisions of amendments to said law adopted prior to the 1978 amendment. 
(w)  Any officer or employee whose age and creditable service before credit for accrued unused sick leave equals at least 73 years as of March 31, 1998, shall be entitled to a monthly pension benefit upon retirement without any reduction for any age or vesting penalties as would otherwise be applicable. 
All officers and employees eligible to retire pursuant to this section must make written application to the pension office between February 13, 1998 and March 31, 1998. 
(x)  Any officer or employee who was eligible to elect coverage under the pension laws as amended by Ordinance No. 1985-94 and who failed to make such election may do so by making written application on forms provided by the pension office within 60 days of the effective date of this subsection. 
(y)  Any officer or employee who is a member of the Police Pension Fund, and whose creditable service before credit for accrued unused sick leave equals at least 30 years shall be entitled to a monthly pension benefit upon retirement without any reduction for any age or vesting penalties as would otherwise be applicable. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3616, §§ 1, 2; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3623, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3635, § 1; 1981 Ga. Laws, page 3208, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1994-11, § 3, 3-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-37, § 3, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1994-45, § 1, 9-25-94; Ord. No. 1998-2, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 1998-5, § 3, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-2, § 1, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 1, 2-24-01; Ord. No. 2001-67, § 1, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 2003-54, §§ 1—3, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 2005-53, § 4, 9-12-05; Ord. No. 2005-69, § 1, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 2005-81, § 2, 11-22-05; Ord. No. 2006-62, § 1, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 6-223. - Consent by applicant to participate in system. 
The receipt of an applicant's executed enrollment or application card by the commissioner of finance or his agent shall constitute the irrevocable consent of the applicant to participate under the provisions of this act, as amended, or as may hereinafter be amended. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, page 3205, § 1) 
Sec. 6-224. - Refunds regulated. 
Except upon the separation of employment other than retirement or death of an employee, or in the case of bookkeeping, clerical or data processing errors, the refund of pension contributions paid by an employee shall be prohibited. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, page 3205, § 2) 
Sec. 6-225. - Tax on salaries of policemen. 
Beginning April 1, 1945, three per centum (3%) shall be deducted from the salaries or wages of all members of said police department up to a maximum of $200 per month, or a total of $6.00 per month, but if the member desires to name either his wife or dependent mother or minor child or children as beneficiary, he may do so and in that case, there shall be deducted the sum of four per centum (4%) from his salary or wage up to a maximum of $200 or a total of $8.00 per month, as and when paid. If the person does not name a beneficiary on or before April 1, 1945, but later decides to name a beneficiary, he shall pay the additional one percent (1%) up to a maximum of $2.00 per month, from April 1, 1945, or the date of his entry into the police department, whichever shall be the latest date; provided, however, that the widow shall not be eligible to receive the pension benefits of the deceased pensioner unless she married such member at least one (1) year before he became eligible to retire by reason of length of service. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 9; 1939 Ga. Laws, page 356, § 4; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1067, § 8) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-226. - Appropriations for fund. 
The budget commission and the mayor and general council of such city shall appropriate from any funds available the sum of $90,000 per annum and shall pay said amount into the pension fund created under the provisions of this act during the month of January of each year. The mayor and general council shall not treat any funds whatsoever paid into the pension fund created under the provisions of the act as receipts for the purposes of computing funds due the school department under the charter of such city. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 10; 1941 Ga. Laws, page 476, § 3) 
Sec. 6-227. - Appropriations by city. 
Should said fund at any time be insufficient to meet and pay the pensions due to such members, such governing authorities shall appropriate from current funds other than funds derived from ad valorem taxation sufficient amounts to make up the deficiency as it relates to such members. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2893, § 2) 
Sec. 6-228. - Maintenance of fund. 
The city treasurer, or other person performing the duties of such, shall keep separate and apart from other monies in his possession the funds raised under the provisions of sections 8, 9 and 10 of this act, as amended, and all other funds, which may be received by him in connection with the provisions of this act, as amended. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 12; 1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2717, § 2) 
Sec. 6-229. - Right of retirement; computation of service. 
Every member of such police department who has stood civil service examination and has been passed by the civil service board, and whose names are [sic] on the payroll of such police department at the time of the passage of said act and future members of such department may, as a matter of right, retire from active service, provided he shall have served 25 years in active service at the time of his retirement. The time of service shall be determined from the payroll records in the office of the city comptroller. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 2; 1941 Ga. Laws, page 476, § 1; 1947 Ga. Laws, page 675, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-230. - Credit for prior service; terms, conditions. 
Any person qualified for pension benefits under this act, as amended, who was employed by the State of Georgia or a political subdivision thereof, prior to his employment by such city, to render service within the county in which such city is located in whole or in part, may receive credit for such service for pension benefits under this act, as amended, upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  No credit may be given for part-time or temporary service. 
(2)  Such person must have had at least five (5) years' continuous service with the city, before becoming eligible for this credit. 
(3)  Application must be made for the credit within six (6) months after the passage of this act or after becoming eligible for the credit, whichever is later. 
(4)  Such person shall pay into the pension fund created by this act, as amended, an amount equal to the amount he would have paid into such fund had he been an employee of such city during such time. The payments may be divided into 36 equal installments bearing interest at four percent (4%) per annum, and the amounts thereof deducted from any compensation of pension benefits due such person. 
(5)  It shall be the responsibility of the person making application for such credit to furnish to the board of trustees proof of the years of service and the monthly rate of compensation in such manner as the board may by rules prescribe. 
(6)  The total amount of creditable service as provided in this act shall not exceed 10 years. 
(1955 Ga. Laws, page 2046, § 5; 1957 Ga. Laws, page 3244, § 5) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. Section 7 of the 1957 act provides for liberal construction of same. 
Sec. 6-231. - Status of member not desiring to retire after becoming eligible. 
In the event a member has served for 25 years as a member of such police department and does not desire to retire on pension under the provisions of this act; and the board of trustees deems such member incapable of further service in said police department because of disability or impairment of health, then and in that event the same procedure shall be had as that described in sections 6-320 and 6-321, to determine the condition of said member, and the decision of a majority of the physicians examining said member shall be final on the question which they decide. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 14) 
Sec. 6-232. - Eligibility to retire of policemen employed on or after April 1, 1945. 
All persons becoming members of such police department on or after April 1, 1945, must attain 55 years of age and have served a minimum of 25 years to be eligible to retire as a matter of right; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply in cases of actual total and permanent disability nor to any members of said department as of March 31, 1945, but shall apply solely to those employed or becoming members of said department after March 31, 1945. 
(1945 Ga. Laws, page 1067, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-233. - Retirement age and service required for policemen employed on or after April 1, 1945. 
Every person who became a member of the police department since April 1, 1945 and all persons becoming members of such department in the future must attain 55 years of age and must serve a minimum of 25 years to be eligible to retire as a matter of right, provided, that this provision shall not apply in cases of actual total and permanent disability. 
(1952 Ga. Laws, page 2559, § 4) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-234. - Policemen must pass civil service examination. 
Each and every member of such police department shall pass a civil service examination as may be required by the governing authorities of such cities before he can be taxed three dollars ($3.00) per month as provided in this act, and before he can become entitled to participate in any of the funds raised under the provisions of this act for relief and pensions. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 24; 1941 Ga. Laws, page 476, § 6) 
Sec. 6-235. - Time lost due to suspension for cause or leave of absence. 
Should any member of such police department be suspended for cause, and the suspension without pay approved by the police committee, or should he be on leave of absence without pay, the time so spent under suspension or on leave without pay shall not be counted in the time required for a pension because of service in such department under the provisions of this act, and no payment into the pension fund shall be required for the time under suspension or on leave without pay. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 5; 1941 Ga. Laws, page 476, § 2) 
Sec. 6-236. - Rights of employees transferring from one department to another; application of provisions. 
Whenever any officer or employee of such city is transferred from one department to another, he shall be entitled to become a member of the pension fund of the department to which he has been transferred and to receive credit for the years of service in the department from which he has been transferred by paying the pension fund of the department to which he is transferred the amount of premiums he would have paid into said fund if he had been a member of said department for the number of years he claims credit for service in the other department. Such transferred employee shall have the right to have transferred from the pension fund the amount he had paid into such fund. The rights given in this act shall be effective as to the officers and employees who have transferred prior to this act, as well as future transferees. This act shall apply to all the pension funds of such city, namely the police officer's pension fund, and firemen's[fighter's] pension fund and the general employees' pension fund. 
(1947 Ga. Laws, page 675, § 5; Ord. No. 1993-41, § 4, 9-7-93) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-237. - Rights of county policemen transferred to city. 
Whenever a member of any police department in any county in which such a city is located is transferred to such city from such county, he shall have all the rights, privileges and benefits of any member of such police department set forth in this act as amended upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  There shall be paid into the pension fund of any such city an amount equal to the amount paid into the county pension fund by such county employee and an equal amount to represent the fund required to be paid into such county pension fund by the county authorities; 
(2)  Such transferred officer or employee shall receive the same credit for service that he would have received under the pension plan applicable to such employee at the time of transfer from the county to the city. Every such officer and employee may, as a matter of right, retire from active service provided his service to the city, when added to his county credit, would have authorized him to retire under the county pension plan; 
(3)  Such transferred employee shall have all other rights, privileges and benefits provided in this act, as amended, and shall be required to contribute to the pension fund the same amounts required of other members of the police departments of such cities; 
(4)  Whenever a minor child or children of a policeman who transfers from the county to the city shall be entitled to be paid a pension, the same shall be paid for the same length of time such pension would have been payable under the county pension law, to-wit, until reaching the age of 18 years. 
(1951 Ga. Laws, page 3057, § 1; 1952 Ga. Laws, page 2559, § 1; 1960 Ga. Laws, page 3205, § 1; 1962 Ga. Laws, page 3193, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-238. - Same; service in the armed forces; terms, conditions. 
Service in the armed forces of the United States, under the Department of Defense, or service in the Coast Guard of the United States, shall, for the purpose of service pension rights established by this Act, be considered service to any such city, upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Such officer or employee must have been inducted into such armed forces, either voluntarily or involuntarily, under any Act applicable thereto, when there is at the time of such induction an actual conflict or such induction is mandatory under the applicable law; 
(2)  Such officer or employee must have been on the payrolls of any such city and in good standing at the time of such induction; 
(3)  Such officer or employee shall not voluntarily extend his term of service beyond the termination of the conflict or beyond the time when he could retire from such service; 
(4)  Such officer or employee shall make application for reemployment to his former position within the time required by the charter of any such city for the reemployment of such officers or employees; 
(5)  Dishonorable discharge from such armed forces shall terminate all rights under this amendment; 
(6)  Such officer or employee, upon his return to the service of such city from service in the armed forces, shall make the same contributions to the said pension fund for the time served in the armed forces as he would have made if he had been in active service of the city, but shall be permitted to make such contributions in equal monthly installments within a period of time equal to the time served in such armed forces; and 
(7)  In the event such officer or employee dies while performing "qualified military service" as defined in U.S. Internal Revenue Code Section 414(u), on or after January 1, 2007, such officer or employee shall be considered to have been rehired on the day prior to the date of death, and the survivors of such officer or employee shall be entitled to any additional benefits required to be paid pursuant to U.S. Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(37). 
(1953 Ga. Laws, page 2629, § 1; Ord. No. 2015-05(14-O-1632), § 1, 2-26-15 ) 
Sec. 6-239. - Same; officers and employees serving in Korean conflict or subsequent thereto. 
Any officer or employee who was inducted into the service of the armed forces of the United States under the Department of Defense, or service in the Coast Guard of the United States either during the Korean conflict or subsequent thereto, or shall have served in the Navy in connection with such service shall be given full credit for the time served in such service as though he were actually employed during that time by the city and shall not be required to make any contribution to the pension fund for such period of service provided such employee meets the conditions set forth in section 6-238, except he shall not be required to make contributions as provided in subsection (f) [subsection (6)] thereof. 
(1956 Ga. Laws, page 3379, § 1; 1959 Ga. Laws, page 2635, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-240. - Same; method of receiving credit for military leave. 
All members of said police department who are on approved military leave from active employment service may receive service credit toward retirement by making the same contribution to the said pension fund as they would have made if they had been on active employment service where a leave of absence from active employment service has been granted to one on military leave. Said contribution shall be paid within 36 months after reassignment to active police duty. No credit will be allowed to any member who voluntarily reenlists in the military service after the end of said leave for the period of reenlistment unless he be granted an additional military leave by the proper authority. 
(1945 Ga. Laws, page 1067, § 6) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-241. - Subsistence allowances to be treated as compensation in fixing benefits and obligations. 
Subsistence allowances, which have been or may be provided by law or the ordinances of any such city, shall be treated as compensation in the determination of benefits and obligations of such employees as though such sums were definitely fixed by the governing authorities of such cities as compensation or salary. 
(1956 Ga. Laws, page 3379, § 2) 
Sec. 6-242. - Service prerequisite to disability benefits. 
Any person entitled to disability benefits under the provisions of this act, as amended, may receive such benefits after he has been in the active employment of the city for a period of 10 years. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 3244, § 6) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-243. - Type of rights created. 
The rights herein created shall not be construed as rights under a contract, but the rate and amount of pension fixed under said act, as amended, shall be subjected to reduction by the legislature in the future; provided however, said reduction shall not be below the rate or amount fixed by the act of 1933. 
(1939 Ga. Laws, page 356, § 8) 
Sec. 6-244. - Spendthrift provisions. 
None of the funds herein mentioned shall be subject to the process of garnishment, attachment, judgment or other legal process, nor shall any of the funds to be paid or disbursed under the provisions of this act be assignable, but the same shall be paid in cash to the beneficiary entitled thereto, if requested by him or her. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 17) 
Sec. 6-245. - Reemployment of pensioners. 
(a)  Any officer or employee of the police departments of such cities who has applied for and been granted a service pension shall be eligible for reemployment or reappointment to any position in the government of such cities, provided such person has not reached the age of 70 years, such reemployment in any position to terminate at the end of the year in which such person reaches age 70. Such reemployment shall be made under the provisions relating to reemployment of former employees as now provided by law or ordinance, except that such reemployed person shall not acquire any civil service rights or any further pension rights during such period of reemployment, shall not be paid a pension during such period, and shall not be required to make any contribution to the pension fund during such period of reemployment. The payment of his pension shall be resumed as of the date of termination of such period of reemployment. No such reemployment shall be effective until the person to be reemployed under the provisions of this section shall execute and deliver to the comptroller of any such cities a contract agreeing to the conditions hereof. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent any retired officer or employee of the police departments of such cities from holding any position which is filled by an election by the people. No additional pensions or civil service rights or privileges shall accrue to such officer or employee during such period. 
(c)  The provisions of this act as amended shall not in any way affect or restrict the rights, powers and privileges of an emeritus officer of such cities who now or shall hereafter hold an emeritus office pursuant to the provisions of any law or ordinance establishing same. 
(d)  Whenever by contract with a city or one of its agencies, boards or commissions, a retired person, regardless of age and as an independent contractor, agrees to perform a special or particular service, as may be now or hereafter allowed by law or ordinance, then such person, during the term of such contract which shall not exceed one (1) calendar year, shall be entitled to continue to receive his or her regular pension payments, but shall not acquire any civil service rights or any further pension rights, and shall not be required to make any contribution to the pension fund; provided however, no such contract shall be effective until a fully executed copy of such contract, in which such retired person agrees to the conditions hereof, has been delivered by such person to the secretary of the board of trustees of the pension fund. 
(1961 Ga. Laws, page 2885, §§ 1—3; 1969 Ga. Laws, page 3394, § 1; 1970 Ga. Laws, page 2348, § 1) 
Sec. 6-246. - Effect on workers' compensation laws. 
Except as provided in subsection (F) of 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 et seq., this act shall not affect nor be affected by any workers' compensation law, or other similar laws. Further, no decisions of the state board of workers' compensation shall be entered as evidence with a pension application before the board of trustees of said pension fund, nor shall said board consider any evidence pertaining to the applicant's previously determined entitlement to workers' compensation in any hearing upon a pension application. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 23; 1982 Ga. Laws, page 4385, § 5) 
Sec. 6-247. - Computations of time; fractional parts of years to be counted. 
Whenever this law, or any amendment of this law, requires a computation, for any purpose of the years of creditable service of any active or retiring member, fractional parts of years of service shall be counted. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213 et seq.; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 319) 
Sec. 6-248. - Salary and earnings. 
For the purposes of determining any benefit or contribution under this Act, 1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, as amended, the "salary," "earnings" or "wages" or "total" "salary," "earnings" or "wages" of an officer or employee of the City of Atlanta for any period shall include the base wages or salary paid to such officer or employee (including lump-sum payments thereof); amounts contributed or deferred by the officer or employee and not includable in gross income under sections 125, 132(f) or 457 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the "Code"); amounts contributed by the officer or employee to a governmental qualified retirement plan and treated as employer contributions under Code section 414(h); and amounts credited to the officer or employee for furlough hours. Such salary, earnings or wages shall not include the following amounts: disability insurance payments to an officer or employee; travel, mileage or automobile-related allowances or reimbursements; bonuses (other than sick-leave bonuses) or performance awards; overtime or premium payments; or any other special, unusual or nonrecurring payment. 
The City of Atlanta may amend this provision at any time to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1985-71, § 2, 11-12-85; Ord. No. 2004-84, § II(1), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-88, § 1, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-88 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2004. 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-249. - Distribution requirements. 
(a)  The requirements of this section shall apply to the distribution of all benefits under this Act, 1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, as amended, and will take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of this act. 
(b)  All distributions required under this section will be determined and made in accordance with section 401(a)(9) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the `Code'), including the incidental death benefit requirements of Code section 401(a)(9)(G), and the regulations thereunder. 
(c)  The entire benefit of an officer or employee under this act will be distributed beginning not later than his required beginning date over the life of such officer or employee or, if applicable, over the lives of such officer or employee and a designated beneficiary. `Required beginning date' shall mean April 1 of the calendar year following the later of (1) the calendar year in which the officer or employee attains age 70½ or (2) the calendar year in which the officer or employee terminates employment. 
(d)  If the distribution of a benefit has begun in accordance with subsection (c) above and the officer or employee dies before his entire benefit has been distributed to him, the remaining portion of such benefit will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used as of the date of his death. 
(e)  If an officer or employee dies before the distribution of his benefit has begun in accordance with subsection (c) above, his interest will be distributed to his designated beneficiary (as defined in Code section 401(a)(9)(E)) over a period not extending beyond the life or life expectancy of such beneficiary, beginning not later than December 31 of the calendar year following the calendar year of the officer's or employee's death. If such benefit is payable to (or for the benefit of) his surviving spouse or registered domestic partner, the date on which the distributions are required to begin shall not be earlier than December 31 of the calendar year in which the officer or employee would have attained age 70½. If the spouse or registered domestic partner dies before the distribution to such spouse or registered domestic partner is made or begun, this subsection (e) shall be applied as if the surviving spouse or registered domestic partner were the officer or employee. 
(f)  If an officer or employee dies before the distribution of his benefit has begun in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section and the officer or employee does not have a designated beneficiary (as defined in Code section 401(a)(9)(E)), the officer's or employee's benefit, if any, shall be distributed in a single lump-sum payment by December 31 of the year in which occurs the five-year anniversary of the officer's or employee's death. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § III(2), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-89, § 2, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 3-23-06) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-89 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 1997. 
Sec. 6-250. - Limitation on benefits. 
(a)  Basic limitation. Notwithstanding any provision of this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, to the contrary, the amount of an officer's or employee's annual retirement benefit, calculated as a single life annuity commencing before age 62 or after age 65, shall not exceed $160,000.00, as adjusted as of the first day of each limitation year to the dollar limitation determined by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue pursuant to regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury under the authority granted by section 415(d) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the "Code") (the "maximum permissible dollar amount"). For purposes of this section, the term "limitation year" shall mean the calendar year. 
As of each January 1, the dollar limitation as determined by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue for that calendar year will become effective as the maximum permissible dollar amount for that calendar year. The dollar limitation applicable to officers and employees who have commenced distribution of their benefit shall be adjusted annually to reflect any changes to the maximum permissible dollar amount. 
Employee contributions treated as employer contributions made pursuant to section 6-37(u) shall be considered a part of the benefit subject to the limitations of this section. Officer or employee contributions for prior service with certain other employers shall be subject to the rules of section 6-94. Employee contributions not made pursuant to section 6-37(u) and not made for credit for prior service with certain other employers shall be converted to an annual benefit amount pursuant to Code section 411(c)(2)(B) and shall be subtracted from the total annual benefit subject to the limitations of this subsection (a), provided that such contributions shall be considered to be a separate defined contribution plan maintained by the City of Atlanta and subject to the limitations of Code section 415(c). 
If the form of payment under the act is other than a straight-life annuity (with no ancillary benefits), or if the officer or employee has made mandatory or voluntary contributions or rollover contributions, or if any portion of the payment is attributable to assets transferred to the fund from another qualified plan not maintained by the City of Atlanta, the benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to a straight-life annuity with no ancillary benefits. For purposes of adjusting any benefit, the actuarially equivalent amount shall be the greater of: (i) the annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any) payable to the officer or employee under the act commencing at the same annuity starting date as the form of benefit payable to the officer or employee; or (ii) the annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the form of benefit payable to the officer or employee, computed using a five percent interest rate and the applicable mortality table. No actuarial adjustment shall be required to reflect the value of any of the following: (A) that portion of any joint and survivor annuity that constitutes a qualified joint and survivor annuity (as defined in Code section 417); (B) benefits that are not directly related to retirement benefits, such as pre-retirement disability and death benefits, and post-retirement medical benefits; and (C) post-retirement cost-of-living increases made in accordance with Code section 415(d) and the regulations thereunder. 
The provisions of this section 6-93 shall be applied in accordance with the rules of Code section 415 and the regulations thereunder, and the relevant provisions of the regulations are incorporated by reference herein. If payments to or on behalf of an officer or employee begin on multiple dates, the rules of this Section 6-93 shall be applied on each such date to the relevant portion of the benefit. 
(b)  Exception to basic limitation. If the annual retirement benefit payable to an officer or employee under this act does not exceed $10,000.00 for the limitation year with respect to which a determination is being made or any prior limitation year, and the City of Atlanta has not at any time maintained a defined contribution plan (as determined pursuant to the Code section 415(d) regulations) in which the officer or employee has participated, the limitation otherwise imposed by subsection (a) shall not apply. For purposes of determining whether any officer or employee has ever participated in a defined contribution plan, mandatory employee contributions to any defined benefit plan maintained by the City of Atlanta are not to be treated as a separate defined contribution plan maintained by the City of Atlanta. 
(c)  Reduction for fewer than ten years of participation. If an officer or employee has participated under the provisions of this act for fewer than ten years, the maximum permissible dollar amount shall be adjusted by multiplying such limitation by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the officer's or employee's years of participation as of such date (and any fraction thereof) and the denominator of which is ten. The foregoing reduction shall not apply to (1) disability retirement benefits received by an officer or employee under this act or (2) death benefits received by an officer's or employee's beneficiary under this act. 
(d)  Actuarial adjustment when benefits commence before age 62 or after age 65. If an officer's or employee's annual retirement benefit commences before he attains age 62, the maximum permissible dollar amount for the limitation year shall be reduced so that it is the actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible dollar amount that would be applicable if the retirement benefit had commenced at age 62. 
The actuarially equivalent amount shall be equal to the lesser of (A) the maximum permissible dollar amount multiplied by the ratio of the annual retirement benefit payable under the act at the time payments are scheduled to commence, without regard to the limits of this section 6-93, to the annual retirement benefit commencing at age 62, without regard to the limits of this section 6-93, and (B) the actuarially equivalent amount using a five percent interest rate and the applicable mortality table. To the extent that benefits will not be forfeited upon the death of the officer or employee, the mortality decrement shall be ignored for purposes of determining any reduction in the dollar limitation. If any benefits are forfeited upon death the full mortality decrement shall be taken into account. If an officer's or employee's annual retirement benefit commences after age 65, the maximum permissible dollar amount for the limitation year shall be increased so that it is the actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible dollar amount at age 65. The actuarially equivalent amount shall be equal to the lesser of: (A) the maximum permissible dollar amount multiplied by the ratio of the annual retirement benefit under the act at the time payments are scheduled to commence, disregarding accruals after age 65 and without regard to the limits of this section 6-93, to the annual retirement benefit commencing at age 65, without regard to the limits of this section 6-93, and (B) the actuarially equivalent amount determined using a five percent interest rate and the applicable mortality table. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the maximum permissible dollar amount shall not be reduced by reason of the commencement of annual retirement benefits before age 62 for (1) any full-time officer or employee with at least 15 years of full-time service with any police or fire department that is organized and operated by the City of Atlanta, (2) disability retirement benefits paid to an officer or employee pursuant to this act or (3) a death benefit paid to a beneficiary pursuant to this act. 
(e)  Applicable mortality table. On or after January 1, 2008, "applicable mortality table" shall mean the mortality table specified by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to Code section 417(e)(3)(B). Before January 1, 2008, "applicable mortality table" shall mean the mortality table prescribed by Revenue Ruling 2001-62, 2001-2 C.B. 632 or any successor revenue ruling, notice or other guidance provided by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue that establishes a replacement mortality table pursuant to Code section 415(b)(2)(E)(v). 
(f)  Preservation of old law benefits. In the case of an officer or employee who participated in one or more defined benefit plans of the City of Atlanta as of the first day of the first limitation year beginning after December 31, 1994, the application of the limitations of this section shall not cause the maximum permissible benefit for such officer or employee under all such defined benefit plans to be less than the officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit. 
For officers or employees with RPA '94 Old-Law Benefits, for purposes of determining whether an officer's or employee's benefit exceeds the limitations of this section after December 31, 1999 (the "RPA '94 Freeze Date"), an officer's or employee's total annual benefit under the act calculated as a straight life annuity shall be determined, and this benefit shall not exceed the maximum permissible dollar amount applicable to the officer or employee. Where an officer's or employee's benefit must be adjusted to an actuarially equivalent straight life annuity, such adjustment shall be calculated as provided under subsection (a) above. 
In no event shall an officer or employee receive less than the officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit. For purposes of determining that an officer or employee receives no less than the officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit, the limitation applicable to the officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit ("Old-Law Limitation") shall be determined, and the officer or employee shall receive the RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit to the extent it does not exceed such old-law limitation. Before January 1, 2000 (the "final implementation date"), adjustments to the old-law limitation for benefits that commence before age 62 or after age 65 shall be calculated as provided under Code section 415(b)(2)(E) and the terms of the act as in effect on December 7, 1994. On or after the final implementation date, adjustments to the old law limitation for commencement of benefits before age 62 or after age 65 shall be calculated as provided in subsection (d) above. In no event, however, may an officer's or employee's old-law benefit exceed the officer's or employee's old-law benefit as of the RPA '94 Freeze Date. 
For the purposes of this subsection, the term "RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit" shall mean the officer's or employee's accrued benefit under the terms of the act as of the RPA '94 Freeze Date, for the annuity starting date and optional form and taking into account the limitations of Code section 415 as in effect on December 7, 1994, including the participation requirements under Code section 415(b)(5). In determining the amount of an officer's or employee's RPA Old-Law Benefit, the following shall be disregarded: (1) any ordinance or amendment to the act increasing benefits adopted after the RPA '94 Freeze Date, and (2) any cost-of-living adjustments that become effective under Code section 415(d) after the RPA '94 Freeze Date. 
If, at any date after the RPA '94 Freeze Date, the officer's or employee's total benefit under the act, before the application of Code section 415, is less than the officer's or employee's old-law benefit, the RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit will be reduced to a benefit equal to the officer's or employee's total benefit. 
The use of a different interest rate and mortality table may not increase an officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit to an amount greater than such benefit as of the RPA '94 Freeze Date. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § III(3), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-89, § 3, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2010-69(10-O-1895), § 1, 12-15-10) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-89 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2002. 
Sec. 6-251. - Treatment of employee contributions for prior service with certain other employers. 
(a)  Basic Limitation. If an officer or employee makes one or more contributions under this Act, 1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, as amended, to purchase permissive service credit on or after January 1, 1998, the requirements of section 6-250 shall be treated as satisfied if either: 
(1)  The requirements of section 415(b) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the `Code') are satisfied, determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all contributions under this Act for permissive service credit as an annual benefit for purposes of Code section 415(b), provided, however, that the reduced limit under Code section 415(b)(2)(C) (as described in section 6-250(d)) shall not be exceeded solely by reason of this section 6-251; or 
(2)  The requirements of Code section 415(c) are satisfied, determined by treating all contributions under this Act for permissive service credit as an annual addition for purposes of Code section 415(c), provided, however, that the percentage limitation under Code section 415(c)(1)(B) shall not be exceeded solely by reason of this section 6-251. 
(b)  Limitation on Nonqualified Service. Notwithstanding the foregoing, not more than five years of permissive service credit attributable to nonqualified service shall be taken into account for purposes of this section, and no permissive service credit shall be taken into account before the officer or employee has participated under the provisions of this act for at least five years. 
(c)  Definitions. 
(1)  Permissive Service Credit. For purposes of this section, the term `permissive service credit' shall mean service credit that (A) is recognized under this Act for purposes of calculating an officer's or employee's benefit, (B) such officer or employee has not received under this Act and (C) such officer or employee may receive only by making a voluntary additional contribution in an amount determined under this Act that does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service credit. 
(2)  Nonqualified Service. For purposes of this section, the term 'nonqualified service' means service for which permissive service credit is allowed, other than: 
(A)  Service (including parental, medical, sabbatical and similar leave) as an employee of the Government of the United States, any State or political subdivision thereof or any agency or instrumentality of any of the foregoing (other than military service or service for credit that was obtained as a result of a repayment under Code section 415(k)(3)); 
(B)  Service (including parental, medical, sabbatical and similar leave) as an employee (other than as an employee described in clause (A) above) of an educational organization described in Code section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii) that is a public, private or sectarian school providing elementary or secondary education (through grade 12), as determined under the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(C)  Service as an employee of an association of employees who are described in clause (A), above; or 
(D)  Military service (other than qualified military service under Code section 414(u)) recognized under this Act. 
In the case of service described in clauses (A), (B) or (C), such service will be nonqualified service if recognition of such service would cause an officer or employee to receive a retirement benefit for the same service under more than one retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § III(4), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-89, § 4, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-89 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2002. 
Sec. 6-252. - Limitation on monthly earnings. 
For the period from January 1, 1996 to December 31, 2001, the annual compensation of each officer and employee taken into account for determining all benefits provided under this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, for any year shall not exceed $150,000.00, as adjusted for the cost of living in accordance with Section 401(a)(17)(B) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the "Code"). For years beginning on and after January 1, 2002, the annual compensation of each officer and employee taken into account for determining all benefits provided under this Act for any year shall not exceed $200,000.00, as adjusted for the cost of living in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17)(B). 
If compensation for any prior year is taken into account in determining the benefits of an officer or employee, the compensation for such prior year shall be subject to the applicable annual compensation limit in effect under Code Section 401(a)(17) for that prior year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective January 1, 2002, the limit on compensation taken into account with regard to years before January 1, 2002 shall be increased to $200,000.00, and the monthly benefit of officers and employees who have terminated employment, including officers and employees who have commenced receiving a benefit, shall be recalculated to reflect such increase. 
The annual compensation of an officer or employee who commenced participation under this Act before January 1, 1996 shall not be limited by the terms of this section. 
For the purposes of compliance with the requirements of Code Section 415, on or after January 1, 2009, the definition of "compensation" shall include differential wage payments within the meaning of Code Section 414(u)(12). 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § III(5), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-89, § 5, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2015-05(14-O-1632), § 2, 2-26-15 ) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-89 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 1996. 
Sec. 6-253. - Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, 1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, as amended, to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with section 414(u) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § III(6), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-89, § 6, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-89 provided for an effective date for this section of Dec. 12, 1994. 
Sec. 6-254. - Supplemental benefit arrangement. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Supplemental Benefit Arrangement is to provide officers and employees participating under the provisions of this Act, 1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, as amended, with the full amount of benefit intended under the Act, without regard to the limitations imposed by section 415 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the `Code'). 
(b)  Benefits. If the annual retirement benefit of an officer or employee under the Act is reduced as a result of the limitations in Code section 415 (as described in sections 6-250 and 6-251) such officer or employee shall receive an amount from the Supplemental Benefit Arrangement equal to the difference between (i) the amount that would have been payable under the terms of the Act without the application of Code section 415 and (ii) the amount payable under the terms of the Act determined with the application of the limitations in Code section 415. 
(c)  Elective Deferrals Not Permitted. Officers and employees shall not be permitted to defer compensation either directly or indirectly under the Supplemental Benefit Arrangement at any time. 
(d)  Subfund. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Act, the benefits payable under this section shall be paid from the assets of a subfund established under the existing fund, provided that such subfund shall be maintained solely for the purpose of providing benefits under the Supplemental Benefit Arrangement. The assets of the fund (other than the subfund) shall not be used to pay benefits under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § III(7), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-89, § 7, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-89 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2004. 
Sec. 6-255. - Eligible rollover distributions. 
(a)  General rule. The distributee of any eligible rollover distribution made under this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, may elect, in the manner and at the time specified by the board of trustees, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Distributee. For purposes of this section, a "distributee" shall include any current or former officer or employee who has a right to a benefit under this act. In addition, a 'distributee' shall include the current or former officer's or employee's surviving spouse, as well as the current or former officer's or employee's current or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order as defined in Code section 414(p). Effective January 1, 2010, a 'distributee' shall include a non-spouse beneficiary who is a designated beneficiary within the meaning of Code section 401(a)(9)(E). 
(2)  Eligible rollover distribution. For purposes of this section, an 'eligible rollover distribution' is any distribution from the fund established under the act of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the "Code"); and any hardship distribution. All or a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the distribution includes after-tax employee contributions that are not includible in gross income, provided, however, that such amounts may only be paid to a plan that constitutes an eligible retirement plan with respect to a distribution or portion of a distribution constituting after-tax contributions, as defined below. 
(3)  Eligible retirement plan. For purposes of this section, an 'eligible retirement plan' is an individual retirement account or annuity described in Code sections 408(a) or 408(b); a qualified trust described in Code section 401(a); an annuity plan described in Code section 403(a); an annuity contract described in Code section 403(b); and an eligible deferred compensation plan described in 457(b) that is maintained by a state, a political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and that agrees to account separately for amounts transferred into such plan from this fund; and, effective January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA described in Code section 408A. With respect to that portion of an eligible rollover distribution that consists of after-tax contributions that are not includible in gross income, an eligible retirement plan shall include only an individual retirement account or annuity described in Code sections 408(a) or (b) or a qualified defined contribution plan described in Code sections 401 (a) or 403(a) that agrees to account separately for the amounts so transferred, including separate accounting for that portion of such distribution that is not includible in gross income. In the case of a distribution to a non-spouse beneficiary, the term eligible retirement plan shall include only an inherited individual retirement account described in Code section 408(a) or an inherited individual retirement annuity described in Code section 408(b). 
(c)  Mandatory distributions. Effective January 1, 2006, if with respect to any mandatory distribution in excess of $1,000.00 that is an eligible rollover distribution a distributee does not make an election pursuant to subsection (a) above and does not elect to receive the distribution directly, the amount of the distribution shall be transferred to an individual retirement plan as described in Code section 408(a) or 408(b) of a designated trustee or issuer, and the distributee shall be notified in writing that the distribution may be transferred to such an individual retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § III(8), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-89, § 8, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 4, 3-23-06; Ord. No. 2010-69(10-O-1895), § 2, 12-15-10) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-89 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2002. 
Sec. 6-256. - Exclusive benefit. 
At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to officers and employees participating under the provisions of this Act, 1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, as amended, and their beneficiaries shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund established under this Act be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of such officers, employees and beneficiaries, except that a contribution by an employer to the fund established under this Act made under a mistake of fact may be returned to such employer within one year after the payment of the contribution. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § III(9), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-89, § 9, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-89 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 1997. 
Sec. 6-257. - Minimum vesting standards. 
Upon the termination of the fund established under this Act, 1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, as amended, or upon complete discontinuance of contributions under the Act, the rights of all officers and employees to benefits accrued to the date of such termination or discontinuance, to the extent then funded, shall be nonforfeitable. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § III(10), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-89, § 10, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-89 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 1997. 
Sec. 6-258. - Application of Pension Modification pursuant to City Related Laws Section 6-2. 
There has been raised and established funds for the relief and pensioning of members of the Atlanta Police Department who were in active service on or after the date of the passage of this act ("Police Officers' Pension Fund"). The terms of the Police Officers' Pension Fund have been modified by City Related Laws Section 6-2. The terms of the Police Officers' Pension Fund shall be as set forth in City Related Laws Sections 6-221 through 6-280, as amended by Related Laws Section 6-2. The retirement plan and benefits of the following members of the Police Officers' Pension Fund shall not be impacted by Related Laws Section 6-2: 1) members who were active service City Employees on November 1, 2011 who were hired by the City and joined the Police Officers' Pension Fund prior to January 1, 1984, and had continuous City service, or had had a break in service and purchased the interim pension benefits upon rehire; and 2) members who retired before November 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 2011-27(11-O-0672), § 12, 6-29-11) 
Secs. 6-259—6-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Sec. 6-281. - Board of trustees; constituted, membership. 
(a)  There is hereby established one board of trustees whose duty it shall be to implement the provisions of this act [Act] with respect to the City of Atlanta's General Employees' Pension Fund, Police Officers' Pension Fund and Firefighters' Pension Fund and to ensure that the funds of each pension fund are maintained and accounted for separately, except as provided in Section 6-37(r), Section 6-222(q) and Section 6-367(q). The board of trustees shall be authorized to adopt such rules, procedures and policies that it deems necessary to perform its duties; provided, however, that any such rules, procedures and policies are consistent with the provisions of this act [Act] and with all other applicable laws. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall be known as the City of Atlanta Defined Benefit Pension Plan Investment Board (the "Investment Board") and shall be comprised as follows: 
(1)  Chair. The Investment Board shall have an independent chair, who shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Atlanta to one (1) term of five (5) years, with relevant financial services industry experience, preferably in the area of investments. The Investment Board chair shall have no familial or business ties to the City of Atlanta or the Atlanta Public Schools 
(2)  Vice Chair. The vice chair of the Investment Board shall be the Mayor of the City of Atlanta or her/his designee. 
(3)  Three (3) members of the Atlanta City Council, who shall be appointed annually by the Mayor of the City of Atlanta. 
(4)  One (1) member of the Atlanta City Council, who shall be appointed annually by the President of the Atlanta City Council. 
(5)  One (1) member who shall be appointed annually by the Atlanta Board of Education. 
(6)  The Chief Financial Officer of the City of Atlanta. 
(7)  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources of the City of Atlanta. 
(8)  One (1) member elected every three (3) years by active and retired City of Atlanta participants in the City of Atlanta General Employees' Pension Fund (the "General Employee Trustee"). 
(9)  One (1) member elected every three (3) years by active and retired participants in the Atlanta Public Schools portion of the City of Atlanta General Employees' Pension Fund (the "Atlanta Public Schools Trustee"). 
(10)  One (1) member elected every three (3) years by the active and retired participants in the City of Atlanta Firefighters' Pension Fund (the "Fire Department Trustee"). 
(11)  One (1) member elected every three (3) years by the active and retired participants in the City of Atlanta Police Officers' Pension Fund (the "Police Department Trustee"). 
(c)  Trustee qualifications. To qualify as a Trustee, a candidate must demonstrate no less than twenty-four (24) hours of training, education, experience, or a combination of the three, regarding the following core competencies: 
(1)  Understanding of governance and administration of a public pension fund, including benefits administration and disability. 
(2)  Basic knowledge of fiduciary responsibility and liability. 
(3)  Basic understanding of investment structures and strategies. 
(4)  Basic understanding of financial controls and audits. 
(5)  Understanding of ethical standards of behavior, including conflicts of interest and disclosures. 
(6)  Basic knowledge of applicable Georgia Law, including the Open Records Act and Open Meetings Act. 
(d)  Committees. The Board shall create the following committees: 
(1)  Administration Committee. There shall be three (3) separate Administration Committees to manage the administrative duties, including the selection of a third party administrator, and make all pension award decisions for each of the three separate pension plans. The three (3) committees shall be as follows: 
D.  The City of Atlanta and Atlanta Public Schools General Employees' Administration Committee shall be comprised of: 
i.  The General Employees' Pension Plan elected representative to the Investment Board. 
ii.  The Atlanta Public Schools' Pension Plan elected representative to the Investment Board. 
iii.  One (1) member elected every three (3) years by active City of Atlanta participants in the City of Atlanta General Employees' Pension Fund. 
iv.  One (1) member elected every three (3) years by retired City of Atlanta participants in the City of Atlanta General Employees' Pension Fund. 
v.  One (1) member elected every three (3) years by active participants in the Atlanta Public Schools portion of the City of Atlanta General Employees' Pension Fund. 
vi.  One (1) member elected every three (3) years by retired participants in the Atlanta Public Schools portion of the City of Atlanta General Employees' Pension Fund. 
vii.  The Chief Financial Officer or her/his designee. 
viii.  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources or her/his designee. 
E.  The Police Officers' Administration Committee shall be comprised of: 
i.  The Police Officers' Pension Plan elected representative to the Investment Board. 
ii.  One (1) member elected every three (3) years by active participants in the City of Atlanta Police Officers' Pension Fund. 
iii.  One (1) member elected every three (3) years by retired participants in the City of Atlanta Police Officers' Pension Fund. 
iv.  The Chief Financial Officer or her/his designee. 
v.  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources or her/his designee. 
F.  The Firefighters' Administration Committee shall be comprised of: 
i.  The Firefighters' Pension Plan elected representative to the Investment Board. 
ii.  One (1) member elected every three (3) years by active participants in the City of Atlanta Firefighters' Pension Fund. 
iii.  One (1) member elected every three (3) years by retired participants in the City of Atlanta Firefighters' Pension Fund. 
iv.  The Chief Financial Officer or her/his designee. 
v.  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources or her/his designee. 
(2)  Governance Committee. The Governance Committee shall be responsible for implementation of the qualification requirements listed in paragraph (b) above. The Governance Committee shall also review and address conflicts of interest and compliance issues related to trustees and investment managers. The Governance Committee shall be comprised of: 
A.  The Chair of the Investment Board 
B.  Three Administration Committee members, each appointed from one of the three Administration Committees. Such appointees may be a member of the respective Administration Committee or an individual selected by the members of that Administration Committee. 
C.  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources or her/his designee. 
(3)  Audit Committee. The Audit Committee shall oversee audits of the three pension plans and review the financial statements for each pension plan. The Audit Committee shall be comprised as follows: 
A.  The Chair of the Investment Board 
B.  Three members elected by the combined membership of the three Administration Committees. Such members shall be elected from the active and retired participants of all three pension plans. 
C.  The Chief Financial Officer or her/his designee. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 6; 1952 Ga. Laws, page 2559, § 2; 1953 Ga. Laws, Nov.-Dec. Sess., page 2707, § 2; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2891, §§ 1, 2; 1964 Ga. Laws, page 2411, § 1; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3205, § 3; Ord. No. 2017-95(17-O-1589), § 2, 12-15-17 ) 
Sec. 6-282. - Appeals from decisions of the board of trustees; procedures. 
(a)  A majority of the board of trustees shall control on all disputed questions. 
(b)  A decision of the board of trustees to award or deny a service pension or a disability pension must be appealed to the board of trustees in writing within 14 days of the decision being appealed. Upon the receipt of a written appeal, the board of trustees will schedule a hearing to receive testimony from the appealing party or parties. Such hearing shall be conducted informally by the examination of witnesses who may be represented by legal counsel if they so desire. The board of trustees shall be authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and procedures, not inconsistent with general legal principles, governing the manner in which such hearings shall be conducted. The decision of the board of trustees after the hearing shall be final and shall be provided to the individual appealing in writing; provided, however, that such final decision shall be subject to review by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. The secretary of the board of trustees shall be authorized to acknowledge service of any such writ and shall, within the time provided by law, certify and cause to be filed with the clerk of the Fulton County Superior Court, a record of the proceedings before the board of trustees, including a copy of the pension application, the decision of the board and the notice of the board's action as provided to the pension applicant. Where appeals are taken by a pension applicant as provided herein, the board of trustees shall be the respondent and the city shall be the defendant. 
(c)  The method of appeal provided herein shall also serve as the method by which all other disputed pension award questions shall be appealed. 
(1939 Ga. Laws, page 356, § 5; Ord. No. 2017-95(17-O-1589), § 2, 12-15-17 ) 
Sec. 6-283. - Investment of excess funds. 
In the event there should accumulate more funds than are needed for immediate use, the board of trustees is empowered to invest such excess funds as authorized by applicable laws, including but not limited to, the provisions of this act [Act] and the Georgia Investment Authority Law, §47-20, Article 7, et seq. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 7; 1947 Ga. Laws, page 675, § 2; 1953 Ga. Laws, Nov.-Dec. Sess., page 2707, § 3; Ord. No. 1985-49, § 1, 8-9-85; Ord. No. 1992-45, § 1, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 1992-58, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 1994-13, § 7, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 2017-95(17-O-1589), § 2, 12-15-17 ) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-284. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-95(17-O-1589) , § 2, adopted Dec. 15, 2017, repealed § 6-284, which pertained to rules for meetings of board of trustees and derived from 1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 8. 
Sec. 6-285. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-95(17-O-1589) , § 2, adopted Dec. 15, 2017, repealed § 6-285, which pertained to appeals from decisions of board of trustees; procedure and derived from 1981 Ga. Laws, page 4381, §§ 2, 8; 1982 Ga. Laws, page 4385, § 2. 
Sec. 6-286. - Investment of excess funds. 
In the event there should accumulate more funds than is needed for immediate use, the board of trustees are empowered to invest such excess funds in United States, State of Georgia, or municipal bonds of any municipality in said state; but not otherwise. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 16; Ord. No. 1985-49, § 2, 8-9-85; Ord. No. 1992-45, § 2, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 1994-13, § 8, 3-24-94) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-287. - City attorney; function, compensation. 
The city attorney shall, without extra compensation render such legal service as the board of trustees created by this act shall require. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 15) 
Sec. 6-288. - Actuarial investigations. 
The board of trustees of this retirement system shall have the system's actuary make an actuarial investigation every three (3) years or more often as the board, in its discretion, may deem proper. Such actuarial investigation shall include the results of any actuarial investigation into the then current assumptions as to rates of interest, mortality, disability, withdrawal and retirement system under its assumptions and a comparison of results with the previous actuarial investigations and may also include such other studies as may be necessary or desirable for the completeness and accuracy of the actuarial investigation. The actuarial investigation shall also include a valuation of the contingent assets and liabilities of the retirement system and a determination of the payment necessary to amortize over a stated period any unfunded accrued liability disclosed. As an exhibit to the actuarial investigation, the retirement system board of trustees shall attach a copy of all the provisions of the plan for the retirement system, including the requirements and conditions for qualifying to participate, the nature of benefits under the plan, and the manner in which the local retirement system is funded. The board of trustees of the retirement system shall file with the state auditor a copy of each actuarial investigation. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 4507, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3629, § 1) 
Sec. 6-289. - Approval by city of certain contracts. 
Any contract entered into by the board of trustees on or after January 1, 2003 which affects the administrative staffing, management, or operation of the pension fund shall require the consent of the city by adoption of a resolution and approval by the mayor. Any such contract which does not comply with the requirements of this ordinance shall be null and void. 
Because this ordinance is not a modification of the Pension Laws, the provisions of City of Atlanta Charter section 3-507 are inapplicable. 
(Ord. No. 2003-55, §§ 1, 2, 2-25-03) 
Secs. 6-290—6-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BENEFITS 

Sec. 6-311. - Amount of pension; benefits to dependents. 
When such member shall retire as a matter of right, as aforesaid, he shall be paid thereafter, if otherwise entitled hereto under the provisions of this act [Act], 55 percent of the monthly salary or pay he was receiving at the time of his retirement for the remainder of his life, to be paid monthly, provided said sum shall not exceed $100 per month, except as hereinafter provided. In the event of the death of such member who is receiving a pension under the provisions of this section, his widow and minor children, and if no widow, his minor children, shall draw from the time of such pensioner's death, the sum equal to three-fourths (¾) of the sum that the pensioner was drawing or entitled to draw at the time of his death; and such pensions shall continue until such widow dies or remarries, and at her death or remarriage, the said pension shall be continued to be paid to the minor child or children of such deceased pensioner, and shall continue to be so paid until such child, or the youngest of such children, shall attain the age of 16 years. The term "widow" as herein used shall mean the wife of a policeman or pensioner who was married to him at least one (1) year prior to the time the said policeman was making application for pension under this act [Act]; and unless such widow whose husband participated in the pension fund hereunder was married to such policeman or pensioner at least one (1) year prior thereto, she shall not be entitled to a pension under this act [Act]; nor shall the provisions of this act be extended to include a wife of a policeman or pensioner who is not living with her husband, who is a policeman or pensioner hereunder, at the time of his death; nor shall the provisions of this act be construed to include a wife who has deserted her husband who is such a policeman or pensioner and has not been supported by him. But if such policeman or pensioner is not married and should leave a widowed mother who is dependent upon such policeman or pensioner under this act, then and in that event the widowed mother shall draw the pension which would otherwise have gone to the widow of such policeman or pensioner, or his minor child or children, under the provisions of this act, had he been a married man. Provided, however, that the amount of the pension herein provided for shall be increased in the sum of five dollars ($5.00) per month for each full year's service not in excess of 10 years rendered by the officer or employee after the time when he might have retired as a matter of right. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 3; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1067, § 2; 1947 Ga. Laws, page 675, § 3; 1952 Ga. Laws, page 2559, § 3) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-312. - Designation of spouse or unmarried child or children as beneficiaries; secondary beneficiary. 
(a)  Any officer or employee of the police department (an officer or employee who has passed the civil service examination and has been certified by the civil service or personnel board for employment as a police officer and is elected or employed in such capacity), whether male or female, who has a spouse or unmarried child or children under the age of 18 years, as provided for in section 6-331, or under the age of 16 years wherever provided for in other provisions of said act, as amended, shall have the right at any time to designate such spouse or such child or children as beneficiary of such officer's or employee's pension benefits, the amount of such pension benefits to be the same as provided for beneficiaries elsewhere in this act, as amended, and provided that the additional contributions for beneficiaries required in this act, as amended, are made; provided, however, that as to every male officer or employee hereafter elected or employed, participation for the benefit of such officer's or employee's wife or unmarried child or children under the age of 18 years, or under the age of 16 years as the provisions of said act may provide, shall be compulsory. Any and all provisions of this act, as amended, conferring benefits or placing restrictions on the wife or widow, as beneficiary, of male officers or employees, shall apply equally and in the same manner to the husband or widower as beneficiary of female officers or employees. Whenever, in said act, as amended, a beneficiary is designated as a wife or widow, such shall also include the husband or widower of a female officer or employee, if such should be the case. A child or children of a female officer or employee, who has provided for payment of a pension to her beneficiary, shall be entitled to the same benefits and subject to the same restrictions as may now or hereafter apply to the child or children of a male officer or employee, as provided in said act, as amended. 
(b)  If a member, whether male or female, designates a beneficiary, and thereafter such beneficiary should cease to be qualified to receive a pension in the event of the officer's or employee's death, then such member may at his or her option designate some other beneficiary who does qualify for pension benefits under this act, as amended, and continue to make contributions for such beneficiary, or cease to make further contributions for beneficiaries, in which event contributions theretofore made for the benefit of such a beneficiary shall not be refunded except insofar as refunds may be allowed by other provisions of this act, as amended. Nothing herein provided shall prevent an officer or employee from designating a primary beneficiary (spouse or children under the age of 18 years, or under the age of 16 years, as the provisions of said act may provide), and a secondary beneficiary (either spouse or children under the age of 18 years, or the age of 16 years, as the provisions of said act may provide, and not named as primary beneficiary). 
(c)  At such time as an officer or employee elects participation for the benefit of a beneficiary, such officer or employee shall give written notice of such election to the board, and shall within a period of two (2) years thereafter, in addition to current requirements, pay into the pension fund such additional percentage of such officer's or employee's monthly salary as will equalize the contributions of such electing officer or employee with the contributions of other officers or employees made during the same prior years and months of eligible service for the same benefits, together with three percent (3%) interest thereon for the months during which other officers or employees currently made their contributions for the same benefits. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 3172, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-313. - Reduction of certain pensions; application to come under 1933 act. 
On and after the passage of this act all pensioners and beneficiaries under all prior existing pension acts for the benefit of policemen and their dependents, and who are now receiving pensions, shall be reduced to the sum of $75 per month, under the provisions of this act; and no pensioner or beneficiary of a pensioner shall draw more than said sum of $75 per month. All pension rolls of the police department of such cities are hereby abolished, and all persons who are now or heretofore entitled to a pension under any prior law shall make application for pension under the provisions of this act, and, if entitled thereto under the provisions of this act, shall be by said board placed on the pension roll under the provisions thereof, but if not entitled to pension under the provisions of this act, shall be denied the right to participate in any of the funds belonging to the pension fund of such departments in such cities; and the same is true of any of the dependents or beneficiaries of prior members of said police departments, that they likewise shall make application under the provisions of this act for pension, and, if entitled to participate and be pensioned from the funds of such department, they shall be placed on the pension roll under the provisions of this act, but not otherwise. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 19; 1939 Ga. Laws, page 356, § 6) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-314. - Recomputation of benefits for persons who retired prior to March 8, 1945. 
Pension payments due all former officers and employees who retired prior to March 8, 1945 and their widows, and who were awarded a pension under the provisions of this act amended prior to March 8, 1945, shall be recomputed under the terms and provisions of the amendment to said act approved March 8, 1945 (1945 Ga. Laws, page 1067 et seq.). It is the intention of this amendment to increase the pension payments of all such persons and to pay minimum pension benefits to them as provided in this act. It is not the purpose of this amendment to reduce any pension benefits which would accrue under subsequent amendments to this act. 
(1961 Ga. Laws, page 2510, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. The provisions of 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1067, are compiled in sections 6-225, 6-232, 6-240, 6-311, 6-320, 6-321, 6-325, 6-327 and 6-328. 
Sec. 6-315. - Recomputation of pensions for officers, employees, retiring prior to April 1, 1955. 
(a)  Pension payments due all former officers and employees who have retired prior to April 1, 1955, and have been awarded a pension under the provisions of this act, who have reached 70 years of age, or who shall hereafter reach 70 years of age, shall be recomputed upon the following basis: The total pension benefits shall be a sum equal to one-half (½) of the average monthly salary of such former employee during the last three (3) years of his active service to such city, but shall not exceed the sum of $150 per month. The pension payments due to persons who were retired because of disability or for a period of service less than 25 years shall be increased in the same proportion. All such persons shall receive a minimum of four dollars ($4.00) per month for each full year of active service to such city subject to the limitations set out in this act as amended. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall permit any officer or employee who is eligible for pension benefits or increased pension benefits under this act as amended and who is not now making the required contributions for such benefits, to become a member of such pension fund and to participate in the increased benefits provided by this act as amended provided such officer or employee shall pay into the pension funds of such city an amount which would be equal to the amounts which he would have been required to pay had he exercised his privileges upon becoming eligible for such benefits. These payments shall be increased by four percent (4%) per annum from the dates such payments would have been due and may be paid over a period of 50 months. The board of trustees shall by rules provide for the exercise of the options herein authorized. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 3244, § 2; 1958 Ga. Laws, page 2890, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-316. - Increase of pensions for retired officers with over 25 years of service. 
(a)  Pension payments due to former officers and employees who have retired as a matter of right prior to the effective date of this act, and who have to their credit 25 years or more of active service with said city and have been awarded pensions under the terms of this act, as amended, shall have their pensions recomputed on the following basis: 
(1)  Subject to the limitations hereinafter set forth, there shall be paid to such former officers and employees a basic pension of $190 per month. 
(2)  In addition to the basic pension in the preceding subparagraph, there shall be paid the sum of six dollars ($6.00) per month for each full year's active service in excess of 25 years. For each full year's active service in excess of 35 years, there shall be paid an additional $10 per month. The record kept in the office of the department of finance, division of pensions, shall be conclusive as to the time served. 
(3)  The aggregate of all pension benefits payable to former officers and employees under the provisions of this act shall be limited in that the same shall not exceed 75 percent of the average monthly salary paid to such officer or employee for the last year of employment in active service. 
(b)  Former officers and employees who retired prior to the effective date of this act, but who had less than 25 years of active service with said city, but who have been awarded pensions under the terms of this act as heretofore amended, shall be paid that proportion of the basic pension provided in (a)(1) as the length of their service, measured in full years of service, bears to 25 years. 
(c)  No recomputation provided for under this act shall be made, if the result thereof would be to reduce pension payments already being received by any former officer or employee. 
(d)  Benefits now being paid to dependents of deceased former officers and employees awarded pensions under the terms of this act as heretofore amended, shall be recomputed under the terms and provisions of this act, so as to make the same applicable to such deceased former officers and employees, and the benefits payable to their dependents on account thereof. 
(e)  This section shall not be effective to, nor be construed to, confer eligibility for a pension upon any former officer or employee who was not eligible for a pension under the provisions of this act in effect on the date of the retirement, resignation or other withdrawal from service of such former officer or employees. 
(f)  Increased benefits payable under the terms of this act shall be paid out of general funds of the City of Atlanta. 
(g)  The provisions of this act shall be effective as of January 1, 1973. 
(1955 Ga. Laws, page 2046, § 2; 1957 Ga. Laws, page 3244, § 1; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2882, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-317. - Funds for benefits under sections 6-314 and 6-316. 
The increased pension benefits provided by sections 6-314 and 6-316 shall be paid by the board of trustees from funds available to them for the payment of pensions. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 3244, § 10) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-318. - Benefits payable upon death of nonpensioned policeman with 25 years of service. 
When any policeman who has served 25 years, is eligible to retire and has not been placed on a pension, but has remained in active service, dies, his wife and minor child or children shall receive a pension of 75 percent of the amount of the pension that the policeman would have been entitled to had he retired at the time of his death, said pension to be payable monthly until such widow dies or remarries; and in either event, then the pension shall be continued to be paid in the sum aforesaid to the child or children under 16 years of age, and after such child shall attain the age of 16 years, the pension shall cease, and in the event said policeman shall not be survived by a widow or minor child, but shall be survived by a widowed mother who was dependent upon such policeman at the time of his death, then the pension shall be paid to said widowed mother during her natural life or until she remarries, it being the intention of this act, where payment of a pension is provided to a widow of a policeman, that the same shall not be paid unless such widow shall have been married to such policeman for a period of at least 12 months prior to the time of his death. This section shall be retroactive to include any widow of a policeman who may have died since March 26, 1947. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 21; 1947 Ga. Laws, page 675, § 4; 1955 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2055, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-319. - Compensation payable upon death of member with at least five years of service. 
(a)  Where any policeman participating in the provisions of this act shall die while in active service and after having had not less than five (5) years of active service prior to his death, his widow, provided she has been designated as beneficiary, was the lawful wife of such policeman at the time of his death and had been married to him for at least one (1) year prior to his death, shall be entitled to receive a pension during her life or until she remarries, representing three-fourths (¾) of the amount that said policeman would have been entitled to receive in the future had such policeman not died but had become as of the date of his death totally and permanently disabled within the provisions of this act from accident, injuries or illness outside of police duties and not from his own indiscretion. Such pension shall be graduated according to the length of service of the deceased policeman before his death. To illustrate, for five (5) years of service the beneficiary would be entitled to three-fourths (¾) of five twenty-fifths ( 5/25 ) of the full pension the deceased policeman would have been entitled to had he served 25 years, and for any number of years of service beyond five (5) years and not more than 24 years the beneficiary would be entitled to three-fourths (¾) of whatever proportion of the pension the deceased would have been entitled to for 25 years service as the number of years of active service bears to 25. In determining the number of years of service fractional parts of years shall be counted. To illustrate, if the deceased policeman had served 18 years and nine (9) months, the beneficiary would be entitled to three-fourths (¾) of eighteen and seventy-five one hundredths twenty-fifths (18.75/25) of the pension the deceased would have been entitled to had he served 25 years. In the event of the death or remarriage of such policeman's widow, while receiving such pension and there then be a minor child or children of such policeman under 16 years of age, such pension shall be continued to such child or children until the youngest child shall attain the age of 16 years. If such policeman dies while on active duty without leaving a widow who is entitled to a pension under the provisions hereof but should leave a minor child or children under 16 years of age, and has been paying the percentage of his salary provided under this act for a beneficiary, then a pension graduated as herein provided shall be paid to such minor child or children until the youngest reaches the age of 16 years. The foregoing provisions shall be retroactive to March 26, 1947. 
(b)  Any policeman on leave of absence from the police department who accepts any gainful employment other than as a member of the armed forces shall not be considered in active service. If any policeman while on leave of absence becomes gainfully employed other than as a member of the armed forces and dies or becomes totally and permanently disabled before returning to duty in the police department, neither he nor his beneficiary shall be entitled to a pension under the provisions of this act. 
(1947 Ga. Laws, page 675, § 6; 1961 Ga. Laws, page 3466, §§ 1, 2; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3172, § 3; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2832, § 1) 
Sec. 6-320. - Retirement due to total disability in line of duty. 
In the event a member of such police department, in good standing, shall be retired under the provisions of this act, because of total disability from injuries received in line of duty, or because of poor health, that shall render him totally disabled as a result of such police service, but not on account of injuries or ill health brought about on account of his own indiscretion or his own act, he may apply for a disability pension under the provisions of this act, which shall not exceed the sum of 55 percent of the monthly salary or pay he was receiving at the time he was found to be disabled, but not to exceed $100 per month, to be paid monthly, subject to the conditions of section 6-321 of this article, and in the event of his death, after being placed on such pension, his widow, if designated as beneficiary, if living, shall receive three-fourths (¾) of the amount which pensioner was drawing at the time of his death per month for her benefit and the benefit of dependent children under 16 years of age of the deceased officer. If the widow should die or remarry the pension going to her shall go to the dependent children under 16 years of age, and be discontinued when they reach the age of 16 years, and if no children, to the mother of the deceased officer if she be a widow and dependent. The disability pension herein provided for shall be continued to the beneficiary after the death of such pensioner at three-fourths (¾) of the rate paid the pensioner wherever a provision has been made for the beneficiary. Where there is no beneficiary or no one has been named, the disability pension shall cease at the death of the pensioner. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 4; 1939 Ga. Laws, page 356, § 1; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1067, § 3) 
Sec. 6-321. - Determination of total and permanent disability. 
The board of trustees shall have the applicant for a pension on account of permanent and total disability examined by competent physicians and surgeons. In passing upon the question of permanent and total disability, they may receive and consider the reports and recommendations of such examining medical officers and the applicant shall have the right to submit medical and other competent evidence on the question of his disability and right to be retired. If the board of trustees determines that the applicant is not totally and permanently disabled, the act of the board shall be final. If the determination be that the applicant is totally and permanently disabled, he shall be retired subject, however, to the following conditions: 
(1)  The board of trustees shall have the right to at least once a year require the pensioner to submit to a medical examination for the purpose of determining whether or not the pensioner has sufficiently recovered from his disability and is able to return to his former position; 
(2)  If the board, after such examination, determines that the pensioner is not actually totally and permanently disabled but is able to return to his former position or employment he occupied at the time of his retirement and such employment and status as to position, pay and service credit at the time of retirement is offered to such pensioner and he takes the former position or fails or refuses to take such offer, then the payment of such disability pension shall cease. 
(1945 Ga. Laws, page 1067, § 5) 
Sec. 6-322. - Light-duty status. 
(a)  In the event that it has been medically determined that an officer or employee of the city is unable to perform his or her regularly assigned duties by reason of physical or mental incapacity or impairment, and where the officer or employee has applied for disability pension, whether in line of duty or not in line of duty, and upon the confirmation and certification of two (2) or more licensed and practicing physicians of Georgia that such officer or employee is capable of performing less strenuous employment duties with such city, such duties to be designated as "light-duty status," and where such less strenuous employment duties are available and are offered to such officer or employee, the officer or employee may, in the discretion of the appointing authority of such city, be placed into such "light-duty status" within the same bureau and thereby continue to be carried on the payroll of such city with no change in salary status or pension fund membership, pending a further medical determination by two (2) or more licensed and practicing physicians of Georgia that such officer or employee is no longer capable of functioning in such "light-duty status." 
(b)  The board of trustees of the pension fund shall be authorized to make all rules necessary in carrying out the provisions set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)  This amendment shall only apply to officers and employees who become members of the pension fund on or after the effective date hereof [April 6, 1981]. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, page 3569, § 2) 
Sec. 6-323. - Payment of disability benefits to widow, widowed mother, children of member. 
The board of trustees shall pay pensions to the members of the police department who shall be entitled thereto under the disability regulations of this act, and to the widow and children of such deceased member of the police department who shall be entitled thereto under the provisions of this act, which said pension, when paid to a widow or those entitled to receive the same under the provisions hereof, shall not exceed the sum of $40 per month; and likewise where the same is paid to a widowed mother who is entitled thereto under the provisions of this act, the same shall not exceed the sum of $40 per month; and in the event the city for whom such policeman is working at the time of his death shall pay to his widow or minor children, or mother, a year's salary after the death of such policeman, then the board of trustees shall not pay the pension under the provisions of this act to the one entitled thereto until after the expiration of the time for which the salary is paid; but that the benefits intended to accrue under the provisions of this act shall be postponed until such time as the salary of such deceased member shall cease to be paid to his dependent. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 213, § 13) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. To the extent the provisions of the foregoing section conflict with section 6-326, they have been superseded. 
Sec. 6-324. - Continuance of pensions to dependents. 
The provisions of this amendment [section] providing for the continuance of pensions to widows, children and widowed mothers, shall be applied and effective as to those policemen who prior to the passage of this act have been retired because of physical disability, and upon the death of such retired policeman, they shall be entitled to receive the amount of pensions provided for under section 6-320. 
(1939 Ga. Laws, page 356, § 3) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-325. - Dependents' rights upon member being killed in line of duty prior to eligibility for retirement. 
The widow of any member in good standing, whether designated as a beneficiary or not, who is killed while in the discharge of his duty as an officer but before he has served sufficient time to retire as a matter of right, shall be entitled to receive three-fourths (¾) of the pension that he would have been entitled to if he had served sufficient time to have retired as matter of right and if such member at the time of his death leaves no widow, then the minor children or minor child, if any, will be entitled to receive such pension. This provision is made retroactive so that it shall apply to the widow of any member who was killed subsequent to September 1, 1944, as well as those who may be killed in line of duty in the future. 
(1945 Ga. Laws, page 1067, § 7) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-326. - Compensation for death from injuries in line of duty. 
(a)  Payment of compensation. When any person covered by the provisions of this act shall die as a result of injuries incurred in the line of duty, the compensation to which he would have been entitled shall be continued for one (1) year and paid to his widow or minor children, if no widow. 
(b)  Payment of pension. At the expiration of the one-year period referred to in the preceding paragraph the widow of such deceased person shall be entitled to a minimum pension of $150 per month until she remarries or until her death. 
(c)  Termination of widow's benefits. The compensation and pension benefits for the widow provided by this act shall terminate upon her remarriage or her death. 
(d)  Children's benefits. The compensation and pension benefits provided by this act shall be continued to the minor child or children upon the death or remarriage of the widow until the youngest child shall have become 16 years of age. 
(e)  Benefits in lieu of other like benefits. The pension benefits provided by this act shall be in lieu of like pension benefits provided by this act as amended and shall not be in addition thereto except as to compensation and amount of the pension herein provided. 
(f)  Act retroactive. The provisions of this act [section] shall apply retroactively to July 1, 1960. 
(1961 Ga. Laws, page 2481, §§ 1—6) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. To the extent the provisions hereof are in conflict with 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1067, § 7, codified as section 6-325, this section is superseded; the same analysis applies to section 6-323. See also section 6-331(h) for benefits payable under 1964 act. 
Sec. 6-327. - Benefits to members dying or becoming totally disabled outside line of duty. 
Any member of said pension fund who shall hereinafter become because of accident, injuries or illness outside of police duties, and not from his own indiscretion, totally and permanently disabled within the meaning of said term as defined by law may apply for disability pension and if such pension is approved by a majority of the board of trustees the same shall be granted upon the following conditions: No person shall be granted any pension whatsoever for such disability until such person has been in the employment of the department for a period of five (5) years. Such person shall be entitled to receive as a pension such percentage of the full pension provided for as his years of service bears to 25 years. That is to say, a person granted a pension at the expiration of 10 years shall be entitled to ten twenty-fifths ( 10/25 ) of the amount he would receive had he served a period of 25 years. To illustrate, if he has served 11 years, he would receive eleven twenty-fifths ( 11/25 ) of the amount he would have received if he had served 25 years, or, if such person had served 20 years, he would receive twenty twenty-fifths ( 20/25 ) of whatever sum he would receive had he served 25 years. In determining the number of years of service fractional parts of years shall be counted. That is to say, a person who has served 18 years and nine (9) months would be pensioned on a basis of eighteen and seventy-five one-hundredth twenty-fifths (18.75/25) of the full pension or for 18 and three-fourths (¾) years of service. The disability pensions herein provided for shall be continued to the beneficiary after the death of such pensioner at three-fourths (¾) of the rate paid the pensioner wherever a provision had been made for the beneficiary. Where no beneficiary has been named, or none exists, the disability pension shall cease at the death of the pensioner. 
(1939 Ga. Laws, page 356, § 2; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1067, § 4; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3172, § 4; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2832, § 2) 
Sec. 6-328. - Refunds to members leaving service or dying before eligibility for retirement. 
Any member participating in the provisions of this act who leaves the employ of said city before being eligible for retirement shall have refunded to him an amount equal to the amount paid into the said fund less one-half of one per centum (0.5%) per year to cover each year that the member had paid into the fund and received protection under this act. To illustrate, if at the end of the first fiscal year, the member has paid into said fund $10 and leaves the services of the city or withdraws from the pension fund, he shall be entitled to a refund of said $10 less one-half of one per centum (0.5%) or if at the end of 24 years, he has paid into said fund $240, he would be entitled to a refund of $240 less 12 per centum. If such member should die before being awarded a pension, and should leave no beneficiary entitled to a pension as such under this act, the refund shall be paid to his estate. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 445, § 4; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1067, § 10; 1955 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2055, § 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. To the extent the provisions of this section conflict with corresponding provisions derived from 1957 Ga. Laws, page 3244, compiled as section 6-329, this section has been superseded. 
Sec. 6-329. - Refunds when leaving employment prior to retirement. 
Any employee participating in the provisions of this act, as amended who leaves the employ of such city prior to retirement shall have refunded to him an amount equal to the amount which he has paid into said fund. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 3244, § 3) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-330. - Refunds for noncredited deductions upon compulsory retirement or death. 
When any member shall be compelled to retire because of age or disability, or shall die, fractional parts of years shall be counted in determining the number of years of service with respect to the member being compelled to retire because of age before completing the required number of years of service, and with respect to partial pensions and pensions for total permanent disability arising outside of police duties and not in line of duty, or pensions upon death, and thereafter such member or his beneficiary shall be entitled to receive a refund of all amounts deducted from his salary for pension purposes for any months for which he or his beneficiary cannot receive full credit on pension benefits. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 2879, § 1; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2564, § 1; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3172, § 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-331. - Benefits in lieu of like existing benefits. 
(a)  The pension benefits provided by this section and the several subsections shall be in lieu of like pension benefits provided by existing provisions of this act. 
(b)  As used in this act, the language "officer and employee" shall be defined as any officer and employee who has passed the civil service examination and has been certified by the civil service or personnel board for employment as a police officer and is elected or employed in such capacity. 
(c)  Any officer and employee coming under the terms of this act who is in the employment of the city prior to the effective date of this amendment may elect to come under the provisions of this amendment by making written application to the pension board. The applicant must agree in writing to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment, in lieu of other pension benefits and obligations under this act, as amended. 
All such officers and employees in the employment of the city on the effective date of this act who do not in writing agree to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment, shall have their rights and obligations determined under the law as it existed prior to this amendment. 
All regular officers and employees of the city eligible for participation in this act, as amended, who shall be elected or employed after the effective date of this act, shall be required to come under the provisions of this act, as now amended, and shall have all rights and duties provided in the amended act. Temporary employees shall not be required to participate in this act, as amended. 
This amendment and the election to accept these benefits shall be predicated upon an acknowledgment that the General Assembly in adopting this amendment reserved the right to further amend said act and to reduce the benefits provided hereunder not to exceed the primary insurance amount such officer and employee will be eligible to receive in the event the officer and employee of such city should ever qualify and accept the benefits under the Federal O.A.S.I. program by reason of his employment by such city. Provided further, that the benefits of this act, as amended, shall in no event be reduced more than the primary insurance amount received from the Federal O.A.S.I. program as a consequence of participation in said Federal O.A.S.I. program. Provided further, that the benefits of this act, as amended, shall in no event be reduced as a consequence of participation in said Federal O.A.S.I. program below the benefits as same existed prior to the enactment of this amendment. 
(d)  All officers and employees who shall elect to come under the terms of this amendment must attain the age of 55 years and shall have served 25 years before being eligible to retire and receive the benefits as provided by this amendment. Providing, however, that such officer or employee who has served 25 years and who has attained the age of 50 years may elect to retire on a reduced pension, said reduction to be one-twelfth of three percent (3%) per month for each month such officer or employee lacks in being 55 years of age; provided further, that the provisions of this section as to age limit shall not apply to any person claiming a pension by reason of total and permanent disability. 
(e)  When such officer and employee shall retire as a matter of right, he shall be paid thereafter a monthly pension equal to two percent (2%) of his monthly (base and service) earnings, multiplied by his years, and one and one-half percent (1½%) of his monthly (base and service) earnings multiplied by the number of full years of creditable service in excess of 25 years of creditable service. Monthly earnings shall be the average of the highest three (3) years (base and service) salary during the term of employment. 
(f)  In no event shall the total pension benefits payable under this amendment, plus any primary insurance amount under the Federal O.A.S.I. program that may inure to any officer or employee coming under the provisions of this amendment, by reason of his employment by such city, exceed 75 percent of the average monthly (base and service) salary used in computing the pension benefits under the terms of this amendment. Provided, however, that whenever monthly earnings as defined in this amendment, multiplied by years of creditable service at the time of retirement or death shall entitle any officer and employee coming under the provisions of this amendment to a pension in excess of the maximum pension allowable hereunder, said officer and employee, shall be refunded all contributions made by him on monthly earnings in excess of monthly earnings necessary to arrive at the maximum pension allowable. No department head who elects to come under the provisions of this act shall be entitled to receive any emeritus salary as provided by the governing authorities of any city coming within the provisions of this act. 
(g)  (1) Any officer or employee who is a member of the pension fund shall be considered totally and permanently disabled by the board of trustees while the officer or employee is in a continuous state of incapacity due to illness or injury: 
a.  During the first 12 months which the officer or employee is prevented from performing his/her regular, assigned or comparable duties; and 
b.  Thereafter, if the condition continues to prevent the officer or employee from engaging in any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
(2)  A member who is considered by the board of trustees to be totally and permanently disabled in accordance with subsection (g)(1)a. and b. on or after January 1, 1986, shall receive a monthly disability benefit which shall commence on the day following the officer's or employee's last date on the payroll and continue until the earlier of: 
a.  Cessation of total and permanent disability; 
b.  Attainment of age 55. 
(3)  Such monthly disability benefit shall be equal to 50 percent of the officer's or employee's average monthly earnings during the highest three (3) consecutive years of service prior to the date of approval by the board of trustees or the officer's or employee's accrued normal retirement benefit, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Upon the cessation of disability benefits pursuant to subsection (g)(2)a. or b., and the officer's or employee's failure to return to city employment, the officer or employee would be entitled to a pension benefit as calculated in accordance with subsection c. or d. of 1964 Ga. Laws, page 3001, as applicable. Provided further, that the calculation of any such subsequent benefit shall include credit for all years and fractions thereof during the time disability pension benefits have been paid, but shall not include credit for any disability pension payments made. Provided further, that for the purposes of calculating any cost-of-living adjustments, the subsequent benefits shall be considered as a new pension with a new effective date. 
(5)  Disability pension benefits shall be offset by worker's compensation payments so that the combination of payments shall not exceed 75 percent of the officer's or employee's salary at the time disability pension benefits are to commence or 60 percent of an officer's or employee's salary at the time of disability or death in the case of a beneficiary. However, this subsection shall not prevent the restoration of disability pension benefits payable upon the reduction or termination of any such compensation benefits payable by the city under applicable worker's compensation laws. 
(6)  a.  Pensions for beneficiaries designated under the terms of this act, as amended, shall be one-half of the amount the pensioner was receiving, at the time of his death, as a result of retirement as a matter of right or because of total and permanent disability; or one-half of the amount such officer or employee would have been entitled to receive had such person retired prior to death. 
b.  The pension benefits for a primary beneficiary shall be continued to the secondary beneficiary, upon the death, or ineligibility for benefits, of the primary beneficiary. Provided, however, if such primary beneficiary was not receiving the maximum beneficiary payment provided for in this act because of any provision of this act reducing such amount, such maximum beneficiary amount shall be paid to the secondary beneficiary, notwithstanding any lesser amount previously paid to the primary beneficiary. Provided, further, that if said beneficiary, primary or secondary, receiving beneficiary benefits as widow or widower of the pensioner is more than five (5) years younger than the pensioner, there shall be deducted from such pension one-twelfth of two percent (2%) per month for each month such beneficiary is more than five (5) years younger than the pensioner. 
c.  No spouse, designated as a beneficiary, shall be entitled to receive any of said service pension benefits unless such spouse shall have been legally married to such officer or employee of such city for a period of one (1) year prior to the death of such pensioner; provided the officer or employee has made payment for such benefits prior to retirement. 
d.  In determining all pensions of officers or employees referred to above, fractional parts of years of service shall be counted and accumulated annual sick leave days credited to such officer or employee shall be counted as provided for in paragraph e. 
e.  In determining creditable service, accumulated, unused sick leave days credited to such officer or employee shall be added as work days to the creditable service otherwise provided by this act, as amended. In determining average monthly earnings, such accumulated unused sick leave days shall be credited at the highest daily rate of regular salary or earnings during the highest three (3) consecutive years' salary or earnings and all accumulated unused sick leave days shall be substituted for a like number of days at the lowest rate of regular salary or earnings during such highest three (3) consecutive years' salary or earnings during the term of employment. 
f.  Any person entitled to disability benefits under the provisions of this act, as amended, may receive benefits after he/she has been in the active employment of the city for at least a period of five (5) years. Provided, however, said requirement shall not apply to an officer or employee disabled as a direct result of a traumatic event or events occurring during and as a result of the performance of an officer's or employee's regular or assigned duties and not the result of such officer's or employee's willful negligence. 
(7)  Disability pensions; annual review. The retirement of a pension applicant by reason of permanent and total disability shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The board of trustees shall have the right to at least once a year require the pensioner to submit to a medical examination for the purpose of determining whether or not the pensioner has sufficiently recovered from his disability and is able to return to any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
b.  If the board, after such examination, determines that the pensioner is not actually totally and permanently disabled but is able to return to any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience then the payment of such disability pension shall cease. (Ord. No. 1985-94, § 11, 12-19-85) 
(h)  When any person covered by the provisions of this act shall die as a result of injuries incurred in the line of duty, the compensation to which he would have been entitled shall be continued for one (1) year and paid to his widow or minor children (natural or legally adopted), if no widow. Any compensation received by the member due to said injury shall be deducted from the one-year's compensation herein provided for. At the expiration of the one-year period referred to above, the pension benefits for widow shall be computed by the same formula as set forth in subsection (g) above. The pension benefits for widow provided by this amendment shall be continued to the minor child or children (natural or legally adopted) upon the death of the widow until the youngest child shall have become 18 years of age. (Ord. No. 1985-94, § 12, 12-19-85) 
(i)  There shall be deducted from the total salary of any officer or employee electing to come under this amendment the sum of five percent (5%) of his total salary, in the event he does not provide for payment of a pension to this beneficiary, as authorized by this act, as amended, or the sum of six percent (6%) of his total salary, in the event he does provide for the continuance of the pension to his beneficiary. Like payments shall be made from the salaries of future employees of the police department required to come under this amendment. 
(j)  In addition to the payments required to be made in subsection (i) above, any officer or employee who may become a participant under this amendment shall be entitled to all benefits and receive credit for all the years of his creditable service, provided he shall pay into the fund the sum of five percent (5%) of his total salary from the time his salary exceeded $300 per month, if he does not provide for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary, and the sum of six percent (6%) of his total salary from the time his salary exceeded $300 per month, if he does provide for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary. Payments previously made to the pension fund not exceeding the amount due the fund shall be deducted from the total amount due in arriving at the total sum of five percent (5%) or six percent (6%). 
Said total amount due may be paid at the time the officer and employee elects to come under the terms of this amendment or in 60 monthly installments from the date of his participation under this amendment, at the option of the participant to the plan. Provided, however, that the board of trustees of the fund, as created under this act, as amended, may at their discretion allow additional time for such payments to be made. 
Any officer and employee who does not elect to participate under this amendment within six (6) months of the effective date of this amendment, but who later elects to participate, shall be required to pay interest at the rate of four percent (4%) per annum from the effective date of this amendment to the date he elects to participate. In the event the officer and employee should retire or die before said payments into the fund are completed, the secretary of the retirement fund is authorized to deduct the monthly payments from retirement or beneficiary benefits until the obligation is discharged. 
(k)  This section and the several subsections shall be effective the first day of the month following the passage and approval of this act, and the payments required by subsection (i) above, as to those then employed and electing to come under this amendment, shall begin with that date. As to those subsequently coming into the service of the police department or subsequently electing to participate under the terms of this amendment, said payments shall begin with the employment or date of such election. 
(l)  In addition to the fund derived from deductions from salaries and wages, as required by subsection (i) of this amendment, it shall be the duty of the governing authorities of such cities to appropriate and pay into the pension fund an amount which shall be equal to the amount paid into said fund by said officers and employees of the police department for prior creditable service, as required by subsection (j). Provided, however, such governing authorities of such cities may delay the matching of additional contributions caused by the enactment of this amendment to the January 1st next following the effective date of this amendment and provided, further, that said governing authorities of such cities may match the payments for prior creditable service, as provided for in subsection (j) in annual installments over a period not to exceed 20 years from the January 1st next following the effective date of this amendment. Should said pension fund at any time be insufficient to meet and pay the pensions due to such officers and employees of the police department, such governing authorities shall appropriate from current funds amounts sufficient to make up the deficiency and deposit same into such pension fund. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 3001, § 1; 1965 Ga. Laws, page 2112, §§ 1—3; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 3172, § 1; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 3279, § 1) 
Editor's note— Except for subsection (l) (derived from 1964 Ga. Laws, page 3001, § 1), the provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-332. - Deferred pension benefits. 
(a)  When any person coming within the provisions of this act, as amended, shall have completed 20 years of active service with such city and not yet have reached the age of 65 years, then such person shall have the right to terminate his employment with such city upon completion of said 20 years, or at any time thereafter; elect not to withdraw or have paid to such person the amount which such person would have paid into the pension fund prior to terminating such employment; and upon subsequently attaining 65 years of age commence to receive at said time the benefits to which such person would have been entitled had such person otherwise retired as a matter of right in accordance with the applicable provisions of this act, as amended. 
(b)  Should such person have provided for the payment of a pension to the beneficiary of such person, as authorized by said act, as amended, by making the required payments or contributions to the pension fund, then after terminating the employment with such city and upon the death of such person, either before or after attaining 65 years of age, such person's beneficiary designated under the terms of this act, as amended, shall be entitled to all of the benefits provided for such beneficiary as set forth in the relevant and applicable sections of this act, as amended. 
(c)  Should such person, after having left the employment with such city after 20 years of active service, become reemployed by such city, then such person at such time shall have the right to continue under the provisions of the amendments to said act which such person was under prior to the termination of such employment, or may elect to come under any amendments to said act enacted subsequently to the termination of such person's employment and as might exist and be in effect at the time of said reemployment, upon there being made such payments or contributions to the pension fund, through deductions from salary or otherwise, as might be required by said act, as amended. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2234, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4527 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-333. - [Deduction in benefits for repayment of advanced sick leave.] 
(a)  In the event that an officer or employee who has been granted advanced sick leave should retire or die prior to having repaid any and all amounts due such city for the advanced sick leave, an appropriate amount, as determined by the board of trustees, may be deducted from the monthly retirement or beneficiary benefits, or in lieu thereof, such lump sum amounts as the board, in its discretion, deems appropriate until the obligation is discharged. 
(b)  The provisions of this Act shall apply only to officers or employees who become members of the pension fund on or after the effective date of this Act. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 3887, §§ 2, 4) 
Secs. 6-334—6-365. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIREFIGHTERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-366. - Establishment of funds. 
There shall be raised and established funds for the aid, relief and pension of members of paid fire departments who are in active service at the time of the passage of this act and whose names are on the payroll of such departments and future members of such departments, and their dependents in all cities in Georgia having a population of more than 300,000 by the United States census of 1970 or any subsequent census of the United States. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 1; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2837, § 3; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2880, § 2) 
Sec. 6-367. - 1978 Pension Act. 
(a)  The pension benefits provided by this section and the several subsections hereof shall be in lieu of like pension benefits provided by the existing provisions of this act [1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, as amended]. 
(b)  (1) Any officer or employee coming under the terms of this act who is in the employment of the city prior to the effective date of this amendment may elect to come under the provisions of this amendment by making written application to the board of trustees. The applicant must agree in writing to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment, in lieu of other pension benefits and obligations under this act, as amended. 
All such officers and employees in the employment of the city on the effective date of this act who do not in writing agree to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment shall have their rights and obligations determined under the law as it existed prior to this amendment, even though such provisions of law are specifically repealed as hereinafter set forth. 
All regular officers or employees of the city, eligible for participation in this act, as amended, who shall be elected or employed after the effective date of this act, shall be required to come under provisions of this act, as now amended, and shall have all rights and duties provided in the amended act. Temporary and casual employees shall not be required to participate in this act, as amended. 
(2) Pension Application; Procedure. Unless the pension applicant withdraws a pending application for pension benefits, or abandons his or her appeal from the denial of such application by the board of trustees, no new application for a different category of pension benefits shall be accepted by the board of trustees. Further, whenever an officer or employee has been granted a certain category of pension benefits, no new application for a different category shall be accepted by the board of trustees. (1981 Ga. Laws, page 3553, § 1) 
(c)  All officers and employees, who shall elect or be required to come under the terms of this amendment, may as a matter of right retire from active service and receive a monthly pension benefit hereinafter set forth and referred to hereinafter as a "normal monthly pension benefit." Provided such person shall have served 15 years in the active service of such city and shall have attained the age of 55 years prior to commencement of such benefit. Upon such officer or employee retiring as a matter of right, such person shall be paid thereafter a normal monthly pension benefit equal to two percent of such person's average monthly earnings multiplied by the number of each person's years, or fraction thereof, of creditable service and that normal pension benefit shall not exceed 100 percent of such person's average monthly earnings. Average monthly earnings shall be the average of the monthly earnings of the highest three consecutive years' salary or earnings during the term of employment. In computing the average monthly earnings, if the officer or employee shall have received a lump sum payment for compensation, accumulated vacation, sick leave bonus pay, or similar benefits, the amounts of such payments shall be equally distributed over the period of time in which such compensation or benefit was earned or accumulated. 
(d)  All officers and employees, who shall elect or be required to come under the terms of this amendment, may as a matter of right retire from active service and receive an early retirement benefit, hereinafter referred to as "early monthly retirement benefit," provided such person shall have served 15 years in the active service of the city. When such officer or employee shall elect early retirement as a matter of right, such person shall be paid thereafter an early monthly retirement benefit equal to a normal monthly pension benefit less one-half of one percent per month for each month not to exceed 60 months that the officer or employee lacks in being 55 years of age and one-fourth of one percent per month for each month in excess of 60 months that the officer or employee lacks in being 55 years of age. Provided, however, as to any officer or employee coming under the terms of this act who was in the employment of such city prior to the effective date of this amendment, such officer or employee may elect a monthly pension benefit, hereinafter referred to as a "reduced monthly pension benefit," provided such person shall have served 25 years and shall have attained the age of 50 years. Said reduced monthly pension benefit shall be equal to a normal monthly pension benefit less one-twelfth of three percent per month for each month the officer or employee lacks in being 55 years of age. 
(e)  (1) Whenever any officer or employee, electing to or having been required to come under the terms of this amendment, shall have completed at least five (5) years of active service with such city and not yet have reached the age of 60 years, then such person shall have the right to terminate such person's employment with such city upon completion of said five (5) years, or any time thereafter; elect not to withdraw or have paid to such person the amount which said person would have paid into the pension fund prior to terminating such employment; and upon subsequently attaining 60 years of age commence to receive at said time, and be paid thereafter a monthly pension benefit, hereinafter referred to as a "vested monthly pension benefit," as set forth below based upon the number of years of completed service: 
a.  Completion of 10 or more years of service—A normal monthly pension benefit (100% vested). 
b.  Completion of less than 10 years of service—The vesting schedule is as follows: 
Completion of 9 years = 45% Completion of 8 years = 40% Completion of 7 years = 35% 
Completion of 6 years = 30% 
Completion of 5 years = 25% 
Completion of less than 5 years = 0% 
Should such person have provided for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary, as authorized by said act, as amended, by making the required payments or contribution to the pension fund, then after terminating the employment with such city, thereby electing to exercise such person's vesting rights, and upon the death of such officer or employee, either before or after attaining 60 years of age, such beneficiary designated under the terms of this act, as amended, shall be entitled to a beneficiary pension equal to three-fourths (¾) of the amount the pensioner was receiving or such person would have received in accordance with the applicable provisions of this act, as amended. 
(2) Pension Benefits; No Simultaneous Payment of Benefits and Salary; No entitlement to Interest. 
a.  Whenever an officer or employee has been declared eligible for pension benefits, such pension benefits shall only commence the day following the last day of paid employment for such city. 
b.  In each and every instance where pension benefits shall become payable pursuant to this act, as amended, such payments shall be limited to the statutorily required amount as provided by this act, as amended, and shall be exclusive of interest or other amounts. (1981 Ga. Laws, page 3553, § 5) 
(f)  No department head who elects to come under the provisions of this act shall be entitled to receive any emeritus salary as provided by the governing authorities of any city coming within the provisions of this act. 
(g) (1) Any officer or employee who is a member of the pension fund shall be considered totally and permanently disabled by the board of trustees while the officer or employee is in a continuous state of incapacity due to illness or injury: 
a.  During the first months which the officer or employee is prevented from performing his/her regular assigned or comparable duties; and 
b.  Thereafter, if the condition continues to prevent the officer or employee from engaging in any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
(2) A member who is considered by the board of trustees to be totally and permanently disabled in accordance with subsection (g)(1)a. and b. on or after January 1, 1986, shall receive a monthly disability benefit which shall commence on the day following the officer's or employee's last date on the payroll and continue until the earlier of 
a.  Cessation of total and permanent disability; 
b.  Attainment of age 55. 
(3) Such monthly disability benefit shall be equal to 50 percent of the officer's or employee's average monthly earnings during the highest three (3) consecutive years of service prior to the date of approval by the board of trustees or the officer's or employee's accrued normal retirement benefit, whichever is greater. 
(4) Upon the cessation of disability benefits pursuant to subsection (g)(2)a. or b., and the officer's or employee's failure to return to city employment, the officer or employee would be entitled to a pension benefit as calculated in accordance with subsections b., c. or d. of 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508, as applicable. Provided further, that the calculation of any such subsequent benefit shall include credit for all years and fractions thereof during the time disability pension benefits have been paid, but shall not include credit for any disability pension payments made. Provided further, that for the purposes of calculating any cost-of-living adjustments, the subsequent benefits shall be considered as a new pension with a new effective date. 
(5) Disability pension benefits shall be offset by worker's compensation payments so that the combination of payments shall not exceed 75 percent of the officer's or employee's salary at the time disability pension benefits are to commence or 60 percent of an officer's or employee's salary at the time of disability or death in the case of a beneficiary. However, this subsection shall not affect any cost-of-living adjustments as provided in subsection (h), nor prevent the restoration of disability pension benefits payable upon the reduction or termination of any such compensation benefits payable by the city under applicable worker's compensation laws. 
(6)  a. Pensions for beneficiaries designated under the terms of this act, as amended, shall be three-fourths of the amount the pensioner was receiving, at the time of his death, as a result of retirement as a matter of right or because of total and permanent disability; or three-fourths of the amount such officer or employee would have been entitled to receive had such person retired prior to death. 
b.  The pension benefits for a primary beneficiary shall be continued to the secondary beneficiary, upon the death, or ineligibility for benefits, of the primary beneficiary. Provided, however, if such primary beneficiary was not receiving the maximum beneficiary payment provided for in this act because of any provision of this act reducing such amount, such maximum beneficiary amount shall be paid to the secondary beneficiary, notwithstanding any lesser amount previously paid to the primary beneficiary. 
c.  No spouse, designated as a beneficiary, shall be entitled to receive any of said service pension benefits unless such spouse shall have been legally married to such officer or employee of such city for a period of one (1) year prior to the death of such pensioner; provided the officer or employee has made payment for such benefits prior to retirement. No domestic partner, designated as a beneficiary, shall be entitled to receive any of said service pension benefits unless such domestic partner shall have been legally registered as a domestic partner for a period of one (1) year prior to the death of such pensioner; provided the officer or employee has made payment for such benefits prior to retirement. 
d.  In determining all pensions of officers or employees referred to above, fractional parts of years of service shall be counted and accumulated annual sick leave days credited to such officer or employee shall be counted as provided for in paragraph e. 
e.  In determining creditable service, accumulated, unused sick leave days credited to such officer or employee shall be added as work days to the creditable service otherwise provided by this act, as amended. In determining average monthly earnings, such accumulated unused sick leave days shall be credited at the highest daily rate of regular salary or earnings during the highest three (3) consecutive years' salary or earnings; and all accumulated unused sick leave days shall be substituted for a like number of days at the lowest rate of regular salary or earnings during such highest three (3) consecutive years' salary or earnings during the term of employment. 
f.  Any person entitled to disability benefits under the provisions of this act, as amended, may receive benefits after he/she has been in the active employment of the city for at least a period of five (5) years. Provided, however, said requirement shall not apply to an officer or employee disabled as a direct result of a traumatic event or events occurring during and as a result of the performance of an officer's or employee's regular or assigned duties and not the result of such officer's or employee's willful negligence. 
(7) Disability pensions; annual review. The retirement of a pension applicant by reason of permanent and total disability shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The board of trustees shall have the right to at least once a year require the pensioner to submit to a medical examination for the purpose of determining whether or not the pensioner has sufficiently recovered from his/her disability and is able to return to any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
b.  If the board, after such examination, determines that the pensioner is not actually totally and permanently disabled and is able to return to any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience, then the payment of such disability pension shall cease. (1981 Ga. Laws, page 3553, § 3; Ord. No. 1985-94, § 5, 12-19-85; Ord. No. 1987-30, § 1, 4-8-87; Ord. No. 1994-45, § 1, 9-25-94; Ord. No. 2006-14, § 1, 3-23-06) 
(h)  Any person coming under the provisions of this amendment, either voluntarily or by compulsion, shall be entitled to cost-of-living adjustments as hereinafter set forth. As used herein, the following terms shall have the following meaning: 
(1)  Current average cost-of-living index. The average of the monthly Consumer Price Index for the 12 month period from November 1 through October 31, prior to the annual adjustment date, as determined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor for all items and major groups, United States city average. 
(2)  Pensioner base index. The average of the Consumer Price Index for the 12 month period ending two (2) months prior to the date of retirement for any Participant who retires under the provisions of this amendment. In the event the base year used in computing the monthly Consumer Price Index should be changed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the board of trustees shall, with the advice of an independent actuary, adjust the pensioner base index of each retired pensioner and of each pensioner or beneficiary, with benefit payments commencing during the first year in which such change was made, so as to effect the original intent of this section in an equitable manner. 
(3)  Adjusted pensioner index. The pensioner base index, adjusted, on a cumulative basis, for all percentage adjustments made in benefits prior to the current annual adjustment date. The adjusted pensioner index and the pensioner base index shall be applicable to any beneficiary becoming entitled to benefits under this amendment in the same manner as they would have been applicable to the pensioner had such pensioner continued in life. 
(4)  Annual adjustment date. January 1 of each year. 
The board of trustees shall ascertain the current average cost-of-living index as of January 1 each year, and the benefits being paid under this amendment shall be adjusted as of the annual adjustment date as follows: If the current average cost-of-living index is more than 100 percent of the adjusted pensioner index, the benefit shall be increased by a percentage equal to the difference between 100 percent and the percentage representing the current average cost-of-living index divided by such person's adjusted pensioner index. If the current average cost-of-living index is less than 100 percent of the adjusted pensioner index, such person's basic benefit shall be reduced by a percentage equal to the difference between 100 percent and the percentage representing the current average cost-of-living index divided by his adjusted pensioner index. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, no increase or decrease in the amount of the monthly retirement benefit due to changes in the current average cost-of-living index, effective at any annual adjustment date, shall be in excess of three percent (3%) of the amount of the monthly retirement benefit payable immediately prior to such date. Neither shall the provisions of this subsection be applied so as to reduce the amount of the benefits of a pensioner or beneficiary to an amount less than that to which such pensioner or beneficiary would be entitled to receive under the other provisions of this amendment. 
(i)  There shall be deducted from the total salary of any officer or employee electing to come under this amendment the sum of seven percent (7%), in the event such person does not provide for payment of a pension to such person's beneficiary, as authorized by this act, as amended, or a sum to be actuarially determined pursuant to the most recent actuary study, sufficient to cover the cost of providing a continuing pension benefit to such person's beneficiary. Like deductions shall be made from the salary of future employees required to come under this amendment. 
(j)  (1) In addition to the payments required to be made in subsection (i) above, any officer or employee who becomes a participant under this amendment shall be entitled to all benefits and receive credit for all the years, or fraction thereof, of such person's creditable service, provided such person shall pay into the fund the sum of six percent (6%) of such person's total salary or earnings, received by such person during the years claimed for such creditable service, if such person does not provide for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary; and the sum of seven percent (7%) of such person's total salary or earnings, received during the years claimed for such creditable service, if such person does provide for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary. Payments previously made to the pension fund, not exceeding the amount due to the fund, shall be deducted from the total amount due in arriving at the total payment due, plus any additional sums as may be required by the following provisions for prior service credits. If any part of the creditable service consists of prior service, as defined by this act, as amended, which was allowed and credited prior to this amendment, the percentages of salary or earnings, used in computing the sum to be paid for such prior service credit shall be twice those set forth above, and shall constitute both the employee and employer contributions. Provided further that payment for any such creditable service rendered on or after April 1, 1978, shall be twice the payment due as computed above. 
Any officer or employee electing to come under the provisions of this amendment within six (6) months subsequent to the enactment of this amendment, shall have a period of 60 months from the date of such election in which to pay all back pension contributions, as provided in this subsection, without interest. Any officer or employee electing to come under the provisions of this amendment, subsequent to the expiration of six (6) months after the enactment of this amendment, shall have a period of 60 months from the date of such election in which to pay all back pension contributions, as provided in this subsection, and shall be required to pay interest on said back pension contributions at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum from October 1, 1978, to the date of such payment. The board of trustees is authorized to establish rules and regulations for extending the period in which back pension contributions may be paid provided that interest in the amount of seven percent (7%) per annum shall be added to any amounts not paid within the above specified time period. The board of trustees shall require as a prerequisite for the granting of such extension an assignment of life insurance in an amount sufficient to cover the outstanding obligation. 
(2) Employee Back Pension Contributions, Deductions From Benefits; Assignment of Group Life Insurance Proceeds. 
a.  In the event an officer or employee obligated to pay back pension contributions should retire or die before said payments into the fund are completed, the secretary of the retirement fund is authorized to deduct an appropriate amount, as determined by the board of trustees, from the monthly retirement or beneficiary benefits, or in lieu thereof, such lump sum amounts as the board, in its discretion, deems appropriate until the obligation is discharged. 
b.  In the event an officer or employee obligated to pay back pension contributions should retire before said payments into the fund are completed, the board of trustees shall require, in consideration of the payment of such indebtedness, an assignment of such officer's or employee's group life insurance in an amount sufficient to satisfy the outstanding obligation. (1981 Ga. Laws, page 3553, § 4) 
(k)  (1) Any officer or employee coming under the provisions of the amendment shall be entitled to all of the forms and types of prior service authorized under the Act approved August 20, 1927 (1927 Ga. Laws, page 265 et seq.) as amended, prior to this amendment. Provided, however, contributions for any such prior service shall be based on the salary or wages then being earned by such officer or employee as and when such person becomes eligible for such prior service and such is credited. 
To be eligible for such prior service credit the officer or employee must have completed at least five (5) continuous years in the employment of the city, and must have filed, five (5) years prior thereto, an application with the board of trustees for such prior service credit. Thereafter prior service credit may be granted to such person eligible and continuing in the service of such city on a pay period basis (one (1) year of prior service credit, not to exceed a maximum of 10 years, for each year such person continues in the service of such city) upon the payment of contributions by such person for such prior service credit based on the wages or salary earned by such person at the time of such prior service being credited. 
The contributions to be paid by such officer or employee, herein referred to, shall be at the rates set forth in subsection (i) above, plus the rates of the employer's contribution set forth in subsection (m). 
(2) Credit For Previous City Service, Contributions, Payment. Any officer or employee claiming previous service credit for previous employment as a regular, temporary, or part-time employee of the city may be eligible for previous service credit immediately upon filing application for same, and upon payment of the contribution in accordance with the provisions set forth in subsection (I) of the 1978 Pension Act Amendment (1978 Ga. Laws, pages 4508, 4516) [subsection (j) of this section]; provided, however, the penalty provision of said subsection (I) shall be applicable only to such officers or employees who failed to elect enrollment under said 1978 Pension Act Amendment prior to October 1, 1978, and who terminated employment subsequent to April 1, 1978. The total amount of such required contributions shall be increased by a sum equal to the amount previously paid into the pension fund by a regular officer or employee and withdrawn upon termination of employment, multiplied by an interest factor of seven percent (7%) per annum compounded from the date of termination to the date of filing of the application. The total amount of such required contributions, less a sum equal to the amount previously paid into the pension fund by a regular officer or employee and withdrawn upon termination of employment, shall be increased by an amount equal to such required contributions, less the said amount withdrawn multiplied by an interest factor of seven percent (7%) per annum compounded from the date of termination or October 1, 1978, whichever is later to the date of application. The total amount of such required contribution shall be decreased by the amount previously paid into the pension fund by a regular officer or employee and not withdrawn upon termination of employment plus an amount equal to seven percent (7%) per annum compounded of such amount not withdrawn from the date of termination to the date of filing of the application. As to credit for part-time or temporary service with the city, such previous service credit shall be on the basis of one (1) day for each day worked by such person as a temporary employee or on a part-time basis; except that the required contribution shall be based upon the gross salary of such person at the time of filing of the application for previous service credit. The payment of the contributions of previous service credit for previous employment as a regular, temporary, or part-time employee of the city may be paid upon the filing of the application for such credit; or such officer or employee shall have a period of sixty (60) months from the date of filing the application in which to pay such contributions; provided, however, the total amount of such contribution shall bear interest at seven percent (7%) per annum on the unpaid balance. 
The board of trustees is authorized to establish rules and regulations for extending the period in which back pension contributions may be paid provided that interest in the amount of seven percent (7%) per annum shall be added to any amounts not paid within the above specified period. The board of trustees shall require as a prerequisite for the granting of such extension an assignment of life insurance in an amount sufficient to cover the outstanding obligation. 
(l)  This section and the several subsections shall be effective as of April 1, 1978, except for the provisions of subsection (m) which shall be effective as of January 1, 1979. Payments required by subsection (i) above, as to those persons then employed and electing to come under this amendment, shall commence on April 1, 1978. As to such persons subsequently coming into the service of such city or subsequently electing to participate under the terms of this amendment, said payments shall begin with the date of employment or date of such election. 
(m)  (1)  In addition to the funds derived from deductions from salaries and wages, as required by subsection (i) of this amendment, it shall be the duty of the governing authority of such cities to appropriate and pay into the pension fund each year an amount which shall be equal to the actuarially determined percentage of members' salary and wages necessary to pay the normal cost contribution of benefits earned by members and to amortize the unfunded accrued liability of the pension fund on a closed 30-year schedule commencing July 1, 2011, after deducting contributions required of officers and employees required by subsection (i) of this amendment. 
For purposes of paying the required employer contributions provided above, the governing authority of such cities shall be authorized to levy ad valorem taxes payable to the pension fund sufficient to amortize the unfunded accrued liability under provisions of this amendment within a closed schedule of thirty (30) years commencing July 1, 2011, and upon the determination by an independent actuarial valuation as provided in subsection (n) below that such unfunded accrued liability has been amortized, such authorization to levy such ad valorem taxes shall cease. Should said pension fund at any time be insufficient to meet and pay the pension due to such officers and employees, the governing authority shall appropriate from current funds amounts sufficient to make up the deficiency as it relates to the respective officers and employees and deposit same into said pension fund. Should such actuarial valuation as provided in subsection (n) below result in a determination that the total required employer contribution would be less than the contribution required of members by subsection (i) of this amendment, then the contributions required of members by subsection (i) of this amendment shall be reduced and the required employer contributions in this subsection shall be increased so that the member contributions required by subsection (i) will not be greater than the required employer contributions under this subsection. 
(2)  Every three (3) years and prior to submitting the annual fiscal budget for that third year, the Chief Financial Officer for the City of Atlanta shall review and prepare for the chair of the finance executive committee and the boards of trustees a report on the effect the amortization schedule has upon the actuarial accrued liability for the pension funds. 
(n)  When any person covered by the provisions of this Act shall die as a result of injuries incurred in the line of duty, the compensation to which such person would have been entitled had such person continued in active service shall be continued for two years by such city and paid to the primary beneficiary designated by such officer or employee. Any compensation received by the member due to said injury shall be deducted from the two-years' compensation herein provided for. At the expiration of the two-year period referred to above, the pension benefits due the beneficiary shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of this amendment. The pension benefits for a primary beneficiary shall be continued to the secondary beneficiaries upon the death or ineligibility of the primary beneficiary. 
The city employing any officer or employee coming under the provisions of this Act shall immediately notify the board of trustees upon the occurrence of the disability or death of any such officer or employee, and the board of trustees shall conduct an investigation within ninety (90) days of the date of the event which caused such disability or death. 
Thereafter, the board of trustees shall make a determination as to whether such disability or death was incurred in line of duty or not in line of duty. Should such city, or any person having an interest in said decision, disagree with such decision of the board then either such city or such person may appeal from such decision as provided by law. 
It shall also be the duty and responsibility of the board of trustees to employ an independent actuary to render an actuarial review of the pension fund at periodic intervals of not more than five (5) years, commencing with the enactment of this amendment. The term "independent actuary" as used herein means a fellow of the Society of Actuaries, or a member of the American Academy of Actuaries, or an organization of which one or more members is a fellow of the Society of Actuaries or a member of the American Academy of Actuaries, or both. 
(o)  The board of trustees is authorized to invest funds accumulated under this Act in any manner permitted by the Public Retirement Systems Investment Authority Law, Ga. Stat. Ann. section 47-20-80, et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1992-45, § 2, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 1994-13, § 6, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 1996-37, § 2, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 2005-81, § 3, 11-22-05; Ord. No. 2009-27(09-O-0776), § 3, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2011-15(11-O-0674), § 3, 5-9-11) 
(p)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this act, as amended, regarding the rights of officers or employees to designate beneficiaries of their pension benefits after their death, every male or female officer, coming under the provisions of this amendment, either voluntarily or by compulsion, having a spouse or unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under the age of 18 years or domestic partner shall be compelled to make the necessary additional contributions in order to provide continued pension benefits for such spouse or unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) or domestic partner under the age of 18 years, and designated as beneficiaries. 
Nothing herein provided shall prevent an officer or employee from designating a primary beneficiary (spouse or unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under 18 years of age) or domestic partner and a secondary beneficiary (either spouse or unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under 18 years of age or domestic partner and not named as primary beneficiary). If an officer or employee designates a beneficiary, and thereafter such beneficiary should cease to be qualified to receive a pension in the event of the member's death, then such officer or employee may at his or her option, designate some other beneficiary who does qualify for pension benefits under this amendment, and continue to make contributions for such beneficiaries, or should no qualified beneficiary exist, cease to make further contributions for beneficiaries, in which event contributions theretofore made for the benefit of a beneficiary shall not be refunded except insofar as refunds may be allowed by other provisions of this act, as amended. 
Should any officer or employee become eligible for a service pension and thereafter remain in the service of such city, then upon the death of such person, without having retired, the spouse or domestic partner of such person may apply for a beneficiary pension as provided for in this amendment, which shall continue for the life of such spouse or domestic partner. In the event of the death or disqualification of a spouse or domestic partner to receive such beneficiary pension, then the unmarried child or children (natural or legally adopted) under the age of 18 years shall succeed to the rights of such deceased or disqualified spouse or domestic partner, as above provided, and such beneficiary pension shall be continued to such child or children until the youngest living child shall reach the age of 18 years, die, or marry, whichever event should first occur. No child (natural or legally adopted) of such officer or employee shall be entitled to receive any benefits unless such child is less than 18 years of age and unmarried or unless such child is less than 23 years of age and enrolled as a full-time student at an accredited secondary school, college or university, and unmarried. 
Any officer or employee coming under the provisions of this amendment either voluntarily or by compulsion, who, at such time, has no qualified beneficiary, either spouse or unmarried child or children under 18 years of age or domestic partner, shall not be required to make the contributions necessary to provide for the continuation of pension benefits to a beneficiary. Provided, however, upon the occurrence of the event by which such officer or employee acquires a qualified beneficiary, then such officer or employee shall immediately commence making required contributions to provide benefits for such beneficiary and shall within a period of two (2) years thereafter, in addition to current requirements, pay into the pension fund one percent (1%) of his total salary or earnings for all creditable service prior to the occurrence of such event. 
Any officer or employee, electing to come under the provisions of this act, who prior thereto had a qualified beneficiary but who had not made the contributions to provide for the payment of continued pension benefits to such beneficiary, shall be required to pay to the pension fund the amount of such beneficiary contributions for the number of years of service with such city and during which such officer or employee had a qualified beneficiary, such payments to be at the rates and in the manner as set forth in subsection (j) hereof. 
In the event that a member dies after retirement, either before or after receiving retirement payments, the named beneficiary, or the member's estate in the absence of a named beneficiary, shall receive a refund in an amount equal to the amount such member paid into said pension fund less the total amount received by such member or beneficiaries in retirement benefits. (Ord. No. 1985-94, § 6, 12-19-85; Ord. No. 2006-14, § 2, 3-23-06) 
(q)  The board of trustees may pool any amount of the funds administered by them with the funds of any other pension or retirement fund for other employees of such city for the purpose of joint investments. When such pooling occurs, the pooled trust funds shall be accounted for in accordance with generally accepted principles of accounting in order to maintain the separate accountability of such pension funds. The board of trustees may employ an independent investment counselor who shall advise them on the best and most appropriate portfolio of investments. 
(r)  Should an officer or employee in the employment of such cities transfer from a position of employment covered by another pension fund to a position of employment covered by this pension fund, the accumulated employee and employer contributions of such officer or employee paid to such other pension fund shall be transferred to this pension fund and such officer or employee shall be credited with all creditable service certified in such other pension fund as though such service had been rendered under this pension fund, provided, however, that should such officer or employee retire as a matter of right within three (3) years subsequent to the date of such transfer, the service retirement benefits payable to such officer or employee shall be the lesser of the service retirement payable under the provisions of this act, as amended, or the provisions of the pension fund from which such officer or employee transferred. 
(s)  Any employee participating in the provisions of the act approved August 13, 1924 (1924 Ga. Laws, page 167 et seq.) [this section], or of the several acts amendatory thereof, who leaves the employ of such municipality prior to retirement shall be entitled to a refund of all monies paid into such fund by said employee; provided, however, that such refunds shall be subject to withholding or deduction for any debts owed or amounts due to such municipality by such ex-employee. 
(t)  The terms of this amendment to said act shall apply to any member who meets the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Any officer who has received an in-line-of-duty disability pension from the firefighters pension fund prior to November 13, 1987; and 
(2)  Thereafter has been reemployed by the city in the fire department. 
(3)  Any such employee meeting the aforementioned conditions shall make application for such credit within 90 days of the enactment of this amendment or within 90 days of their return to work, whichever is later. 
(4)  Such employee may receive credit toward retirement for the years they received an in-line-of-duty disability pension. 
(5)  The maximum credit to be received under this amendment at the time of retirement is limited to the number of years an employee works after being reemployed. (Ord. No. 1993-41, § 2, 9-7-93) 
(u)  Subject to approval by the United States Internal Revenue Service in accordance with IRC section 414(h), employee contributions shall be treated as employer contributions in determining tax treatment effective with the following payroll periods in 1994: 

 
Such contributions shall not be included as gross income of the employee for tax purposes until such time as they are distributed or made available. The City of Atlanta shall reduce the compensation payable to a member in an amount of the contributions made on behalf of the employee. 
(v)  Any officer or employee who retires pursuant to this section between August 15, 1994, and September 30, 1994, and whose age and creditable service before credit for accrued unused sick leave equals at least 75 years, shall be entitled to a monthly pension benefit upon retirement without any reduction for any age or vesting penalties as would otherwise be applicable. Provided further that such officer or employee shall receive a benefit calculated by adding three (3) years to their service. 
Entitlements specified under subsection (v), above, shall be accorded to those officers and employees not covered by the aforesaid 1978 pension amendment, under applicable provisions of amendments to said law adopted prior to the 1978 amendment. 
(w)  Any officer or employee whose age and creditable service before credit for accrued unused sick leave equals at least 73 years as of March 31, 1998, shall be entitled to a monthly pension benefit upon retirement without any reduction for any age or vesting penalties as would otherwise be applicable. 
All officers and employees eligible to retire pursuant to this section must make written application to the pension office between February 13, 1998 and March 31, 1998. 
(x)  Any officer or employee who was eligible to elect coverage under the pension laws as amended by Ordinance No. 1985-94 and who failed to make such election may do so by making written application on forms provided by the pension office within 60 days of the effective date of this subsection. 
(y)  [Catastrophic injury.] 
1.  Georgia Laws 1924, p.167, particularly as amended by Georgia Laws 1978, p. 4508 (and as has been further amended) and codified at section 6-367, Related Laws Section of Volume I, City Charter and Code (Firefighters Pension Fund) is hereby amended by providing that any City of Atlanta firefighter who receives a catastrophic injury in the line of duty, will receive 100% of the top salary for the grade and position that he/she occupied at the time of his/her injury. 
2.  The determination of whether a disability is catastrophic shall be in the sole discretion of the board by a preponderance of the evidence and as supported by official medical records, qualified medical expert opinions, sworn testimony and/or other such reliable source accepted by the board in its discretion. For the purposes of this Code Section, a catastrophic injury is a sudden, violent, life-threatening injury sustained by a member who is or was employed as a sworn employee by the City at the time of the injury, which injury is due to an externally-caused event or events, as supported by evidence, including, but not specifically limited to, one of the conditions described below: (1) loss of sight in one or both eyes; (2) loss of one or both feet at or above the ankle; (3) loss of one or both hands at or above the wrist; (4) an injury to the spine that results in permanent and complete paralysis of both arms, both legs, or one arm and one leg, or; (5) an externally caused traumatic physical injury to the brain or-skull that renders one physically or mentally unable to perform two or more Activities of Daily Living (feeding oneself, dressing, continence, bathing, toileting and transferring, i.e. getting in and out of bed), driving a motor vehicle, etc. or catastrophically disabled includes a permanent severely disabling injury or disorder that compromises the ability to carry out the activities of daily living to such a degree that the individual requires personal or mechanical assistance to leave home or bed or requires constant supervision to avoid physical harm to self or others. 
3.  This ordinance shall be retroactive and those persons who have received catastrophic injuries in the line of duty, while employed as City of Atlanta officer or employee, shall be eligible for review and adjustment of their pension in accordance with this section. 
4.  The Chief Financial Officer of the City of Atlanta shall identify any and all funding required to implement this ordinance. 
5.  As expressed and referenced in Resolution 01-R-1940, Adopted on November 19, 2001, it is the intent of the City Council to increase the monthly benefit of Firefighters as it relates to catastrophic injury, to provide that the eligibility for said increased monthly pension benefit shall be retroactive, but that the payment of said benefit shall be prospective from the effective date of the passage of an ordinance providing for such benefit, and also as referenced in Ordinance 01-O-0976, Adopted on September 17, 2001 where the definition of catastrophic injury is contained. 
(z)  Any officer or employee who is a member of the Firefighters Employee Pension Fund, and whose creditable service before credit for accrued unused sick leave equals at least 30 years shall be entitled to a monthly pension benefit upon retirement without any reduction for any age or vesting penalties as would otherwise be applicable. 
(aa)  (1)  Defined terms: 
An "eligible roll-over plan participant" is any former Fulton County Firefighter rehired as a full-time firefighter by the City of Atlanta after June 1, 2007. 
Prior eligible rollover employment is any employment as a full-time firefighter with Fulton County, Georgia prior to June 1, 2007. 
(as defined in paragraph (2) below) may elect to have part or all of his "prior eligible employment" (as defined in paragraph (2) below) considered as creditable service under this plan in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (3) below. If such a participant becomes entitled to "prior eligible employment" by making the payment described in paragraph (4) below, then his "prior eligible employment" will count as creditable service for all purposes under the plan as if such employment had been served with the City of Atlanta. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, an "eligible plan rollover participant" may elect to have part or all of his "prior eligible rollover employment" considered as creditable service under this plan in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (3). Credit for "prior eligible rollover employment" may be obtained through the purchase procedures contained in paragraph (3). 
(3)  In order for an eligible plan participant to receive credit under this plan for part or all of his prior eligible employment, such participant must make an irrevocable "prior service contribution" to this plan in addition to any other contributions required from participating employees. The amount of the "prior service contribution" will be determined by the plan's enrolled actuary as the actuarial present value of the additional benefit that is expected to accrue to the participant solely due to his "prior eligible employment." In making such a determination, the actuary will use the same actuarial assumptions and methods that are used to determine the minimum required contribution due from the City for the 2007 plan year pursuant to Georgia Code section 47-20-10 and, furthermore, the determination will be made such that the City of Atlanta is not expected on an actuarial basis to be required to make any increased contributions due to the granting of such prior eligible employment to any participant. A participant electing to receive credit for part or all of his prior eligible employment must make the prior service contribution in the manner described in paragraph (4) below. 
(4)  A participant must make his prior service contribution in one of the following methods: 
(a)  As a single lump sum payment from the participant's funds; 
(b)  As a single lump sum paid directly from another pension fund that is qualified under Internal Revenue Code (IRC) section 401(a) or 457; 
1.  Whenever the amount transferred from another qualified pension fund exceeds the cost of the prior service credit, the excess increment will be rolled over into an individual retirement account (IRA). 
(c)  As a series of level-dollar payments spread over a period of up to five years, where the amount of such payments are determined based on an amortization of the single lump sum payment otherwise required using an interest rate of 8.00% per annum; 
(d)  As a series of level-dollar payroll deductions spread over a period of up to five years where the amount of such payroll deductions are determined based on an amortization of the single lump sum payment otherwise required using an interest rate of 8.00% per annum; or 
(e)  In any combination of the methods described in (a) through (d) above. 
(5)  A participant who terminates his employment with the City of Atlanta for any reason and who has not effected full payment for his prior eligible employment as set forth in paragraph (4) above will only receive creditable service for such employment in proportion to the payments actually made as determined by the plan's actuary using the actuarial methods and assumptions described in paragraph (3) above. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3620, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3618, §§ 1, 2; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3633, § 1; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3692, §§ 1, 2; 1981 Ga. Laws, page 3553, § 6; Ord. No. 1985-49, § 2, 8-9-85; Ord. No. 1994-11, § 2, 3-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-37, § 2, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1994-45, § 1, 9-25-94; Ord. No. 1998-2, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 1998-5, § 2, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-2, § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2005-28, §§ 1—5, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 2005-52, § 1, 9-12-05; Ord. No. 2005-53, § 3, 9-12-05; Ord. No. 2005-55, § 2, 9-12-05; Ord. No. 2005-81, § 3, 11-22-05; Ord. No. 2006-63, § 1, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2007-78(07-O-2148), § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2010-41(10-O-0907), §§ 1, 2, 6-29-10) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-368. - Consent by applicant to participate in system. 
The receipt of an applicant's executed enrollment or application card by the commissioner of finance or his agent shall constitute the irrevocable consent of the applicant to participate under the provisions of this act, as amended, or as may hereinafter be amended. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, page 3204, § 1) 
Sec. 6-369. - Refunds regulated. 
Except upon the separation of employment other than retirement or death of an employee, or in the case of bookkeeping, clerical or data processing errors, the refund of pension contributions paid by an employee shall be prohibited. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, page 3204, § 2) 
Sec. 6-370. - Tax on salaries of firemen. 
(a)  Beginning April 1, 1945, three percent shall be deducted from the salaries and wages of all members of said fire department up to a maximum of $200.00 per month or a total deduction of $6.00 per month. Where a member has either a wife or a minor child or children, which children are under the age of 16 years, it shall be mandatory that he designate such wife or child or children as his beneficiaries and in such case, there shall be deducted from the member having the beneficiary, the sum of four per centum from his monthly salary or wage up to a maximum of $200.00 or a total of $8.00 per month deduction, as and when paid. If, at the time of the effective date of this Act, a member does not have anyone who is eligible to be named as beneficiary, but later does have a person who is eligible to be a beneficiary, he shall designate such beneficiary and shall pay into said pension fund an additional one percent upon his salary up to a maximum of $200.00 or not more than $2.00 per month from April 1, 1945. 
(b)  No spouse, designated as beneficiary, shall be entitled to receive any of said service pension benefits unless such spouse shall have been legally married to such officer or employee of such city for a period of one (1) year prior to retirement of such pensioner, or for one (1) year prior to the death of an officer or employee who was entitled to retire but failed to do so, as provided by the terms of this act. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 9; 1935 Ga. Laws, page 450, § 5; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1080, § 6; 1946 Ga. Laws, page 136, § 2; 1976 Ga. Laws, page 3050, § 1) 
Editor's note— Except for the last sentence (derived from 1976 Ga. Laws, page 3050, § 1), the provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-371. - Tax on fire and lightning insurance companies. 
A tax of not less than one and one-fourth per centum (1-¼%) shall be levied against the premiums of all fire and lightning insurance companies or associations or property situated within the corporate limits of such cities, to be collected from and after the passage of this act. The tax provided in this section shall go to the aid, relief and pension funds provided in this act. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 10; 1925 Ga. Laws, page 194, § 1; 1931 Ga. Laws, page 223, § 5; 1935 Ga. Laws, page 450, § 6; 1968 Ga. Laws, page 3706, § 2) 
Sec. 6-372. - Maintenance of fund. 
The city treasurer, or other person performing the duties of such, shall keep separate and apart from other monies in his possession the funds raised under the provisions of sections 6-370 and 6-371 and all other funds, which may be received by him in connection with the provisions of this act, as amended. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 11; 1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2705, § 2) 
Editor's note— The 1953 amendment purports to amend section 12 of the 1924 act but in fact amends section 11. 
Sec. 6-373. - Appropriations by city, when fund is insufficient. 
Should said fund at any time be insufficient to meet and pay the pensions due to such members, such governing authorities shall appropriate from current funds other than funds derived from ad valorem taxation sufficient amounts to make up the deficiency as it relates to such members. 
(1961 Ga. Laws, page 3373, § 2; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 3356, § 4) 
Sec. 6-374. - Compulsory participation. 
All regular members of the fire department of such cities, elected or employed after the effective date of this act, shall be required to come under the provisions of this act, as amended by the preceding section, and shall have all the rights and duties provided in this act, as now amended. 
(1955 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2051, § 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-375. - Right of retirement; computation of service. 
Any member of such fire department who is in active service at the time of the passage of this act and whose name is on the payroll, and future members, may as a matter of right, retire from active service, provided he shall have served 25 years in active service at the time of his retirement. The time of service shall be determined from the payroll records in the office of the city comptroller. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 2; 1947 Ga. Laws, page 717, § 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-376. - Credit for prior service; terms, conditions. 
Any person qualified for pension benefits under this act, as amended, who was employed by the State of Georgia or a political subdivision thereof, prior to his employment by such city, to render service within the county in which such city is located in whole or in part, may receive credit for such service for pension benefits under this act, as amended, upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  No credit may be given for part-time or temporary service. 
(2)  Such person must have at least five (5) years' continuous service with the city, before becoming eligible for this credit. 
(3)  Application must be made for the credit within six (6) months after the passage of this act or after becoming eligible for the credit, whichever is later. 
(4)  Such person shall pay into the pension fund created by this act, as amended, an amount equal to the amount he would have paid into such fund had he been an employee of such city during such time. The payments may be divided into 36 equal installments bearing interest at four percent (4%) per annum, and the amounts thereof deducted from any compensation of pension benefits due such person. 
(5)  It shall be the responsibility of the person making application for such credit to furnish to the board of trustees proof of the years of service and the monthly rate of compensation in such manner as the board may by rules prescribe. 
(6)  The total amount of creditable service as provided in this act shall not exceed 10 years. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 2854, § 5) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. Section 7 of the 1957 act provides that it is to be liberally construed. 
Sec. 6-377. - Status of member not desiring to retire after becoming eligible. 
In case a member has served 25 years, does not desire to retire, and the board of trustees deem such member incapable of further service in the department, the same proceeding shall be had as that to determine the condition of a disabled fireman as set forth in section 6-469 hereof. The decision shall be final. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 14) 
Sec. 6-378. - Eligibility to retire of firemen employed on or after April 1, 1945. 
Effective April 1, 1945, any person employed on or after that date must attain the age of 55 years and have served 25 years before being eligible to retire on a pension, provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person on the payroll as of March 31, 1945, nor any person claiming a pension by reason of permanent disability. 
(1945 Ga. Laws, page 1080, § 4) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-379. - Rights of employees transferring from one department to another; application of provisions. 
Whenever any officer or employee of the city is transferred from one department to another, he shall be entitled to become a member of the pension fund of the department to which he has been transferred and to receive credit for the years of service in the department from which he has been transferred by paying into the pension fund of the department to which he is transferred the amount of premiums he would have paid into said fund if he had been a member of said department for the number of years he claims credit for service in the other department. Such transferred employee shall have the right to have transferred from the pension fund the amount he had paid into such fund. The rights given in this act shall be effective as to the officers and employees who have transferred prior to this act, as well as future transferees. This act shall apply to all the pension funds of the city, namely, the policemen's[officer's] pension fund, the firefighter's pension fund and the general employees' pension fund. 
(1947 Ga. Laws, page 717, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-41, § 5, 9-7-93) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-380. - Rights of county firemen transferring to city. 
Whenever a member of any fire department in any county in which such a city is located is transferred to such city from such county, he shall have all the rights, privileges and benefits of any member of such fire department set forth in this act as amended upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  There shall be paid into the pension fund of any such city an amount equal to the amount paid into the county pension fund by such county employee and an equal amount to represent the fund required to be paid into such county pension fund by the county authorities. 
(2)  Such transferred officer or employee shall thereupon receive the same credit for service that the employee would have received under the pension plan applicable to such employee at the time of transfer from the county to the city, it being the purpose of this provision to grant to all such transferred employees full credit for the years of service in the county towards accumulating time required to be made in order for such employee to retire as a matter of right under the county pension law. 
(3)  Such transferred employee shall have all other rights, privileges and benefits provided in this article, and shall be required to contribute to the pension fund the same amounts required of other members of the fire departments of such cities. 
(1951 Ga. Laws, page 529, § 1; 1952 Ga. Laws, page 2566, § 1; 1962 Ga. Laws, page 3194, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. Paragraphs have been renumbered after repeal of former paragraph (2). 
Sec. 6-381. - Service in the armed forces—Scope of provisions. 
The terms of this amendment to said act shall apply to any member of any fire department or any such city who has been or shall be inducted into the armed forces of the United States, either voluntarily or involuntarily, or under the Selective Service and Training Act, or otherwise, on the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Such member must have been or must be on the payrolls of such department and in good standing at the time of such induction; 
(2)  He shall not voluntarily extend his term of service beyond the termination of the present conflict; 
(3)  He shall return to service in such fire department promptly upon his honorable discharge from the armed forces; 
(4)  Dishonorable discharge from such armed forces shall terminate all rights under said acts as amended, whether said rights arise under this amendment or any other part of said act as amended. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 560, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. To the extent the above provisions are in conflict with 1953 Ga. Laws, page 2251, section 1, codified as section 6-382, the provisions hereof are superseded. 
Sec. 6-382. - Same—Terms, conditions of service. 
Service in the armed forces of the United States, under the Department of Defense, or service in the Coast Guard of the United States, shall, for the purpose of service pension rights established by this Act, be considered service to any such city, upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Such officer or employee must have been inducted into such armed forces, either voluntarily or involuntarily, under any Act applicable thereto, when there is at the time of such induction an actual conflict or such induction is mandatory under the applicable law; 
(2)  Such officer or employee must have been on the payrolls of any such city and in good standing at the time of such induction; 
(3)  Such officer or employee shall not voluntarily extend his term of service beyond the termination of the conflict or beyond the time when he could retire from such service; 
(4)  Such officer or employee shall make application for reemployment to his former position within the time required by the charter of any such city for the reemployment of such officers or employees; 
(5)  Dishonorable discharge from such armed forces shall terminate all rights under this amendment; 
(6)  Such officer or employee, upon his return to the service of such city from service in the armed forces, shall make the same contributions to the said pension fund for the time served in the armed forces as he would have made if he had been in active service of the city, but shall be permitted to make such contributions in equal monthly installments within a period of time equal to the time served in such armed forces; and 
(7)  In the event such officer or employee dies while performing "qualified military service" as defined in U.S. Internal Revenue Code Section 414(u), on or after January 1, 2007, such officer or employee shall be considered to have been rehired on the day prior to the date of death, and the survivors of such officer or employee shall be entitled to any additional benefits required to be paid pursuant to U.S. Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(37). 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2251, § 1; Ord. No. 2015-04(14-O-1631), § 1, 2-26-15 ) 
Sec. 6-383. - Same—Officers and employees serving in Korean conflict or subsequent thereto. 
Any officer or employee who was inducted into service in the armed forces of the United States under the Department of Defense, or service in the Coast Guard of the United States either during the Korean conflict or subsequent thereto, or shall have served in the Navy in connection with such service, shall be given full credit for the time served in such service as though he were actually employed during that time by the city and shall not be required to make any contributions to the pension fund for such period of service provided such employee meets the conditions set forth in section 1 of the amendment to this act approved February 16, 1953, (1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Session, page 2269 et seq.), except he shall not be required to make contributions as provided in subsection (f) thereof. 
(1956 Ga. Laws, page 3097, § 1; 1958 Ga. Laws, page 3015, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-384. - Same—Method of receiving credit for military leave. 
All members of the fire department who are on approved military leave from active service and employment may receive credit towards retirement by making the same contribution to the said pension fund as they would have made if they had been on active employment service where a leave of absence from active employment service had been granted to one on military leave. Said contribution shall be paid within 36 months after reassignment to active duty. No credit will be allowed to any member who voluntarily reenlists in the military service after the end of his said leave for the period of reenlistment unless he be granted an additional military leave by the proper authority. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 136, § 3) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-385. - Spendthrift provisions. 
None of the funds herein mentioned shall be subject to attachment, garnishment, judgment; nor shall they be assignable; but shall be paid in cash to the beneficiary if so requested by him or her. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 17) 
Sec. 6-386. - Reemployment of pensioners. 
(a)  Any officer or employee of the fire departments of such cities who has applied for and been granted a service pension shall be eligible for reemployment or reappointment to any position in the government of such cities, provided such person has not reached the age of 70 years, such reemployment in any position to terminate the end of the year in which such person reaches age 70. Such reemployment shall be made under the provisions relating to reemployment of former employees as now provided by law or ordinance, except that such reemployed person shall not acquire any civil service rights or any further pension rights during such period of reemployment, shall not be paid a pension during such period, and shall not be required to make any contribution to the pension fund during such period of reemployment. The payment of his pension shall be resumed as of the date of termination of such period of reemployment. No such reemployment shall be effective until the person to be reemployed under the provisions of this section shall execute and deliver to the comptroller of any such cities a contract agreeing to the conditions hereof. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent any retired officer or employee of the fire departments of such cities from holding any position which is filled by an election by the people. No additional pension or civil service rights or privileges shall accrue to such officer or employee during such period. 
(c)  The provisions of this act as amended shall not in any way affect or restrict the rights, powers and privileges of an emeritus officer of such cities who now or shall hereafter hold an emeritus office pursuant to the provisions of any law or ordinance establishing same. 
(d)  Whenever by contract with a city or one (1) of its agencies, boards or commissions, a retired person, regardless of age and as an independent contractor, agrees to perform a special or particular service, as may be now or hereafter allowed by law or ordinance, then such person, during the term of such contract which shall not exceed one (1) calendar year, shall be entitled to continue to receive his or her regular pension payments, but shall not acquire any civil service rights or any further pension rights, and shall not be required to make any contribution to the pension fund; provided, however, no such contract shall be effective until a fully executed copy of such contract, in which such retired person agrees to the conditions hereof, has been delivered by such person to the secretary of the board of trustees of the pension fund. 
(1961 Ga. Laws, page 2777, §§ 1—3; 1969 Ga. Laws, page 3393, § 1; 1970 Ga. Laws, page 2351, § 1) 
Sec. 6-387. - Effect on workers' compensation laws. 
Except as provided in section 6-367(g), this Act shall not affect nor be affected by any workers' compensation law, or other similar laws. Further, no decisions of the state board of workers' compensation shall be entered as evidence with a pension application before the board of trustees of said pension fund, nor shall said board consider any evidence pertaining to the applicant's previously determined entitlement to workers' compensation in any hearing upon a pension application. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 21; 1982 Ga. Laws, page 4385, § 6) 
Sec. 6-388. - Prior pension laws preserved. 
This act shall not repeal nor in any wise affect any benefit or pension now being paid to those who were receiving the same prior to the passage of this act. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 19) 
Sec. 6-389. - Computations of time; fractional parts of years to be counted. 
Whenever this law, or any amendment of this law, requires a computation, for any purpose, of the years of creditable service of any active or retiring member, fractional parts of years of service shall be counted. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167 et seq.; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 320) 
Sec. 6-390. - Overtime pay excluded from calculation of benefits. 
Insofar as this article appertains to employees and officers of the City of Atlanta, the terms "average monthly earnings," "total salary or earnings" and "total salary," exclude overtime pay, salary or compensation from the calculation of pension benefits and employee contributions to the pension fund. Overtime pay, salary or compensation as used herein shall mean any pay, salary or compensation received for services rendered beyond regularly fixed working hours. This section shall apply to the average monthly earnings and total salary or earnings received on and after the first pay period of 1986 for all officers and employees of the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 1985-71, § 3, 11-12-85) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-391. - Distribution requirements. 
(a)  The requirements of this section shall apply to the distribution of all benefits under this Act, 1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, as amended, and will take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of this Act. 
(b)  All distributions required under this section will be determined and made in accordance with section 401(a)(9) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the `Code'), including the incidental death benefit requirements of Code section 401(a)(9)(G), and the regulations thereunder. 
(c)  The entire benefit of an officer or employee under this Act will be distributed beginning not later than his required beginning date over the life of such officer or employee or, if applicable, over the lives of such officer or employee and a designated beneficiary. `Required beginning date' shall mean April 1 of the calendar year following the later of (1) the calendar year in which the officer or employee attains age 70½ or (2) the calendar year in which the officer or employee terminates employment. 
(d)  If the distribution of a benefit has begun in accordance with subsection (c) above and the officer or employee dies before his entire benefit has been distributed to him, the remaining portion of such benefit will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used as of the date of his death. 
(e)  If an officer or employee dies before the distribution of his benefit has begun in accordance with subsection (c) above, his interest will be distributed to his designated beneficiary (as defined in Code section 401(a)(9)(E)) over a period not extending beyond the life or life expectancy of such beneficiary, beginning not later than December 31 of the calendar year following the calendar year of the officer's or employee's death. If such benefit is payable to (or for the benefit of) his or her surviving spouse or domestic partner, the date on which the distributions are required to begin shall not be earlier than December 31 of the calendar year in which the officer or employee would have attained age 70½. If the spouse or domestic partner dies before the distribution to such spouse or domestic partner is made or begun, this subsection (e) shall be applied as if the surviving spouse or domestic partner were the officer or employee. 
(f)  If an officer or employee dies before the distribution of his benefit has begun in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section and the officer or employee does not have a designated beneficiary (as defined in Code section 401(a)(9)(E)), the officer's or employee's benefit, if any, shall be distributed in a single lump-sum payment by December 31 of the year in which occurs the five-year anniversary of the officer's or employee's death." 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § II(2), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-88, § 2, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2006-14, § 3, 3-23-06) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-88 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 1997. 
Sec. 6-392. - Limitation on benefits. 
(a)  Basic limitation. Notwithstanding any provision of this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, to the contrary, the amount of an officer's or employee's annual retirement benefit, calculated as a single life annuity commencing before age 62 or after age 65, shall not exceed $160,000.00, as adjusted as of the first day of each limitation year to the dollar limitation determined by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue pursuant to regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury under the authority granted by section 415(d) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the "Code") (the "maximum permissible dollar amount"). For purposes of this section, the term 'limitation year' shall mean the calendar year. 
As of each January 1, the dollar limitation as determined by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue for that calendar year will become effective as the maximum permissible dollar amount for that calendar year. The dollar limitation applicable to officers and employees who have commenced distribution of their benefit shall be adjusted annually to reflect any changes to the maximum permissible dollar amount. 
Employee contributions treated as employer contributions made pursuant to section 6-37(u) shall be considered a part of the benefit subject to the limitations of this section. Officer or employee contributions for prior service with certain other employers shall be subject to the rules of section 6-94. Employee contributions not made pursuant to section 6-37(u) and not made for credit for prior service with certain other employers shall be converted to an annual benefit amount pursuant to Code section 411(c)(2)(B) and shall be subtracted from the total annual benefit subject to the limitations of this subsection (a), provided that such contributions shall be considered to be a separate defined contribution plan maintained by the City of Atlanta and subject to the limitations of Code section 415(c). 
If the form of payment under the act is other than a straight-life annuity (with no ancillary benefits), or if the officer, or employee has made mandatory or voluntary contributions or rollover contributions, or if any portion of the payment is attributable to assets transferred to the fund from another qualified plan not maintained by the City of Atlanta, the benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to a straight-life annuity with no ancillary benefits. For purposes of adjusting any benefit, the actuarially equivalent amount shall be the greater of: (i) the annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any) payable to the officer or employee under the act commencing at the same annuity starting date as the form of benefit payable to the officer or employee; or (ii) the annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the form of benefit payable to the officer or employee, computed using a five percent interest rate and the applicable mortality table. No actuarial adjustment shall be required to reflect the value of any of the following: (A) that portion of any joint and survivor annuity that constitutes a qualified joint and survivor annuity (as defined in Code section 417); (B) benefits that are not directly related to retirement benefits, such as pre-retirement disability and death benefits, and post-retirement medical benefits; and (C) post-retirement cost-of-living increases made in accordance with Code section 415(d) and the regulations thereunder. 
The provisions of this section 6-93 shall be applied in accordance with the rules of Code section 415 and the regulations thereunder, and the relevant provisions of the regulations are incorporated by reference herein. If payments to or on behalf of an officer or employee begin on multiple dates, the rules of this section 6-93 shall be applied on each such date to the relevant portion of the benefit. 
(b)  Exception to basic limitation. If the annual retirement benefit payable to an officer or employee under this act does not exceed $10,000.00 for the limitation year with respect to which a determination is being made or any prior limitation year, and the City of Atlanta has not at any time maintained a defined contribution plan (as determined pursuant to the Code section 415(d) regulations) in which the officer or employee has participated, the limitation otherwise imposed by subsection (a) shall not apply. For purposes of determining whether any officer or employee has ever participated in a defined contribution plan, mandatory employee contributions to any defined benefit plan maintained by the City of Atlanta are not to be treated as a separate defined contribution plan maintained by the City of Atlanta. 
(c)  Reduction for fewer than ten years of participation. If an officer or employee has participated under the provisions of this act for fewer than ten years, the maximum permissible dollar amount shall be adjusted by multiplying such limitation by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the officer's or employee's years of participation as of such date (and any fraction thereof) and the denominator of which is ten. The foregoing reduction shall not apply to (1) disability retirement benefits received by an officer or employee under this act or (2) death benefits received by an officer's or employee's beneficiary under this act. 
(d)  Actuarial adjustment when benefits commence before age 62 or after age 65. If an officer's or employee's annual retirement benefit commences before he attains age 62, the maximum permissible dollar amount for the limitation year shall be reduced so that it is the actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible dollar amount that would be applicable if the retirement benefit had commenced at age 62. The actuarially equivalent amount shall be equal to the lesser of (A) the maximum permissible dollar amount multiplied by the ratio of the annual retirement benefit payable under the act at the time payments are scheduled to commence, without regard to the limits of this section 6-93, to the annual retirement benefit commencing at age 62, without regard to the limits of this section 6-93, and (B) the actuarially equivalent amount using a five percent interest rate and the applicable mortality table. To the extent that benefits will not be forfeited upon the death of the officer or employee, the mortality decrement shall be ignored for purposes of determining any reduction in the dollar limitation. If any benefits are forfeited upon death, the full mortality decrement shall be taken into account. If an officer's or employee's annual retirement benefit commences after age 65, the maximum permissible dollar amount for the limitation year shall be increased so that it is the actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible dollar amount at age 65. The actuarially equivalent amount shall be equal to the lesser of: (A) the maximum permissible dollar amount multiplied by the ratio of the annual retirement benefit under the act at the time payments are scheduled to commence, disregarding accruals after age 65 and without regard to the limits of this section 6-93, to the annual retirement benefit commencing at age 65, without regard to the limits of this section 6-93, and (B) the actuarially equivalent amount determined using a five percent interest rate and the applicable mortality table. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the maximum permissible dollar amount shall not be reduced by reason of the commencement of annual retirement benefits before age 62 for (1) any full-time officer or employee with at least 15 years of full-time service with any police or fire department that is organized and operated by the City of Atlanta, (2) disability retirement benefits paid to an officer or employee pursuant to this act or (3) a death benefit paid to a beneficiary pursuant to this act. 
(e)  Applicable mortality table. On or after January 1, 2008, "applicable mortality table" shall mean the mortality table specified by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to Code section 417(e)(3)(B). Before January 1, 2008, "applicable mortality table" shall mean the mortality table prescribed by Revenue Ruling, 2001,-62, 2001-2 C.B. 632, or any successor revenue ruling, notice or other guidance provided by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue that establishes a replacement mortality table pursuant to Code section 415(b)(2)(E)(v). 
(f)  Preservation of old law benefits. In the case of an officer or employee who participated in one or more defined benefit plans of the City of Atlanta as of the first day of the first limitation year beginning after December 31, 1994, the application of the limitations of this section shall not cause the maximum permissible benefit for such officer or employee under all such defined benefit plans to be less than the officer's or employee's RPA'94 Old-Law Benefit. 
For officers or employees with RPA '94 Old-Law Benefits, for purposes of determining whether an officer's or employee's benefit exceeds the limitations of this section after December 31, 1999 (the "RPA '94 Freeze Date"), an officer's or employee's total annual benefit under the act calculated as a straight life annuity shall be determined, and this benefit shall not exceed the maximum permissible dollar amount applicable to the officer or employee. Where an officer's or employee's benefit must be adjusted to an actuarially equivalent straight life annuity, such adjustment shall be calculated as provided under subsection (a) above. 
In no event shall an officer or employee receive less than the officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit. For purposes of determining that an officer or employee receives no less than the officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit, the limitation applicable to the officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit ("Old-Law Limitation") shall be determined, and the officer or employee shall receive the RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit to the extent it does not exceed such old-law limitation. Before January 1, 2000 (the "final implementation date"), adjustments to the old-law limitation for benefits that commence before age 62 or after age 65 shall be calculated as provided under Code section 415(b)(2)(E) and the terms of the act as in effect on December 7, 1994. On or after the final implementation date, adjustments to the old law limitation for commencement of benefits before age 62 or after age 65 shall be calculated as provided in subsection (d) above. In no event, however, may an officer's or employee's old-law benefit exceed the officer's or employee's old-law benefit as of the RPA '94 Freeze Date. 
For the purposes of this subsection, the term "RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit" shall mean the officer's or employee's accrued benefit under the terms of the act as of the RPA '94 Freeze Date, for the annuity starting date and optional form and taking into account the limitations of Code section 415 as in effect on December 7, 1994, including the participation requirements under Code section 415(b)(5). In determining the amount of an officer's or employee's RPA Old-Law Benefit, the following shall be disregarded: (1) any ordinance or amendment to the act increasing benefits adopted after the RPA '94 Freeze Date, and (2) any cost-of-living adjustments that become effective under Code section 415(d) after the RPA '94 Freeze Date. 
If, at any date after the RPA '94 Freeze Date, the officer's or employee's total benefit under the act, before the application of Code section 415, is less than the officer's or employee's old-law benefit, the RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit will be reduced to a benefit equal to the officer's or employee's total benefit. 
The use of a different interest rate and mortality table may not increase an officer's or employee's RPA '94 Old-Law Benefit to an amount greater than such benefit as of the RPA '94 Freeze Date. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § II(3), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-88, § 3, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2010-68(10-O-1894), § 1, 12-15-10) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-88 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2002. 
Sec. 6-393. - Treatment of employee contributions for prior service with certain other employers. 
(a)  Basic Limitation. If an officer or employee makes one or more contributions under this Act, 1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, as amended, to purchase permissive service credit on or after January 1, 1998, the requirements of section 6-392 shall be treated as satisfied if either: 
(1)  The requirements of section 415(b) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the `Code') are satisfied, determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all contributions under this Act for permissive service credit as an annual benefit for purposes of Code section 415(b), provided, however, that the reduced limit under Code section 415(b)(2)(C) (as described in section 6-392(d)) shall not be exceeded solely by reason of this section 6-393; or 
(2)  The requirements of Code section 415(c) are satisfied, determined by treating all contributions under this Act for permissive service credit as an annual addition for purposes of Code section 415(c), provided, however, that the percentage limitation under Code section 415(c)(1)(B) shall not be exceeded solely by reason of this section 6-393. 
(b)  Limitation on Nonqualified Service. Notwithstanding the foregoing, not more than five years of permissive service credit attributable to nonqualified service shall be taken into account for purposes of this section, and no permissive service credit shall be taken into account before the officer or employee has participated under the provisions of this Act for at least five years. 
(c)  Definitions. 
(1)  Permissive Service Credit. For purposes of this section, the term `permissive service credit' shall mean service credit that (A) is recognized under this Act for purposes of calculating an officer's or employee's benefit, (B) such officer or employee has not received under this Act and (C) such officer or employee may receive only by making a voluntary additional contribution in an amount determined under this Act that does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service credit. 
(2)  Nonqualified Service. For purposes of this section, the term 'nonqualified service' means service for which permissive service credit is allowed, other than: 
(A)  service (including parental, medical, sabbatical and similar leave) as an employee of the Government of the United States, any State or political subdivision thereof or any agency or instrumentality of any of the foregoing (other than military service or service for credit that was obtained as a result of a repayment under Code section 415(k)(3)); 
(B)  service (including parental, medical, sabbatical and similar leave) as an employee (other than as an employee described in clause (A) above) of an educational organization described in Code section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii) that is a public, private or sectarian school providing elementary or secondary education (through grade 12), as determined under the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(C)  service as an employee of an association of employees who are described in clause (A), above; or 
(D)  military service (other than qualified military service under Code section 414(u)) recognized under this Act. 
In the case of service described in clauses (A), (B) or (C), such service will be nonqualified service if recognition of such service would cause an officer or employee to receive a retirement benefit for the same service under more than one retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § II(4), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-88, § 4, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-88 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2002. 
Sec. 6-394. - Limitation on monthly earnings. 
For the period from January 1, 1996 to December 31, 2001, the annual compensation of each officer and employee taken into account for determining all benefits provided under this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, for any year shall not exceed $150,000.00, as adjusted for the cost of living in accordance with Section 401(a)(17)(B) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the "Code"). For years beginning on and after January 1, 2002, the annual compensation of each officer and employee taken into account for determining all benefits provided under this Act for any year shall not exceed $200,000.00, as adjusted for the cost of living in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17)(B). 
If compensation for any prior year is taken into account in determining the benefits of an officer or employee, the compensation for such prior year shall be subject to the applicable annual compensation limit in effect under Code Section 401(a)(17) for that prior year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective January 1, 2002, the limit on compensation taken into account with regard to years before January 1, 2002 shall be increased to $200,000.00, and the monthly benefit of officers and employees who have terminated employment, including officers and employees who have commenced receiving a benefit, shall be recalculated to reflect such increase. 
The annual compensation of an officer or employee who commenced participation under this Act before January 1, 1996 shall not be limited by the terms of this section. 
For the purposes of compliance with the requirements of Code Section 415, on or after January 1, 2009, the definition of "compensation" shall include differential wage payments within the meaning of Code Section 414(u)(12). 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § II(5), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-88, § 5, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2015-04(14-O-1631), § 2, 2-26-15 ) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-88 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 1996. 
Sec. 6-395. - Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, 1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, as amended, to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with section 414(u) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § II(6), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-88, § 6, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-88 provided for an effective date for this section of Dec. 12, 1994. 
Sec. 6-396. - Supplemental benefit arrangement. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Supplemental Benefit Arrangement is to provide officers and employees participating under the provisions of this Act, 1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, as amended, with the full amount of benefit intended under the Act, without regard to the limitations imposed by section 415 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the `Code'). 
(b)  Benefits. If the annual retirement benefit of an officer or employee under the Act is reduced as a result of the limitations in Code section 415 (as described in sections 6-392 and 6-393) such officer or employee shall receive an amount from the Supplemental Benefit Arrangement equal to the difference between (i) the amount that would have been payable under the terms of the Act without the application of Code section 415 and (ii) the amount payable under the terms of the Act determined with the application of the limitations in Code section 415. 
(c)  Elective Deferrals Not Permitted. Officers and employees shall not be permitted to defer compensation either directly or indirectly under the Supplemental Benefit Arrangement at any time. 
(d)  Subfund. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Act, the benefits payable under this section shall be paid from the assets of a subfund established under the existing fund, provided that such subfund shall be maintained solely for the purpose of providing benefits under the Supplemental Benefit Arrangement. The assets of the fund (other than the subfund) shall not be used to pay benefits under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § II(7), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-88, § 7, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-88 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2004. 
Sec. 6-397. - Eligible rollover distributions. 
(a)  General rule. The distributee of any eligible rollover distribution made under this Act, 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265, as amended, may elect, in the manner and at the time specified by the board of trustees, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Distributee. For purposes of this section, a "distributee" shall include any current or former officer or employee who has a right to a benefit under this act. In addition, a 'distributee' shall include the current or former officer's or employee's surviving spouse, as well as the current or former officer's or employee's current or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order as defined in Code section 414(p). Effective January 1, 2010, a "distributee" shall include a non-spouse beneficiary who is a designated beneficiary within the meaning of Code section 401(a)(9)(E). 
(2)  Eligible rollover distribution. For purposes of this section, an "eligible rollover distribution" is any distribution from the fund established under the act of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the "Code"); and any hardship distribution. All or a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the distribution includes after-tax employee contributions that are not includible in gross income, provided, however, that such amounts may only be paid to a plan that constitutes an eligible retirement plan with respect to a distribution or portion of a distribution constituting after-tax contributions, as defined below. 
(3)  Eligible retirement plan. For purposes of this section, an 'eligible retirement plan' is an individual retirement account or annuity described in Code sections 408(a) or 408(b); a qualified trust described in Code section 401(a); an annuity plan described in Code section 403(a); an annuity contract described in Code section 403(b); and an eligible deferred compensation plan described in 457(b) that is maintained by a state, a political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and that agrees to account separately for amounts transferred into such plan from this fund; and, effective January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA described in Code section 408A. With respect to that portion of an eligible rollover distribution that consists of after-tax contributions that are not includible in gross income, an eligible retirement plan shall include only an individual retirement account or annuity described in Code sections 408(a) or (b) or a qualified defined contribution plan described in Code sections 401(a) or 403(a) that agrees to account separately for the amounts so transferred, including separate accounting for that portion of such distribution that is not includible in gross income. In the case of a distribution to a non-spouse beneficiary, the term eligible retirement plan shall include only an inherited individual retirement account described in Code section 408(a) or an inherited individual retirement annuity described in Code section 408(b). 
(c)  Mandatory distributions. Effective January 1, 2006, if with respect to any mandatory distribution in excess of $1,000.00 that is an eligible rollover distribution, a distributee does not make an election pursuant to subsection (a) above and does not elect to receive the distribution directly, the amount of the distribution shall be transferred to an individual retirement plan as described in Code section 408(a) or 408(b) of a designated trustee or issuer, and the distributee shall be notified in writing that the distribution may be transferred to such an individual retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § II(8), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-88, § 8, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2006-14, § 4, 3-23-06; Ord. No. 2010-68(10-O-1894), § 2, 12-15-10) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-88 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 2002. 
Sec. 6-398. - Exclusive benefit. 
At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to officers and employees participating under the provisions of this Act, 1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, as amended, and their beneficiaries shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund established under this Act be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of such officers, employees and beneficiaries, except that a contribution by an employer to the fund established under this Act made under a mistake of fact may be returned to such employer within one year after the payment of the contribution. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § II(9), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-88, § 9, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-88 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 1997. 
Sec. 6-399. - Minimum vesting standards. 
Upon the termination of the fund established under this Act, 1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, as amended, or upon complete discontinuance of contributions under the Act, the rights of all officers and employees to benefits accrued to the date of such termination or discontinuance, to the extent then funded, shall be nonforfeitable. 
(Ord. No. 2004-84, § II(10), 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2004-88, § 10, 12-10-04) 
Note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2004-88 provided for an effective date for this section of Jan. 1, 1997. 
Sec. 6-400. - Application of Pension Modification pursuant to City Related Laws Section 6-2. 
There has been raised and established funds for the aid, relief and pension of members of the Atlanta Fire Department who were in active service on or after the date of the passage of this act ("Firefighters' Pension Fund"). The terms of the Firefighters' Pension Fund have been modified by City Related Laws Section 6-2. The terms of the Firefighters' Pension Fund shall be as set forth in City Related Laws Sections 6-366 through 6-420, as amended by Related Laws Section 6-2. The retirement plan and benefits of the following members of the Firefighters' Pension Fund shall not be impacted by Related Laws Section 6-2: 1) members who were active service City Employees on November 1, 2011 who were hired by the City and Joined the Firefighters' Pension Fund prior to January 1, 1984, and had continuous City service, or had had a break in service and purchased the interim pension benefits upon rehire; and 2) members who retired before November 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 2011-27(11-O-0672), § 11, 6-29-11) 
Secs. 6-401—6-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Sec. 6-421. - Board of trustees; constituted, membership. 
(a)  "Mayor" shall be deemed to include the chief executive officer of any city coming within the provisions of this act. "Commissioner of finance" shall include any officer by whatever title designated who performs the duties of the chief financial officer of any such city. "City council" shall include the legislative body of any such city. 
(b)  There is hereby established, to serve without compensation, a board of trustees whose duty it shall be to manage said fund, which shall be kept as a separate fund. The board of trustees shall consist of the mayor; the commissioner of finance; one (1) member of the city council, said member to be appointed biennially by the mayor; and two (2) members of the fire department, whether in active service or retired, to be elected for four-year terms, by both active and retired members of said department. Provided that if such city has an administrative assistant to the mayor, the mayor shall have the privilege of designating such administrative assistant to serve on the board of trustees in his stead; and, when so acting, he shall have all the powers herein conferred upon the mayor. 
(c)  The terms of the two (2) present members of said board of trustees, elected by the members of said fire department, due to expire in January, 1980, shall expire June 1, 1980, at which time or immediately thereafter an election shall be held, in accordance with subsection (b) above, to fill the vacancies created thereby. For the initial election to be held not later than June, 1980, the individual receiving the highest number of votes shall serve for a term expiring January 1, 1984, with the individual receiving the second highest number of votes to serve for a term expiring January 1, 1982. Not later than January, 1982, an election shall be held to fill such expired term; and thereafter an election to fill expired terms shall be held not later than January of each succeeding two (2) years, with the individual so elected serving for a term of four (4) years as provided in subsection (b) above. Such members shall continue to serve until their successors have been elected. 
(d)  The board of trustees shall be authorized to adopt all rules necessary in carrying out the provisions of this act, as amended, pertaining to electing members to the board of trustees and with respect to the filling of vacancies occurring on said board; provided, however, that any such rules shall not be inconsistent with any provisions of this act, as amended; provided, further, that the names of candidates in any election shall be sent to those persons eligible to vote not more than 45 days nor less than 30 days before the said election. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 6; 1931 Ga. Laws, page 223, § 4; 1935 Ga. Laws, page 450, § 4; 1952 Ga. Laws, page 2566, § 2; 1953 Ga. Laws, Nov.-Dec. Sess., page 2305, § 2; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 3356, §§ 1, 2; 1964 Ga. Laws, page 2409, § 1; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3201, § 1) 
Sec. 6-422. - Powers and duties of board of trustees; meetings, organization. 
This board shall make all rules for the payment of said funds to those entitled to receive the same. It shall have its first meeting on Wednesday following the first Tuesday in September after the passage of this act and organize by electing a chairman, a vice-chairman who shall serve when the chairman is absent, and a secretary. The chairman shall sign all vouchers for disbursements of the fund and his written order shall fully protect the city treasurer in the payment of the same. A majority of the board shall control on all questions. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 7; Ord. No. 1985-49, § 1, 8-9-85; Ord. No. 1992-45, § 1, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 1992-58, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 1994-13, § 4, 3-24-94) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-423. - Rules for meetings of board of trustees. 
The board shall make its own rules as to times and places of meetings. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 8) 
Sec. 6-424. - Formulation of certain rules by board of trustees; restrictions, records. 
The board of trustees shall formulate rules for taking care of members in active service at the time of the passage of this act while temporarily sick or hurt, and paying the expense thereof. The board of trustees shall formulate rules for paying the pension of a member of the department who loses his life in the service to his widow till she dies or remarries; and for paying to widow and children pension of deceased pensioner; and for paying the pension of such deceased fireman to his orphan children till they reach the age of 16, provided the total payments to widow and orphan or orphans shall not exceed one-half (½) the pay of such deceased fireman. The trustees shall keep a strict account of the disbursements and receipts of all funds which shall be open at all times to public inspection. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 13) 
Sec. 6-425. - Appeals from decisions of board of trustees; procedure. 
(a)  A majority of the board of trustees shall control on all disputed questions. 
(b)  Whenever an application for disability pension, whether in line of duty or not in line of duty, has been filed, the applicant shall submit therewith a signed certificate from a licensed, practicing physician of Georgia certifying to the applicant's total and permanent disability from his or her regular, assigned or comparable duties with such city and that, where applicable, in the opinion of such physician, such disability was either caused by or resulted from an accident or injury sustained on the job. Immediately thereupon, the board of trustees shall direct the applicant to submit to an examination by physicians chosen by the board who likewise shall certify the physical or mental ability or disability of the applicant, and, where applicable, whether in the opinion of such physicians, such disability was either caused by or resulted from an accident or injury sustained on the job. In the event the certificates of the respective physicians shall be in general agreement with respect to such matters, such facts shall be conclusive as to the physical or mental condition of the applicant; and the board shall thereupon approve such pension in the proper amount. In the event the certificate tendered by the applicant and the certification of the physicians chosen by the board shall disagree as to the condition of the applicant and where applicable, the cause of the disability, then and in that event, the board of trustees shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of determining the true condition of the applicant, and where applicable, the cause of such disability. Such hearing shall be conducted informally by the examination of witnesses for and in opposition to such application who shall be sworn, and the applicant, the city; and the board of trustees may be represented by legal counsel if they so desire. The board of trustees shall be authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and procedures, not inconsistent with general legal principles, governing the manner in which such hearings shall be conducted. The decision of the board after the hearing shall be final as to the physical or mental condition of the applicant, and where applicable, as to whether the disability is compensable as one incurred in the line of duty, provided however, such proceeding shall be subject to review by writ of certiorari to the superior court in and for the county in which such municipality lies, or if such municipality lies in more than one county, then to the superior court of the county in which the greater part of such municipality lies. The secretary-treasurer of the board of trustees shall be authorized to acknowledge service of any such writ and shall, within the time provided by law, certify and cause to be filed with the clerk of said superior court, a record of the proceedings before the board, including a copy of the application for disability pension or other relief involved, the decision of the board and the notice of the board's action as provided to the pension applicant. Where appeals are taken by a pension applicant as provided herein, the board of trustees shall be the respondent and the city shall be the defendant. 
(c)  The method of appeal as provided herein shall also serve as the method by which all other disputed pension questions shall be appealed. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, page 3553, §§ 2, 8; 1982 Ga. Laws, page 4385, § 3) 
Sec. 6-426. - Court review of decisions of board of trustees. 
The decision of said board of trustees granting or refusing a pension shall be subject to review by the superior court in an action at law, suit in equity, writ of certiorari as provided by general law for such writs or other proper proceeding, upon petition of such city or any other person who may have an interest in the funds provided by this Act, as amended. 
(1947 Ga. Laws, page 717, § 4) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-427. - Investment of excess funds. 
In case there should accumulate more funds than should be needed for immediate use, the board of trustees are empowered to invest such excess funds in United States, Georgia or municipal bonds; but not otherwise. Should there be on hand insufficient funds to carry out the purposes of this act, such additional funds as are necessary therefor shall be paid out of the treasury of the city. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 16; 1931 Ga. Laws, page 223, § 6; Ord. No. 1985-45, § 2, 8-9-85; Ord. No. 1992-45, § 2, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 1994-13, § 5, 3-24-94) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 6-428. - City attorney; function, compensation. 
The city attorney shall without extra compensation render such legal service as such board of trustees shall require. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 15) 
Sec. 6-429. - Actuarial investigations. 
The board of trustees of this retirement system shall have the system's actuary make an actuarial investigation every three (3) years or more often as the board, in its discretion, may deem proper. Such actuarial investigation shall include the results of any actuarial investigation into the then current assumptions as to rates of interest, mortality, disability, withdrawal and retirement. The actuarial investigation shall also include consideration of the experience of the retirement system under its assumptions and a comparison of results with the previous actuarial investigations and may also include such other studies as may be necessary or desirable for the completeness and accuracy of the actuarial investigation. The actuarial investigation shall also include a valuation of the contingent assets and liabilities of the retirement system and a determination of the payment necessary to amortize over a stated period any unfunded accrued liability disclosed. As an exhibit to the actuarial investigation, the retirement system board of trustees shall attach a copy of all the provisions of the plan for the retirement system, including the requirements and conditions for qualifying to participate, the nature of benefits under the plan, and the manner in which the local retirement system is funded. The board of trustees of the retirement system shall file with the state auditor a copy of each actuarial investigation. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 4506, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3630, § 1) 
Sec. 6-430. - Approval by city of certain contracts. 
Any contract entered into by the board of trustees on or after January 1, 2003 which affects the administrative staffing, management, or operation of the pension fund shall require the consent of the city by adoption of a resolution and approval by the mayor. Any such contract which does not comply with the requirements of this ordinance shall be null and void. 
Because this Ordinance is not a modification of the Pension Laws, the provisions of City of Atlanta Charter section 3-507 are inapplicable. 
(Ord. No. 2003-55, §§ 1, 2, 2-25-03) 
Secs. 6-431—6-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BENEFITS 

Sec. 6-461. - Amount of pension; benefits to dependents. 
When such member shall retire as a matter of right, he shall be paid thereafter for the rest of his life 55 percent of the monthly salary or pay he was receiving at the time of such retirement, but the maximum amount to be paid to any fireman as a pension shall be the sum of $100 per month, provided he shall have served the 25 years in active service at the time of his retirement, or shall have become totally disabled in the line of duty at any time as aforesaid. In case of death of such pensioner, his widow, if any, shall receive during her life or until remarried, a sum equal to three-fourths (¾) of the amount the pensioner was drawing at the time of his death; provided, however, that no such widow shall receive any such sum hereunder unless she was the lawful wife of said pensioner prior to his retirement from active service. If such pensioner at death leaves no widow or if pensioner's widow was not the lawful wife of pensioner prior to his retirement from active service, but leaves orphan children under the age of 16 years, such orphan child or children, except adopted children, adopted subsequent to said pensioner's retirement from active service, shall receive until reaching the age of 16, a sum equal to three-fourths (¾) of the amount the pensioner was drawing at the time of his death. Upon the death of any member under this act, from any cause, who has no dependents entitled to his pension, the money he has paid into the pension fund shall be paid to his estate at his death. Provided, however, the amount of the pension shall be increased five dollars ($5.00) per month for each full year's service not in excess of 10 years rendered by the officer or employee after the time when he might have retired as a matter of right. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 4; 1931 Ga. Laws, page 223, § 1; 1935 Ga. Laws, page 450, § 1; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1080, § 1; 1947 Ga. Laws, page 717, § 3; 1952 Ga. Laws, page 2566, § 3) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-462. - Designation of spouse or unmarried child or children as beneficiaries; secondary beneficiary. 
(a)  Any member of the fire department that has qualified as a firefighter or is subject to firefighting duties coming under the terms of this act, whether male or female, who has a spouse or unmarried child or children under the age of 18 years, as provided for in section 6-479, or under the age of 16 years wherever provided for in other provisions of said act, as amended, shall have the right at any time to designate such spouse or such child or children as beneficiary of such member's pension benefits, the amount of such pension benefits to be the same as provided for beneficiaries elsewhere in this act, as amended, and provided that the additional contributions for beneficiaries required in this act, as amended, are made; provided, however, that as to every male member hereafter elected or employed, participation for the benefit of such member's wife or unmarried child or children under the age of 18 years, or under the age of 16 years as the provisions of said act may provide, shall be compulsory. Any and all provisions of this act, as amended, conferring benefits or placing restrictions on the wife or widow, as beneficiary, of male members, shall apply equally and in the same manner to the husband or widower as beneficiary of female members. Whenever, in said act, as amended, a beneficiary is designated as a wife or widow, such shall also include the husband or widower of a female member, if such should be the case. A child or children of a female member, who has provided for payment of a pension to her beneficiary, shall be entitled to the same benefits and subject to the same restrictions as may now or hereafter apply to the child or children of a male member, as provided in said act, as amended. 
(b)  If a member, whether male or female, designates a beneficiary, and thereafter such beneficiary should cease to be qualified to receive a pension in the event of the member's death, then such member may at his or her option designate some other beneficiary who does qualify for pension benefits under this act, as amended, and continue to make contributions for such beneficiary, or cease to make further contributions for beneficiaries, in which event contributions theretofore made for the benefit of a beneficiary shall not be refunded except insofar as refunds may be allowed by other provisions of this act, as amended. Nothing herein provided shall prevent a member from designating a primary beneficiary (spouse or children under the age of 18 years, or under the age of 16 years as the provisions of said act may provide) and a secondary beneficiary (either spouse or children under the age of 18 years, or the age of 16 years as the provisions of said act may provide, and not named as primary beneficiary). 
(c)  At such time as a member elects participation for the benefit of a beneficiary, such member shall give written notice of such election to the board, and shall within a period of two (2) years thereafter, in addition to current requirements, pay into the pension fund such additional percentage of such member's monthly salary as will equalize the contributions of such electing member with the contributions of other members made during the same prior years and months of eligible service for the same benefits, together with three percent (3%) interest thereon for the months during which other members currently made their contributions for the same benefits. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 3292, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-463. - Benefits continued for persons receiving pensions under 1924 act. 
All persons now receiving pensions under the provisions of said act approved August 13, 1924, shall henceforth receive such pensions in the amounts provided for in this act. 
(1931 Ga. Laws, page 223, § 7) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-464. - Total pension benefits limited. 
The total pension benefits as provided by this act, as now amended, shall be limited in the following particulars: The total pension benefits plus any social security benefits that may inure to such person by reason of his employment by such city shall not exceed 75 percent of his average monthly salary averaged for the last year of his employment as herein provided. The board of trustees shall establish rules to carry out this restriction, which shall not apply to social security benefits inuring to such person by reason of other employment. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 2854, § 4) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-465. - Recomputation of pensions for certain retired officers, employees. 
(a)  Pension payments due all former officers and employees who have retired prior to April 1, 1955, and have been awarded a pension under the provisions of this act, who have reached 70 years of age, or who shall hereafter reach 70 years of age, shall be recomputed upon the following basis: The total pension benefits shall be a sum equal to one-half (½) of the average monthly salary of such former employee during the last three (3) years of his active service to such city, but shall not exceed the sum of $150 per month. The pension payments due to persons who were retired because of disability or for a period of service less than 25 years shall be increased in the same proportion. All such persons shall receive a minimum of four dollars ($4.00) per month for each full year of active service to such city subject to the limitations set out in this act as amended. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall permit any officer or employee who is eligible for pension benefits or increased pension benefits under this act, as amended, and who is not now making the required contributions for such benefits, to become a member of such pension fund and to participate in the increased benefits provided by this act as amended provided such officer or employee shall pay into the pension funds of such city an amount which would be equal to the amounts which he would have been required to pay had he exercised his privileges upon becoming eligible for such benefits. These payments shall be increased by four percent (4%) per annum from the dates such payments would have been due and may be paid over a period of 50 months. The board of trustees shall by rules provide for the exercise of the options herein authorized. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 2854, § 2; 1958 Ga. Laws, page 2399, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-466. - Rights of dependents when fireman dies after becoming eligible for retirement. 
When any fireman who has served 25 years and is in active service at the time of his death dies, his widow or minor children, natural or adopted, shall receive the same pension she would have received under this act as amended had such fireman been retired and receiving a pension under section 4 thereof. 
(1925 Ga. Laws, page 194, § 2; 1935 Ga. Laws, page 450, § 7) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-467. - Increase of pensions for retired officers with over 25 years of service. 
(a)  Pension payments due to former officers and employees who have retired as a matter of right prior to the effective date of this act, and who have to their credit 25 years or more of active service with said city and have been awarded pensions under the terms of this act, as amended, shall have their pensions recomputed on the following basis: 
(1)  Subject to the limitations hereinafter set forth, there shall be paid to such former officers and employees a basic pension of $190 per month. 
(2)  In addition to the basic pension provided in the preceding subparagraph, there shall be paid the sum of six dollars ($6.00) per month for each full year's active service in excess of 25 years. For each full year's active service in excess of 35 years, there shall be paid an additional $10 per month. The record kept in the office of the department of finance, division of pensions, shall be conclusive as to the time served. 
(3)  The aggregate of all pension benefits payable to former officers and employees under the provisions of this act shall be limited in that the same shall not exceed 75 percent of the average monthly salary paid to such officer or employee for the last year of employment in active service. 
(b)  Former officers and employees who retired prior to the effective date of this act, but who had less than 25 years of active service with said city, but who had been awarded pensions under the terms of this act as heretofore amended, shall be paid that proportion of the basic pension provided in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of section 1 above [subsection (a)(1) of this section] as the length of their service, measured in full years of service, bears to 25 years. 
(c)  No recomputation provided for under this act shall be made, if the result thereof would be to reduce pension payments already received by any former officer or employee. 
(d)  Benefits now being paid to dependents of deceased former officers and employees awarded pensions under the terms of this act as heretofore amended, shall be recomputed under the terms and provisions of this act, so as to make the same applicable to such deceased former officers and employees, and the benefits payable to their dependents on account thereof. 
(e)  This section shall not be effective to, nor be construed to, confer eligibility for a pension upon any former officer or employee who was not eligible for a pension under the provisions of this act in effect on the date of the retirement, resignation or other withdrawal from service of such former officer or employee. 
(f)  Increased benefits payable under the terms of this act shall be paid out of general funds of the City of Atlanta. 
(g)  The provisions of this act shall be effective as of January 1, 1973. 
(1955 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2051, § 3; 1957 Ga. Laws, page 2854, § 1; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2880, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-468. - Funds for benefits provided in sections 6-465 and 6-467. 
The increased pension benefits provided by sections 6-465 and 6-467 shall be paid by the board of trustees from funds available to them for the payment of pensions. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 2854, § 10) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-469. - Disability retirement generally. 
Any member of such department in active service whose name is on the payroll or who shall be injured or whose health shall become permanently impaired to such an extent as to render him totally disabled as a result of such service, shall upon application be retired. The board of trustees shall have the applicant for a pension on account of permanent and total disability examined by competent physicians and surgeons. In passing upon the question of permanent and total disability, they may receive and consider the reports and recommendations of such examining medical officers and the applicant shall have the right to submit medical and other competent evidence on the question of his disability and right to be retired. If the board of trustees determines that the applicant is not totally and permanently disabled, the act of the board shall be final. If the determination be that the applicant is totally and permanently disabled, he shall be retired, subject, however, to the following conditions: 
(1)  The board of trustees shall have the right to at least once a year require the pensioner to submit to a medical examination for the purpose of determining whether or not the pensioner has sufficiently recovered from his disability and is able to return to his former position; 
(2)  If the board, after such examination, determines that the pensioner is not actually totally and permanently disabled but is able to return to his former position or employment he occupied at the time of retirement and such employment and status as to position, pay and service credit at the time of retirement is offered to such pensioner and he takes the former position or fails or refuses to take such offer, then the payment of such disability pension shall cease. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 3; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1080, § 7) 
Sec. 6-470. - Benefits payable to member for total disability incurred in line of duty. 
When such member shall be retired for total disability from injuries received in line of duty, he shall be paid 55 percent of his monthly salary that he was receiving at the time he was injured, but the maximum amount to be paid to any fireman as a petitioner shall be the sum of $100 per month for the rest of his life, subject, however, to the right of the board to reexamine such pensioner on the question of total disability or discontinuance of pension as is hereinafter provided by section 8 [section 6-469] of this act. 
(1924 Ga. Laws, page 167, § 5; 1931 Ga. Laws, page 223, § 2; 1935 Ga. Laws, page 450, § 2; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1080, § 2) 
Editor's note— The reference to "section 6-469" in the above section actually refers to section 7 of 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1080. 
Sec. 6-471. - Service prerequisite to disability benefits. 
Any person entitled to disability benefits under the provisions of this act, as amended, may receive such benefits after he has been in the active employment of the city for a period of five (5) years. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 2854, § 6; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2837, § 2) 
Sec. 6-472. - Benefits for disability not in line of duty; effect of death of member. 
(a)  Should any member become totally disabled not in line of duty but not on account of injuries or ill health brought about on account of his own indiscretion so as to make such member unfit for fire duty or service, he shall receive a pension graduated as follows: After five (5) years of service, he shall be entitled to receive as a pension five twenty-fifths ( 5/25 ) of the pension that he would receive if he had served 25 years, and each year thereafter there shall be a graduated increase based upon the number of years that he served as bears to his years of service based upon the 25 years. To illustrate, if he becomes totally disabled after 11 years of service, he would be entitled to receive eleven twenty-fifths ( 11/25 ) of the full pension that he would be entitled to after 25 years of service and progressively thereafter, so that if he should become disabled after 24 years of service, he would be entitled to receive twenty-four twenty-fifths ( 24/25 ) of the pension he would be entitled to after serving 25 years, but in no event shall he receive more than twenty-five twenty-fifths ( 25/25 ) of the amount of pension he would have received after serving 25 years. 
(b)  Upon the death of any member or pensioner not in line of duty but after the completion of five (5) years of active service or employment prior to the date of such death, his widow, if any, shall be paid during the rest of her life or until she remarries three-fourths (¾) of the pension that the member or pensioner would have been entitled to if he himself had applied for a pension at the time of his death and graduated according to the length of service of the deceased husband before his retirement on account of disability or before his death and the said graduated scale shall be on the same ratio and computed in the same manner as set out above in this section as to a member becoming totally disabled after five (5) years of service and applying for a disability pension except that the widow shall be entitled to only three-fourths (¾) of the amount of the pension that her husband would have been entitled to. To illustrate, after five (5) years of service, she would be entitled to three-fourths (¾) of five twenty-fifths ( 5/25 ) of the full pension that her husband would have been entitled to if he had served 25 years, and the illustrations as applied to the first part of this act are applicable here except that the widow would only be entitled to recover three-fourths (¾) of the amount that her deceased husband would have been entitled to. Provided, however, that no such widow shall receive any sum hereunder, unless she was the lawful wife of said pensioner prior to the time he became disabled. If said pensioner or member dies without leaving a widow, or if pensioner's widow was not the lawful wife of pensioner prior to his disability, the pensioner's minor child or children except children adopted subsequent to said pensioner's retirement from active service shall be paid the same gross sums according to the same graduated scale as set out above for the widow until such child or children reach the age of 16 years. In determining the number of years of service, fractional parts of years shall be counted. That is to say, the person who has served 18 years and nine (9) months would be pensioned on a basis of 18 and seventy-five one-hundredths twenty-fifths (18.75/25) of the full pension or for 18 and three-fourths (¾) years of service. 
(1931 Ga. Laws, page 223, § 3; 1935 Ga. Laws, page 450, § 3; 1945 Ga. Laws, page 1080, § 3; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 2996, § 3; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2837, § 1) 
Sec. 6-473. - Amount of pension for total disability not in line of duty after five years' service. 
All persons now receiving pensions under the provision of said act approved August 13, 1924, and amendments thereto, shall henceforth receive such pensions in the amounts and only under the conditions provided for in this act. Provided, however, that all persons now receiving pensions under said act approved August 13, 1924, as amended, on account of total disability not from accident in line of duty but after five (5) years' service, shall after the passage of this act receive the sum of $15 per month. 
(1935 Ga. Laws, page 450, § 8) 
Sec. 6-474. - Compensation for death from injuries in line of duty. 
(a)  Payment of compensation. When any person covered by the provisions of this act shall die as a result of injuries incurred in the line of duty, the compensation to which he would have been entitled shall be continued for one (1) year and paid to his widow or minor children, if no widow. 
(b)  Payment of pension. At the expiration of the one-year period referred to in the preceding paragraph the widow of such deceased person shall be entitled to a minimum pension of $150 per month until she remarries or until her death. 
(c)  Termination of widow's benefits. The compensation and pension benefits for the widow provided by this act [section] shall terminate upon her remarriage or her death. 
(d)  Children's benefits. The compensation and pension benefits provided by this act [section] shall be continued to the minor child or children upon the death or remarriage of the widow until the youngest child shall have become 16 years of age. 
(e)  Benefits in lieu of other like benefits. The pension benefits provided by this act [section] shall be in lieu of like pension benefits provided by this act as amended and shall not be in addition thereto except as to compensation and amount of the pension herein provided. 
(f)  Act retroactive. The provisions of this act [section] shall apply retroactively to July 1, 1960. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 136, § 1; 1961 Ga. Laws, page 2629, §§ 1—6) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-475. - Refunds when leaving employment prior to retirement. 
Any employee participating in the provisions of this act, as amended, who leaves the employ of such city prior to retirement shall have refunded to him an amount equal to the amount which he has paid into said fund. 
(1957 Ga. Laws, page 2854, § 3) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. Section 7 of the 1957 act provides that such act is to be liberally construed. 
Sec. 6-476. - Refunds to firemen leaving service before eligibility for retirement. 
Any member participating in the provisions of this act who leaves the employ of said city before being eligible for retirement shall have refunded to him an amount equal to the amount paid into the said fund less one-half of one percentum (0.5%) per year to cover each year that the member has paid into the fund and received protection under this act. To illustrate, if at the end of the first year, the member has paid into said fund $10 and leaves the services of the city or withdraws from the pension fund, he shall be entitled to a refund of said $10 less one-half of one percentum (0.5%) or if at the end of 24 years, he has paid into said fund $240, he would be entitled to a refund of $240 less 12 per centum. If such member should die before being awarded a pension, and should leave no beneficiary entitled to a pension as such under this act, the refund shall be paid to his estate. 
(1945 Ga. Laws, page 1080, § 5; 1955 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2051, § 4) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-477. - Refunds for noncredited deductions upon compulsory retirement or death. 
When any member shall be compelled to retire because of age or disability, or shall die, fractional parts of years shall be counted in determining the number of years of service with respect to the member being compelled to retire because of age before completing the required number of years of service, and with respect to partial pensions and pensions for total and permanent disability not in line of duty, or pensions upon death, and thereafter such member or his beneficiary shall be entitled to receive a refund of all amounts deducted from his salary for pension purposes for any months for which he or his beneficiary cannot receive full credit on pension benefits. The provision herein shall be retroactive to cover any pensioner or his beneficiary who had service in excess of twelve months for which no pension benefits were received. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 2849, § 1; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2563, § 1; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 2996, § 2) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-478. - Benefits in lieu of existing benefits, generally. 
(a)  The pension benefits provided by this section and the several subsections shall be in lieu of like pension benefits provided by existing provisions of this act. 
(b)  Any member of the fire department of such cities eligible for a pension who is in the employment of such cities prior to the effective date of this amendment may elect to come under the provisions of this amendment by making written application to the pension board prior to July 1, 1961. The applicant must agree in writing to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment in lieu of other pension benefits and obligations under this act, as amended. 
All such members of the fire departments in the employment of such cities on the effective date of this act who do not in writing agree to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment shall have their rights and obligations determined under the law as it existed prior to this amendment. 
(c)  When such member shall retire as a matter of right, he shall be paid thereafter a monthly pension equal to one-half (½) of the average monthly salary paid to such member during the 12 months immediately preceding his retirement but said pension payment shall not exceed $150 per month, except as hereinafter provided. 
In case the member has served 26 years, or more, the amount of the pension payment shall be increased five dollars ($5.00) per month for each full year's active service in excess of 25 years. 
In case the member has served 30 years, or more, the amount of the pension shall be increased an additional five dollars ($5.00) per month for each full year's active service in excess of 30 years. 
The records kept in the office of the comptroller or other chief finance officer of such city shall be conclusive as to the time served. 
(d)  The sum of five percent (5%) of the salary, not exceeding $300 per month, paid to such member in the event he does not provide for payment of a pension to his beneficiary as authorized by this act, as amended, and the sum of six percent (6%) of the salary, not exceeding $300 per month, in the event he does provide for the continuance of the pension to his beneficiary, shall be deducted from the salaries or wages of all such members who consent and agree to the provisions of this amendment. The sums shall be retained by the comptroller or other chief finance officer of the city, as the case may be, and are hereby set apart as a pension fund, free from the control of any such city for any other purpose or expenditure. 
(e)  This section and the several subsections shall be effective the first day of the month following the passage and approval of this act and the payments required by the preceding section, as to those then employed and electing to come under this amendment, shall begin with that date. 
(f)  Any member who shall elect to come under the terms of this amendment and who shall retire within three (3) years of the effective date of this act, shall pay or shall have paid into the pension fund an amount equivalent to one percent (1%) of his salary used in computing his retirement pay, for said three (3) year period. 
(1955 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. Sess., page 2051, § 1; 1961 Ga. Laws, page 3373, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. The 1961 act did not amend the 1955 act but clearly superseded it. 
Sec. 6-479. - Election by member qualified as fire fighter or subject to fire fighting duties. 
(a)  Scope of Provisions. Any member of the fire department that has qualified as a fire fighter or is subject to fire fighting duties coming under the terms of this act who is in the employment of the city prior to the effective date of this amendment may elect to come under the provisions of this amendment by making written application to the pension board. The applicant must agree in writing to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment, in lieu of other pension benefits and obligations under this act, as amended. Any member of the fire department in the employment of the city on the effective date of this act who is covered under the terms of this act as amended prior to this amendment but who does not qualify as a fire fighter or is not subject to fire fighting duties shall not be allowed to come under the provisions of this amendment but shall have their rights and obligations determined under this act as it existed prior to this amendment or shall be allowed to transfer to the general employees' pension fund as it now exists. 
All such members of the fire department in the employment of the city on the effective date of this act who qualify as a fire fighter or are subject to fire fighting duties but who do not in writing agree to accept the benefits and obligations of this amendment shall have their rights and obligations determined under this act as it existed prior to this amendment. 
All regular members of the fire department of the city, eligible for participation in this act as amended who shall be elected or employed after the effective date of this act, shall be required to come under the provisions of this act, as now amended, and shall have all rights and duties provided in the amended act. 
This amendment and the election to accept its benefits shall be predicated upon an acknowledgement that the General Assembly in adopting this amendment reserved the right to further amend said act and to reduce the benefits provided hereunder not to exceed the primary insurance amount he will be eligible to receive in the event the members of the fire department of such city should ever qualify and accept the benefits under the Federal O.A.S.I. program by reason of their employment by such city. Provided further, that the benefits of this act, as amended, shall in no event be reduced more than the primary insurance amount received from Federal O.A.S.I. program, as a consequence of participation in said Federal O.A.S.I. program. Provided, further, that the benefits of this act, as amended, shall in no event be reduced as a consequence of participation in said Federal O.A.S.I. program below the benefits as same existed prior to the enactment of this amendment. 
(b)  Age, Service, Requirements. All members of the fire department, who shall elect to come under the terms of this amendment, must attain the age of 55 years and shall have served 25 years, before being eligible to retire and receive the benefits, as provided by this amendment; provided, however, that any member of the fire department who has served 25 years and who has attained the age of 50 years may elect to retire on a reduced pension, said reduction to be one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of three percent (3%) per month for each month the member of the fire department lacks in being 55 years of age; provided, further, that the provisions of this section as to age limit shall not apply to any person claiming a pension by reason of total and permanent disability. 
(c)  Monthly Pension. When such member of the fire department shall retire as a matter of right, he shall be paid thereafter a monthly pension equal to two percent (2%) of his monthly (base and service) earnings, multiplied by his years of creditable service, up to and including 25 years, and one and one-half percent (1½%) of his monthly (base and service) earnings multiplied by the number of full years of creditable service in excess of 25 years of creditable service. Monthly earnings shall be the average of the highest three (3) years (base and service) salary during the term of employment. 
(d)  Total Pension Benefits Payable. In no event shall the total pension benefits payable under this amendment, plus any primary insurance amount under the Federal O.A.S.I. program that may inure to any member of the fire department coming under the provisions of this amendment, by reason of his employment by such city, exceed 75 percent of the average monthly (base and service) salary used in computing the pension benefits under the terms of this amendment. Provided, however, that whenever monthly earnings as defined in this amendment, multiplied by years of creditable service at the time of retirement or death shall entitle any member of the fire department coming under the provisions of this amendment to a pension in excess of the maximum pension allowable hereunder, said member of the fire department or, beneficiary in case of death of said member, shall be refunded all contributions made by him on monthly earnings in excess of monthly earnings necessary to arrive at the maximum pension allowable. No department head who elects to come under the provisions of this act shall be entitled to receive any emeritus salary as provided by the governing authorities of any city coming within the provisions of this act. 
(e)  Additional Benefits. 
(1)  Any officer or employee who is a member of the pension fund shall be considered totally and permanently disabled by the board of trustees while the officer or employee is in a continuous state of incapacity due to illness or injury: 
a.  During the first 12 months which the officer or employee is prevented from performing his/her regular, assigned or comparable duties; and 
b.  Thereafter, if the condition continues to prevent the officer or employee from engaging in any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
(2)  A member who is considered by the board of trustees to be totally and permanently disabled in accordance with subsections (f)(1)a. and b. on or after January 1, 1986, shall receive a monthly disability benefit which shall commence on the day following the officer's or employee's last date on the payroll and continue until the earlier of: 
a.  Cessation of total and permanent disability; 
b.  Attainment of age 55. 
(3)  Such monthly disability benefit shall be equal to 50 percent of the officer's or employee's average monthly earnings during the highest three (3) consecutive years of service prior to the date of approval by the board of trustees or the officer's or employee's accrued normal retirement benefit, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Upon the cessation of disability benefits pursuant to subsection (f)(2)a. or b., and the officer's or employee's failure to return to city employment, the officer or employee would be entitled to a pension benefit as calculated in accordance with subsections c. or d. of 1964 Ga. Laws, page 2161, as applicable. Provided further, that the calculation of any such subsequent benefit shall include credit for all years and fractions thereof during the time disability pension benefits have been paid, but shall not include credit for any disability pension payments made. Provided further, that for the purposes of calculating any cost-of-living adjustments, the subsequent benefits shall be considered as a new pension with a new effective date. 
(5)  Disability pension benefits shall be offset by worker's compensation payments so that the combination of payments shall not exceed 75 percent of the officer's or employee's salary at the time disability pension benefits are to commence or 60 percent of an officer's or employee's salary at the time of disability or death in the case of a beneficiary. However, this subsection shall not prevent the restoration of disability pension benefits payable upon the reduction or termination of any such compensation benefits payable by the city under applicable worker's compensation laws. 
(6)  a.  Pensions for beneficiaries designated under the terms of this act, as amended, shall be one-half of the amount the pensioner was receiving, at the time of his death, as a result of retirement as a matter of right or because of total and permanent disability; or one-half of the amount such officer or employee would have been entitled to receive had such person retired prior to death. 
b.  The pension benefits for a primary beneficiary shall be continued to the secondary beneficiary, upon the death, or ineligibility for benefits, of the primary beneficiary. Provided, however, if such primary beneficiary was not receiving the maximum beneficiary payment provided for in this act because of any provision of this act reducing such amount, such maximum beneficiary amount shall be paid to the secondary beneficiary, notwithstanding any lesser amount previously paid to the primary beneficiary. Provided, further, that if said beneficiary, primary or secondary, receiving beneficiary benefits as widow or widower of the pensioner is more than five (5) years younger than the pensioner, there shall be deducted from such pension one-twelfth of two percent (2%) per month for each month such beneficiary is more than five (5) years younger than the pensioner. 
c.  No spouse, designated as a beneficiary, shall be entitled to receive any of said service pension benefits unless such spouse shall have been legally married to such officer or employee of such city for a period of one (1) year prior to the death of such pensioner; provided the officer or employee has made payment for such benefits prior to retirement. 
d.  In determining all pensions of officers or employees referred to above, fractional parts of years of service shall be counted and accumulated annual sick leave days credited to such officer or employee shall be counted as provided for in paragraph e. 
e.  In determining creditable service, accumulated, unused sick leave days credited to such officer or employee shall be added as work days to the creditable service otherwise provided by this act, as amended. In determining average monthly earnings, such accumulated unused sick leave day shall be credited at the highest daily rate of regular salary or earnings during the highest three (3) consecutive years' salary or earnings and all accumulated unused sick leave days shall be substituted for a like number of days at the lowest rate of regular salary or earnings during such highest three (3) consecutive years' salary or earnings during the term of employment. 
f.  Any person entitled to disability benefits under the provisions of this act, as amended, may receive benefits after he/she has been in the active employment of the city for at least a period of five (5) years. Provided, however, said requirement shall not apply to an officer or employee disabled as a direct result of a traumatic event or events occurring during and as a result of the performance of an officer's or employee's regular or assigned duties and not the result of such officer's or employee's willful negligence. 
(7)  Disability pensions; annual review. The retirement of a pension applicant by reason of permanent and total disability shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The board of trustees shall have the right to at least once a year require the pensioner to submit to a medical examination for the purpose of determining whether or not the pensioner has sufficiently recovered from his/her disability and is able to return to any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience. 
b.  If the board, after such examination, determines that the pensioner is not actually totally and permanently disabled but is able to return to any occupation for which he/she is or becomes reasonably qualified by education, training or experience, then the payment of such disability pension shall cease. (Ord. No. 1985-94, § 7, 12-19-85) 
(f)  Benefits for Death From Injuries in Line of Duty. When any person covered by the provisions of this act shall die as a result of injuries incurred in the line of duty, the compensation to which he would have been entitled shall be continued for one (1) year and paid to his widow or minor children (natural or legally adopted), if no widow. Any compensation received by the member due to said injury shall be deducted from the one-year's compensation herein provided for. At the expiration of the one-year period referred to above, the pension benefits for widow shall be computed by the same formula as set forth in subsection (e) above. The pension benefits for widow provided by this amendment shall be continued to the minor child or children (natural or legally adopted) upon the death of the widow until the youngest child shall have become 18 years of age. (Ord. No. 1985-94, § 8, 12-19-85) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the state session laws at the location listed opposite them in the right-hand column below: 

 
(g)  Contribution Prescribed. Any member electing to come under this amendment shall pay into the fire department pension fund the sum of five percent (5%) of his total salary, in the event he does not provide for payment of a pension to this beneficiary, as authorized by this act, as amended, or the sum of six percent (6%) of his total salary, in the event he does provide for the continuance of the pension to his beneficiary. Like payments shall be made from the salaries of future employees of the fire department required to come under this amendment. 
(h)  Additional Contribution Prescribed. In addition to the payments required to be made in subsection (g) above, any member of the fire department who may become a participant under this amendment shall be entitled to all benefits and receive credit for all the years of his creditable service, provided he shall pay into the fund the sum of five percent (5%) of his total salary from the time his salary exceeded $300 per month, if he does not provide for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary, and the sum of six percent (6%) of his total salary from the time his salary exceeded $300 per month, if he does provide for the payment of a pension to a beneficiary. Payments previously made to the pension fund not exceeding the amount due the fund shall be deducted from the total amount due in arriving at the total sum of five percent (5%) or six percent (6%). 
Said total amount due may be paid at the time the member of the fire department elects to come under the terms of this amendment or in 60 monthly installments from the date of his participation under this amendment, at the option of the participant to the plan. Provided, however, that the board of trustees of the fund, as created under this act, as amended, may at their discretion allow additional time for such payments to be made. 
Any member of the fire department who does not elect to participate under this amendment within six (6) months of the effective date of this amendment, but who later elects to participate, shall be required to pay interest at the rate of four percent (4%) per annum from the effective date of this amendment to the date he elects to participate. In the event the member of the fire department should retire or die before said payments into the fund are completed, the secretary of the retirement fund is authorized to deduct the monthly payments from retirement or beneficiary benefits until the obligation is discharged. 
(i)  Effective Date. This section and the several subsections shall be effective the first day of the month following the passage and approval of this act, and the payments required by subsection (g) above, as to those then employed and electing to come under this amendment, shall begin with that date. As to those subsequently coming into the service of the fire department or subsequently electing to participate under the terms of this amendment, said payments shall begin with the employment or date of such election. 
(j)  Appropriations by City. In addition to the fund derived from deductions from salaries and wages, as required by subsection (g) of this amendment, it shall be the duty of the governing authorities of such cities to appropriate and pay into the pension fund an amount which shall be equal to the total amount of deductions from the salaries and wages paid to members of the fire department of said governing authorities, including the amounts paid into said fund by said members of the fire department for prior creditable service, as required by subsection (h). Provided, however, such governing authorities of such cities may delay the matching of additional contributions caused by the enactment of this amendment to the January first next following the effective date of this amendment and provided further, that said governing authorities of such cities may match the payments for prior creditable service, as provided for in subsection (h) in annual installments over a period not to exceed 20 years from the January first next following the effective date of this amendment. Should said pension fund at any time be insufficient to meet and pay the pensions due to such members of the fire department, such governing authorities shall appropriate from current funds amounts sufficient to make up the deficiency and deposit same into the fire department pension fund. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, page 2161, § 1; 1965 Ga. Laws, page 3271, § 1; 1966 Ga. Laws, page 2996, § 1; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 3375, § 1) 
Editor's note— Except for subsection (j) (derived from 1964 Ga. Laws, page 2161), the provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-480. - Light-duty status. 
(a)  In the event that it has been medically determined that an officer or employee of the city is unable to perform his or her regularly assigned duties by reason of physical or mental incapacity or impairment, and where the officer or employee has applied for disability pension, whether in line of duty or not in line of duty, and upon the confirmation and certification of two (2) or more licensed and practicing physicians of Georgia that such officer or employee is capable of performing less strenuous employment duties with such city, such duties to be designated as "light-duty status," and where such less strenuous employment duties are available and are offered to such officer or employee, the officer or employee may, in the discretion of the appointing authority of such city, be placed into such "light-duty status" within the same bureau and thereby continue to be carried on the payroll of such city with no change in salary status or pension fund membership, pending a further medical determination by two (2) or more licensed and practicing physicians of Georgia that such officer or employee is no longer capable of functioning in such "light-duty status." 
(b)  The board of trustees of the pension fund shall be authorized to make all rules necessary in carrying out the provisions set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)  This amendment shall only apply to officers and employees who become members of the pension fund on or after the effective date hereof. [April 6, 1981]. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, page 3569, § 3) 
Sec. 6-481. - Deferred pension benefits. 
(a)  When any person coming within the provisions of this act, as amended, shall have completed 20 years of active service with such city and not yet have reached the age of 65 years, then such person shall have the right to terminate his employment with such city upon completion of said 20 years, or at any time thereafter; elect not to withdraw or have paid to such person the amount which such person would have paid into the pension fund prior to terminating such employment; and upon subsequently attaining 65 years of age commence to receive at said time the benefits to which such person would have been entitled had such person otherwise retired as a matter of right in accordance with the applicable provisions of this act, as amended. 
(b)  Should such person have provided for the payment of a pension to the beneficiary of such person, as authorized by said act, as amended, by making the required payments or contributions to the pension fund, then after terminating the employment with such city and upon the death of such person, either before or after attaining 65 years of age, such person's beneficiary designated under the terms of this act, as amended, shall be entitled to all of the benefits provided for such beneficiary as set forth in the relevant and applicable sections of this act, as amended. 
(c)  Should such person, after having left the employment with such city after 20 years of active service, become reemployed by such city, then such person at such time shall have the right to continue under the provisions of the amendments to said act which such person was under prior to the termination of such employment, or may elect to come under any amendments to said act enacted subsequently to the termination of such person's employment and as might exist and be in effect at the time of said reemployment, upon there being made such payments or contributions to the pension fund, through deductions from salary or otherwise, as might be required by said act, as amended. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2937, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions compiled in the above section were repealed by 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4508 but have been retained at the request of the city due to their applicability to certain individuals. 
Sec. 6-482. - Deduction from benefits for repayment of advanced sick leave. 
(a)  In the event that an officer or employee who has been granted advanced sick leave should retire or die prior to having repaid any and all amounts due such city for the advanced sick leave, an appropriate amount, as determined by the board of trustees, may be deducted from the monthly retirement or beneficiary benefits, or in lieu thereof, such lump sum amounts as the board, in its discretion, deems appropriate until the obligation is discharged. 
(b)  The provisions of this act shall apply only to officers or employees who become members of the pension fund on or after the effective date of this Act. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 3887, §§ 3, 4) 
Chapter 7 - PLANNING 
  

Sec. 7-1. - Historic zones. 
Article XI of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
The governing authority of the City of Atlanta is hereby authorized to establish one (1) or more historic zones in the city as such governing authority may from time to time deem appropriate and to enact appropriate planning and zoning ordinances applicable thereto. 
The purposes of such planning and zoning ordinances shall be to promote the education, cultural, economic welfare of the City of Atlanta by preserving and protecting historic buildings, places, and districts, and to promote the general welfare through the benefits resulting to the economy of the City of Atlanta in developing and maintaining its tourism industry. 
As used herein, an historic zone is a district or area within which the buildings, structures, appurtenances and places are of basic and vital importance for the development and maintenance of the community's tourism industry, its culture and for the protection of property values because of their association with history; because of their unique architectural style and scale, including color, proportions, form and architectural details; or because of their being a part of or related to an area, the design or general arrangement of which should be preserved and/or developed according to a fixed plan based on economic, cultural, historical or architectural motives or purposes. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 1826, § 1; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 1515, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4826. 
Sec. 7-2. - Notice to tax assessing official of zoning changes. 
The planning departments of all counties and municipalities located in whole or in part therein, said counties having within its borders the population of 500,000 or more, according to the United States Census of 1960, or any future United States Census, shall furnish the tax assessing official of such counties and municipalities with notification of any zoning changes made within such counties and municipalities not more than 60 days from the date of said zoning changes. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 3480, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3. - Restriction on rezoning of annexed land. 
Any other law to the contrary notwithstanding, whenever any municipality of this state, which is located wholly within any county of this state having a population of not less than 500,000 or more than 600,000 according to the United States decennial census of 1990 or any future such census, shall annex any land by incorporating same into the corporate limits of such municipality pursuant to general laws authorizing such annexation, such land shall not be rezoned for a different use or the zoning status otherwise changed from that which existed at the time of annexation to such municipality for a period of two years from the time when such annexation became effective, unless the governing authority of the county wherein such municipality is located shall approve such rezoning or change in zoning status. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 4114, § 1; 1981 Ga. Laws, page 3310, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws, page 2343, § 1) 
Chapter 8 - SOLID WASTE 
  

Sec. 8-1. - Criteria for additional solid waste disposal facilities. 
(a)  As of the effective date of this Act, the Council of the City of Atlanta shall not take any action to select a site for or to approve the operation of any additional municipal solid waste disposal facility, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, specifically including, but not limited to, a sewage sludge incinerator until the council enacts and implements a local solid waste management plan which provides for the reduction and recycling of solid waste generated within the city in accordance with the procedures and standards provided in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1. 
(b)  As of the effective date of this Act, the Council of the City of Atlanta shall not take any action to select a site for or to approve the operation of any additional private solid waste disposal facility, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, which has not filed an application for review and approval with the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources, specifically including, but not limited to, a sewage sludge incinerator until the council enacts and implements a local solid waste management plan which provides for the reduction and recycling of solid waste generated within the city in accordance with the procedures and standards provided in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1. 
(c)  This act shall apply to any sites under consideration on the effective date of this act and shall not apply to existing sites in operation on the effective date of this act except for sewage sludge incinerators. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 4804, § 1) 
Chapter 9 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Taxes collectible by county tax commissioner. 
The Constitution of Georgia of 1945 be amended by adding to paragraph VI, section I, article XI the following words: 
Provided, however, that the General Assembly of the state shall have the authority to require or permit the tax receiver, tax collector or tax commissioner of Fulton County to receive tax returns and collect taxes due to the City of Atlanta, and to permit the retention of a percentage of such collections as compensation for such services. 
(1950 Ga. Laws, page 441, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4037. 
Secs. 9-2—9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-26. - Authority to create boards of tax assessors and of tax appeals. 
The General Assembly of Georgia shall have the power by general, local or special law applicable to all counties having therein the greater part of a city with a population of 300,000 or more, according to the United States census of 1950 or any future United States census, and to said city including any portions which lie in one (1) or more counties, without regard to the uniformity provisions otherwise contained in this article, section, and paragraph of this Constitution, to: 
(1)  Provide for the establishment of a board of tax assessors, to define the jurisdiction, powers and duties thereof, the number, terms and qualifications of the members of such board, method of appointment, filling vacancies, removal and remuneration, and 
(2)  Authorize said board to assess all taxable property in the county and in the city for taxation by either for all purposes which is now or may hereafter be authorized by law, and 
(3)  Create a board of tax appeals and equalization, by whatever name designated, and to define the jurisdiction, powers and duties thereof and the number, terms and qualifications of the members of such board and methods of appointment, filling vacancies, removal and remuneration of its members, and establish procedures for appeals from assessments made by the board of tax assessors and for the equalization of said assessments which procedures shall be in lieu of any rights of arbitration or appeal heretofore existing in the county or in the city. 
(4)  Authorize or direct appropriations by the county or the city, or by both, or provide otherwise, for the support of the board or boards created by the General Assembly. 
(5)  The authority conferred on the General Assembly by this amendment shall be retroactive to January 1, 1952. Any act passed after January 1, 1952, germane to the subject matter of this amendment, shall be conclusively presumed to have been passed under the authority of this amendment. It is declared that the authority conveyed to the General Assembly by this amendment relates to only one (1) general subject matter, and the General Assembly is empowered, but not directed, to exercise such authority by one (1) law pertaining to all or any one (1) or more of said functions, which law may be passed prior to the submission of this amendment to the people. 
(6)  Nothing contained in this amendment shall be construed to apply to corporations and persons now required by law to return their property to the State Revenue Commission (formerly the Comptroller General) for ad valorem taxation. 
(1952 Ga. Laws, page 591, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment to the Ga. Const. (1945) was continued in effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4456. 
Secs. 9-27—9-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MILLAGE RATE 

Sec. 9-36. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem tax" or "property tax" means a tax imposed upon the assessed value of property. 
(2)  "Certified tax digest" means that annual property tax digest certified by the tax commissioner of Fulton County to the Georgia Department of Revenue and approved by the state revenue commissioner. 
(3)  "Governing authority" means that official or group of officials responsible for governance of a taxing jurisdiction. 
(4)  "Local fair share" means the amount of funds that each local school system shall be required to spend each fiscal year to support the Quality Basic Education Program pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 20-2-164. 
(5)  "Mill" means one one-thousandth of a United States dollar. 
(6)  "Millage" or "millage rate" means the levy, in mills, which is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the county's, municipalities', or school systems' expenses for their fiscal years. 
(7)  "Roll-back rate" means the millage rate levied in the fiscal year immediately preceding the new fiscal year minus the millage equivalent of the values added by reassessment of real property certified by the chief assessor of Fulton County; provided, however, that the five mills local fair share shall be excluded from the millage rate levied in the fiscal year immediately preceding the new fiscal year for purposes of rollback and that local school systems be authorized to levy the millage required to raise the local fair share required to support the Quality Basic Education Program pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 20-2-164. 
(8)  "Taxing jurisdiction" means Fulton County, the City of Atlanta, any municipality located wholly or partially in Fulton County, the school systems of the county and any such cities, and any special tax district of Fulton County. 
(9)  "Values added by reassessments" means all taxable assessed values added to the certified tax digest as a result of revaluation of existing real property, not including taxable values added as a result of new construction or additions or deletions of structures from the most recent certified tax digest or additions or deletions in the aggregate taxable value of property other than real property. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3506, § 1) 
Sec. 9-37. - Duties of chief tax assessor. 
On or before June 1, 1991, or 30 days before a governing authority is required to establish its millage rates, whichever is earlier, and on or before such date each year thereafter, the chief tax assessor of Fulton County shall certify to the governing authority estimates of: 
(1)  The assessed taxable value of all property, by class of property and in total, which is subject to taxation for that fiscal year within the county; 
(2)  The assessed taxable value contained in the certified tax digest for that fiscal year which was added by reassessment of existing properties; and 
(3)  Instructions describing the method to compute a millage rate for the next fiscal year which, exclusive of values added by new construction, additions, deletions, and property added or deleted due to geographic boundary changes but inclusive of values added by reassessments, will provide the same ad valorem tax revenue for the taxing jurisdiction's next fiscal year as was levied during the current fiscal year; provided, however, that the millage rate for local school systems shall be computed pursuant to section 9-36(7) of this article. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3506, § 2) 
Sec. 9-38. - Procedures for adoption of millage rate. 
(a)  No millage for the calendar year beginning in 1991 and any year thereafter may be levied until the governing authority adopts a resolution or ordinance which specifies the millage rate. The resolution or ordinance shall be adopted at an advertised public meeting and at a time and place which is convenient to the taxpayers of the taxing jurisdiction and shall be adopted only after the governing authority of the taxing jurisdiction has complied with the provisions of this section. Whenever the governing authority shall propose to adopt a millage rate which does not exceed the roll-back rate, it may establish its millage rate pursuant to this subsection. 
(b)  In those instances in which the governing authority proposes to establish any millage rate which would require increases beyond the roll-back rate, the governing authority shall advertise its intent to do so and meet again to adopt its ordinance or resolution establishing a millage rate in excess of the roll-back rate. The meeting shall be held not earlier than three weeks following the date when the proposed millage rate was determined. 
(c)  Not later than one week prior to final consideration of the proposed millage rate, the governing authority shall place an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation serving the residents, which shall read as follows: 
NOTICE OF PROPERTY TAX INCREASE 
The   (name of governing authority)   has tentatively adopted a millage rate which will require an increase in property taxes of   (percentage increase over roll-back rate)   percent. 
All concerned citizens are invited to the public hearing on this tax increase to be held at   (place of meeting)   on   (date and time)   . 
A FINAL DECISION on the proposed tax increase will be made only after this hearing. 
(d)  The advertisement shall be prominently displayed and shall not be placed in that section of the newspaper where legal notices appear. 
(e)  After the final hearing, the millage rate shall be adopted. The ordinance or resolution shall specify the roll-back rate and the final millage rate. 
(f)  Any notice or hearing required under this section may be combined with any notice or hearing required under O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 81, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.). Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude the conduct of further hearings, if the governing authority deems such hearings necessary and complies with the general notice requirements of subsections (a) and (c) of this section. 
(g)  A subsequent adjustment in the millage rate for the then current tax year made by the governing authority of any taxing jurisdiction to effect the adjustments required by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 5, art. 5A (O.C.G.A. § 48-5-340 et seq.) shall not require new advertisement and hearings as required in this section. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3506, § 3) 
Sec. 9-39. - Excess millage rate. 
Nothing contained in this Act shall serve to extend or authorize any millage rate in excess of the maximum millage rate permitted by law or to prevent the reduction of the millage rate. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3506, § 4) 
Sec. 9-40. - Effect of noncompliance. 
Failure of a taxing jurisdiction to comply with the requirements of this bill shall not invalidate any tax bill. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, page 3506, § 5) 
Secs. 9-41—9-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTIONS 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 9-51. - Homestead exemption for elderly or disabled persons. 
(a)  Each resident of the City of Atlanta and City of Atlanta School District who is 65 years of age or over or disabled is granted an exemption from all City of Atlanta and City of Atlanta School District ad valorem taxes in the amount of $10,000.00 on a homestead owned and occupied by such resident if such resident's adjusted gross income, together with the adjusted gross income of the resident's spouse who also resides at such homestead, does not exceed the maximum amount which may be received by an individual and an individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act. As used in this subsection, the term "adjusted gross income" shall have the same meaning as defined in the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, except that for the purposes of this subsection the term shall include only that portion of income or benefits received as retirement, survivor, or disability benefits under the federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability, or pension system which exceeds the maximum amount which may be received by an individual and an individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act. The value of the residence in excess of the above-exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. The homestead exemption provided for in this Act shall not apply to any ad valorem taxes levied to pay interest on and retire bonded indebtedness. 
(b)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided for in subsection (a) of this section as being disabled, the person claiming such exemption shall be required to obtain a certificate from not more than three physicians licensed to practice medicine under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.), relative to medical practitioners, as now or hereafter amended, certifying that in the opinion of such physician or physicians such person is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (a) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an affidavit with the tax commissioner of Fulton County giving the person's age, or if disabled, the certificate or certificates required by subsection (b) of this section, and the amount of income which the person and the person's spouse received during the last taxable year for income tax purposes, and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. 
(d)  Applications for the homestead exemption provided for by this section shall be processed in the same manner as other applications for homestead exemptions, and the provisions of law applicable to the processing of homestead exemptions, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended, shall apply thereto. After a person has filed the proper affidavit and certificate or certificates, it shall not be necessary to make application and file the said affidavit and certificate thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any such person, however, to notify the tax commissioner in the event such person becomes ineligible for any reason to receive the homestead exemption granted by this section. 
(e)  The homestead exemption granted by this section shall be cumulative of any other homestead exemption applicable to City of Atlanta or City of Atlanta School District ad valorem taxes. The homestead exemption granted by this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1990. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, page 4229) 
Secs. 9-52—9-60. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Urban Enterprise Zones 

Sec. 9-61. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Atlanta Urban Enterprise Zone Act." 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 1) 
Sec. 9-62. - Findings and purpose. 
It is found and declared that economically and socially depressed areas exist within the City of Atlanta and that these areas contribute to or cause unemployment, create an inordinate demand for public services, and, in general, have a deleterious effect on the public health, safety, welfare, and morals. It is further found that these areas are commonly characterized by no investment or underinvestment by private enterprise in ventures which produce housing units, jobs, trade, provision of services, and other economic activities which individually and together contribute to a healthy society. This lack of private investment, economic activity, and housing activity contributes materially to social and economic depression in such areas. Therefore, it is in the public interest that incentives be provided to private enterprise to invest in such areas by developing housing units, creating jobs and trade, providing services, and by other economic activities. It is the purpose of this Act, therefore, to grant special powers of tax abatement to the City of Atlanta to provide such incentives. It is the intention of the General Assembly that this Act be liberally construed to carry out such purpose. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 2) 
Sec. 9-63. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem property taxes" means all ad valorem taxes levied by the city or county for city or county purposes, respectively, except those ad valorem property taxes levied to pay bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Board of commissioners" means the board of commissioners of Fulton County. 
(3)  "City" means the City of Atlanta. 
(4)  "City council" means the council which is the legislative body of the City of Atlanta. 
(5)  "City purposes" means purposes of the city including, but not limited to, school and educational purposes. 
(6)  "Commercial purposes" means property used for neighborhood shopping, planned shopping center, general commercial, transient lodging facilities, tourist services, office or institutional, office services, central business district, or other commercial or business use. 
(7)  "Conversion" means the creation of new dwelling units from property previously nonresidential. 
(8)  "County" means Fulton County. 
(9)  "County purposes" means purposes of the county but including neither school nor educational purposes. 
(10)  "Finished goods" means goods, wares, and merchandise of every character and kind, but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted, or unsevered natural resources or raw materials or goods in the process of manufacture or production, or the stock-in-trade of a retailer. 
(11)  "Historic multifamily structure" means a structure which has historically been used principally for multifamily residential purposes or a structure which qualifies as a historic structure and will be converted to multifamily residential purposes pursuant to a plan approved by the city council. 
(12)  "Industrial purposes" means any industrial use permitted by the City of Atlanta zoning ordinance. 
(13)  "Inventories" means property described in section 9-67(a) which may be exempt from ad valorem property taxes. 
(14)  "MARTA station" means Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority station. 
(15)  "Mixed-use commercial and industrial purposes" means property used for both commercial and industrial purposes. 
(16)  "Mixed-use residential and commercial purposes" means property used for both residential and commercial purposes. 
(17)  "Raw materials" means any material, whether crude or processed, that can be converted by manufacture, processing, or combination into a new and useful product but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted, or unsevered natural resources. 
(18)  "Real property" means land and improvements thereon. 
(19)  "Residential purposes" means improvements to property undertaken to provide single-family or multifamily dwelling units for rent or sale; such purposes to include new construction, conversion, or rehabilitation. 
(20)  "Single-room occupancy residence" means a building containing 50 or more dwelling units, all of which are available for rental occupancy for periods of seven days or longer, in which said dwelling units are accessed through a common primary entrance; which contains lounges, living rooms, and other congregate living space of not less than five square feet per dwelling unit; and in which on-site management is provided on a 24 hour basis. For the purposes of this Act, single-room occupancy residences shall be classified as residential uses. As used in this Act, the term `single-room occupancy residence' refers specifically to the Welcome House single-room occupancy residence located on the corner of Memorial Drive and Pryor Street in the City of Atlanta. 
(21)  "Taxable property" means real or personal property subject to ad valorem property taxes. 
(22)  "Taxable value" means the net taxable assessed value of property as shown on the tax digest of Fulton County as adjusted and equalized by the state revenue commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-271, requiring the examination of tax digests for determining uniformity of valuation. 
(23)  "Urban Redevelopment Area (URA)" means an area as defined by and is consistent with O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 44 (O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1 et seq.), the "Redevelopment Powers Law." 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 3; 1990 Ga. Laws, page 3767, § 1; 1991 Ga. Laws, page 3642, § 1; 1994 Ga. Laws, page 5055, § 1) 
Sec. 9-64. - Creation of urban enterprise zones. 
(a)  As provided in this Act, the city council by ordinance may create urban enterprise zones within the corporate limits of the city, within which zones: 
(1)  Inventories of certain goods may be exempted from ad valorem taxation for city and county purposes for the taxable value of those inventories; 
(2)  Taxable real property may be exempted from ad valorem taxation for city and county purposes for the taxable value of that real property; or 
(3)  Property may be exempted under subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(b)  The ordinance creating a zone or exempting additional property from taxation within an existing zone shall specify whether inventories, real property, or both are to be exempted from ad valorem taxation under this Act and shall further specify the types of inventories to be exempt under subsection (a) of section 9-67(a). 
(c)  Urban enterprise zones may be created for commercial, industrial, residential, mixed-use commercial and industrial, or mixed-use residential and commercial purposes. If the zone is for residential purposes, only real property or improvements thereon may be exempted, as provided in paragraph (2) of subsection (a) of this section and section 9-68(c). 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 4; 1994 Ga. Laws, page 5055, § 2) 
Sec. 9-65. - Criteria for creation of zones. 
(a)  Zones for commercial, industrial, or mixed-use commercial and industrial purposes may only be created in an area of the city composed of census tracts as defined in the United States decennial census of 1990 or most recent census, where: 
(1)  The percentage of family and nonfamily households in that census tract that were below the poverty level was at least double the percentage of family and nonfamily households below the poverty level for Fulton County as a whole; 
(2)  The percentage of persons in that census tract who were in the labor force and did not work was at least double the percentage of persons who were in the labor force and did not work for Fulton County as a whole; 
(3)  The percentage of total jobs lost in that census tract for a specified consecutive five-year period was at least double the percentage of total jobs lost for such period for Fulton County as a whole; or 
(4)  The census tract is contiguous to an otherwise eligible census tract, as determined by paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of this subsection, 51 percent of which contains underutilized open lots or parcels of land or structures or buildings of relatively low value, as compared to the value of structures or buildings in the whole census tract, or which is development impaired by airport or airport related transportation noise or airport related environmental factors or by any combination of the foregoing factors. 
(b)  A zone for residential purposes may only be created in an area of the city composed of census tracts in each of which, according to the United States decennial census of 1990 or most recent census: 
(1)  The percentage of family and nonfamily households in that census tract that were below the poverty level was at least double the percentage of family and nonfamily households below the poverty level for Fulton County as a whole; 
(2)  The percentage of persons in that census tract who were in the labor force and did not work was at least double the percentage of persons who were in the labor force and did not work for Fulton County as a whole; or 
(3)  The total number of persons residing in each census tract was less than 1,000 persons. 
(c)  A zone for mixed-use residential and commercial purposes may only be created in an area of the city composed of census tracts as defined in the United States decennial census of 1990 or most recent census, where: 
(1)  The percentage of family and nonfamily households in that census tract that were below the poverty level was at least double the percentage of family and nonfamily households below the poverty level for Fulton County as a whole; 
(2)  The percentage of persons in that census tract who were in the labor force and did not work was at least double the percentage of persons who were in the labor force and did not work for Fulton County as a whole; 
(3)  The percentage of total jobs lost in that census tract for a specified consecutive five-year period was at least double the percentage of total jobs lost for such period for Fulton County as a whole; 
(4)  The total number of persons residing in each census tract was less than 1,000 persons; or 
(5)  The census tract is contiguous to an otherwise eligible census tract, as determined by subsection (a) of this section, 51 percent of which contains underutilized open lots or parcels of land or structures or buildings of relatively low value, as compared to the value of structures or buildings in the whole census tract, or which is development impaired by airport or airport related transportation noise or airport related environmental factors or by any combination of the foregoing factors. 
(d)  (1) A zone for industrial purposes may not be less than 25 acres in size. 
(2)  A zone for commercial purposes may not be less than eight acres in size. 
(3)  A zone for residential purposes may not be less than five acres in size, except: 
a.  When the proposed zone is located within 1,000 feet of a MARTA station pedestrian entrance, in which case a minimum of one-fourth of an acre (0.25 acres) will be required; 
a.1.  When the proposed zone is located beyond 1,000 feet but within 2,000 feet of a MARTA station pedestrian entrance, in which case a minimum of one acre will be required; 
b.  When the proposed zone contains a historic multifamily structure, which structure is suitable for rehabilitation or renovation and can provide a minimum of four multifamily housing units, in which case there will be no minimum acreage required; 
c.  When the proposed zone contains a single-room occupancy residence in which at least 80 percent of the units to be provided bear weekly rents which do not exceed the fair market rents for the Atlanta metropolitan statistical area for single-room occupancy residences as most recently published by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. In said case, there will be no minimum acreage required. Prior to enterprise zone status being granted to single-room occupancy residences, the single-room occupancy operating plan must be presented, and it must project a minimum of 20 percent of the units for homeless persons, including persons previously living in emergency shelters, substandard housing, or in no housing whatsoever; or 
d.  When the proposed zone is located within the Central Business District of the City of Atlanta as defined in the most recent United States Census of Retail Trade, in which case a minimum of 2.5 acres will be required. 
(4)  A zone for mixed-use residential and commercial purposes may not be less than five acres in size, except: 
a.  When the proposed zone is located within 1,000 feet of a MARTA station pedestrian entrance, in which case a minimum of one-fourth of an acre (0.25) acres) will be required; or 
b.  When the proposed zone is located beyond 1,000 feet but within 2,000 feet of a MARTA station pedestrian entrance, in which case a minimum of one acre will be required. 
(5)  A zone for mixed-use commercial and industrial purposes may not be less than 25 acres in size. 
(e)  A zone may extend into a census tract which does not comply with the requirements of subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section if at least 75 percent of the expanded zone would comply with the requirements of subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section. 
(f)  An existing commercial, industrial, residential, mixed-use commercial and industrial, or mixed-use residential and commercial purposes zone may be amended to add additional land to the zone, provided that: 
(1)  The area to be added complies with the requirements of subsections (a), (b), (c) and (e) of this section; and 
(2)  The area to be added is at least ten acres in size for commercial, industrial, mixed-use commercial and industrial, or mixed-use residential and commercial purposes, or one acre in size for residential purposes, and provided, further, that all land is vacant. Notwithstanding the date of expansion of the existing zone, the schedule of abatements for the area added to the existing zone shall coincide with the schedule of abatements for the existing zone. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 5; 1989 Ga. Laws, page 4104, § 1; 1991 Ga. Laws, page 3642, § 2; 1994 Ga. Laws, page 5055, § 3; 1995 Ga. Laws, page 4421, § 1; 1996 Ga. Laws, pages 3743, 3744, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 9-66. - Procedures for tax exemptions. 
(a)  Notice of a public hearing and intent to create an enterprise zone shall be published twice by the city in a newspaper of general circulation at least 14 days prior to the date of the public hearing. All property owners within the proposed zone shall be notified in writing by the city. 
(b)  After the public hearing, the city council may exempt the taxable value of property within a zone only from ad valorem taxation for city purposes. The board of commissioners, by appropriate resolution, may exempt from ad valorem taxation for county purposes under this Act the taxable value of only that same property exempted from ad valorem taxation for city purposes. 
(c)  A copy of the ordinance creating, abolishing, or decreasing in size a zone for industrial or mixed-use commercial and industrial purposes or creating exemptions in any zone shall be transmitted to the tax commissioner of Fulton County, the tax assessors of Fulton County, and the Department of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia within 30 days after its passage. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 6; 1994 Ga. Laws, page 5055, § 4) 
Sec. 9-67. - Types of property eligible for tax exemption. 
(a)  Exemptions from ad valorem taxation of inventories within a zone created for industrial or mixed-used commercial and industrial purposes under this Act may be granted for all or any combination of the following types of property: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in this state. The exemption provided for in this paragraph shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered, or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing, or production operations in this state; 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within this state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in this paragraph shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured; and 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which on the first day of January are stored in a warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside this state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into this state from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for in this paragraph shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. All property that is claimed to be exempt under the provisions of this paragraph shall be designated as being "in transit" upon the official books and records of the warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private where such property is being stored. Such official books and records shall contain a full, true, and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the place of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such "in transit" property, shall be at all times open to the inspection of the Joint City/County Board of Tax Assessors of Fulton County. 
(b)  Exemptions from ad valorem taxation of real property within a zone under this Act may be granted for the taxable value of: 
(1)  The land itself only if the taxable value of all improvements thereon made after the effective date of the creation of the zone in which that land is located equals or exceeds three times the taxable value of the land on the effective date of the creation of the zone; and 
(2)  Only those improvements made after the effective date of the creation of the zone in which the improvements are located. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 7; 1994 Ga. Laws, page 5055, § 5) 
Sec. 9-68. - Amounts of tax exemption. 
(a)  For zones created for industrial or mixed-use commercial and industrial purposes: 
(1)  Real property in a zone which is exempt from ad valorem taxation under this Act shall be exempt for 100 percent of its taxable value for the first five years after the creation of the zone in which the property is located, 80 percent of its taxable value for the next five years, 60 percent of its taxable value for the next five years, 40 percent of its taxable value for the next five years, and 20 percent of its taxable value for the last five years; 
(2)  Real property in a zone which is exempt from ad valorem taxation under this Act as a result of rehabilitation shall be limited to the value of improvements added to the existing structure after the creation of the zone and the value of the land in accordance with section 9-67(b)(1). At such time as the value of the improvements added exceed the value of the land, as of the date of the creation of the zone, by a factor of three or more, then the full value of both the improvements added and the land shall be eligible for the exemption granted under this Act. Said real property in such zone shall be exempt in accordance with the following schedule: 100 percent of its taxable value for the first five years after the creation of the zone, 80 percent of its taxable value for the next five years, 60 percent of its taxable value for the next five years, 40 percent of its taxable value for the next five years, and 20 percent of its taxable value for the last five years; 
(3)  Inventories in a zone which are exempt from ad valorem taxation under this Act shall be exempt from 100 percent of their taxable value for 25 years after the creation of that zone; 
(4)  A zone shall exist for 25 years after the effective date of its creation and at the end of that period the zone and all exemptions established therein pursuant to this Act shall be abolished; 
(5)  Except as provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection, a zone may only be abolished or decreased in size by appropriate ordinance of the city council, approved by a majority of the registered voters of the city voting in a special election which shall be required to be called for such purpose. No such special election to approve the abolition or decrease in size of a zone may be called within five years from the effective date of the creation of that zone. If the results of the election are in favor of the abolition or decrease in size of that zone, it shall be abolished or decreased, respectively, at the end of the fifth year following that special election; and 
(6)  The amount of the exemption for property in a zone may not be changed and the type of property subject to an exemption in a zone may not be decreased by the city council or board of commissioners after the passage of the respective city ordinance or county resolution creating that exemption under this Act, unless the zone and all exemptions on property therein are abolished as provided in this subsection. 
(b)  For zones created for commercial purposes: 
(1)  Real property in a zone which is exempt from ad valorem taxation under this Act shall be exempt for 100 percent of its taxable value for the first five years after the creation of the zone in which the property is located, 80 percent of its taxable value of the next two years, 60 percent of its taxable value for the next year, 40 percent of its taxable value for the next year, and 20 percent of its taxable value for the last year; 
(2)  Real property in a zone which is exempt from ad valorem taxation under this Act as a result of rehabilitation shall be limited to the value of improvements added to the existing structure after the creation of the zone and the value of the land in accordance with section 9-67(b)(1). At such time as the value of the improvements added exceed the value of the land, as of the date of the creation of the zone, by a factor of three or more, then the full value of both the improvements added and the land shall be eligible for the exemption granted under this Act. Said real property in such zone shall be exempt in accordance with the following schedule: 100 percent of its taxable value for the first five years after the creation of the zone, 80 percent of its taxable value for the next two years, 60 percent of its taxable value for the next year, 40 percent of its taxable value for the next year, and 20 percent of its taxable value for the last year; 
(3)  A commercial zone shall exist for ten years after the effective date of its creation and at the end of that period the zone and all exemptions established therein pursuant to this Act shall be abolished; 
(4)  A zone for commercial purposes shall not be abolished or reduced in size nor shall the amounts of exemptions from ad valorem taxation be altered by action of the city council or board of commissioners after adoption of a resolution or ordinance creating the zone. 
(c)  For zones created for residential purposes: 
(1)  a.  Real property in a zone which is exempt from ad valorem taxation under this Act as a result of new construction or conversion shall be exempt for 100 percent of its taxable value for the first five years after the creation of the zone in which the property is located, 80 percent of its taxable value for the next two years, 60 percent of its taxable value for the next year, 40 percent of its taxable value for the next year, and 20 percent of its taxable value for the last year. 
b.  Real property in a zone which is exempt from ad valorem taxation under this Act as a result of rehabilitation shall be limited to the value of improvements added to the existing structure after the creation of the zone and the value of the land in accordance with paragraph (3) of this subsection. At such time as the value of the improvements added exceed the value of the land, as of the date of the creation of the zone, by a factor of eight or more, then the full value of the improvements added shall be eligible for the exemption granted under this Act. Said real property in such zone shall be exempt in accordance with the following schedule: 100 percent of its taxable value for the first five years after the creation of the zone, 80 percent of its taxable value for the next two years, 60 percent of its taxable value for the next year, 40 percent of its taxable value for the next year, and 20 percent of its taxable value for the last year. 
(2)  a.  Except as provided in subparagraph (b) of this paragraph, a zone shall exist for ten years after the effective date of its creation and at the end of this period the zone and all exemptions established therein pursuant to this Act shall be abolished. 
b.  If a zone is located in an area designated as an urban redevelopment area before January 1, 1994, and the effective date of the creation of the zone was on or after January 1, 1992, but before January 1, 1994, and no more than five qualifying housing units were completed in that zone before January 1, 1996, such zone shall exist for 14 years after the effective date of its creation. At the end of such 14-year period, the zone and all exemptions established therein pursuant to this Act shall be abolished. The exemption under this Act for such qualifying housing construction in such zone which has been completed before January 1, 1996, shall expire ten years after the effective date of the creation of such zone in which is located such completed construction. The schedule of reduction in the exemptions provided for by paragraph (1) of this subsection shall begin on the effective date of the creation of the zone for qualifying housing construction completed before January 1, 1996, and that schedule shall begin on January 1, 1996, for qualifying housing construction completed on or after January 1, 1996. In no event may property be granted the exemption provided under this subparagraph for more than ten years. 
(3)  a.  Any tax exemptions granted under this Act shall be restricted to residential purpose improvements made after the effective date of the creation of the zone. If the value of the improvements exceed the value of the land as of the date of the creation of the zone by a factor of eight or more, then the full value of the real property shall be eligible for the exemption granted under this Act. In cases where local zoning allows for mixed use development on property included in a zone for residential purposes, the creation of the zone for residential purposes is not intended to discourage or prohibit development of other locally permissive or permitted uses. However, nonresidential uses of property will not be exempted from ad valorem taxation where found to exist or as may be developed in any zone for residential purposes created pursuant to this Act. 
b.  The only exception to the rule provided for in subparagraph (3)a of this paragraph shall be any urban redevelopment area in which housing construction was initiated and completed prior to zone creation. Any urban redevelopment area (URA) officially adopted by the city council as of January 1, 1980, in which housing units were built during the years 1980 through 1986 shall be eligible for consideration as urban enterprise zones, provided that the requirements of section 9-65(b) and section 9-68(c) have been met. Such action is deemed consistent with the legislative intent of this Act. The designation of appropriate zones, exemption period, and schedule shall be determined by the city council, provided that the exemption period and schedule do not exceed ten years as provided herein and are not less than five years. 
(4)  The determination of whether or not a structure qualifies as an historic multifamily structure shall be based upon a plan for historic preservation which contains standards and criteria for such determination and which plan has been duly adopted by the city council. Further, all rehabilitation improvements to any historic structure shall be consistent with Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings issued by the Secretary, U.S. Department of the Interior, as revised 1983 or as subsequently amended. 
(5)  A zone for residential purposes shall not be abolished or reduced in size nor shall the amounts of exemptions from ad valorem taxation be altered by action of the city council or board of commissioners after adoption of a resolution or ordinance creating the zone. 
(6)  Notwithstanding paragraph (3) of this subsection, subsequent to the creation of a zone, should the use of property therein be converted to a use other than completely for residential purposes, any exemption from ad valorem taxation under this Act shall cease as of the date the use of the property was converted. 
(d)  For zones created for mixed-use commercial and residential purposes: 
(1)  a.  Real property in a zone which is exempt from ad valorem taxation under this Act as a result of new construction or conversion shall be exempt for 100 percent of its taxable value for the first five years after the creation of the zone in which the property is located, 80 percent of its taxable value for the next two years, 60 percent of its taxable value for the next year, 40 percent of its taxable value for the next year, and 20 percent of its taxable value for the last year. 
b.  Real property in a zone which is exempt from ad valorem taxation under this Act as a result of rehabilitation shall be limited to the value of improvements added to the existing structure after the creation of the zone and the value of the land in accordance with paragraph (3) of this subsection. At such time as the value of the improvements added exceed the value of the land, as of the date of the creation of the zone, by a factor of eight or more, then the full value of the improvements added shall be eligible for the exemption granted under this Act. Said real property in such zone shall be exempt in accordance with the following schedule: 100 percent of its taxable value for the first five years after the creation of the zone, 80 percent of its taxable value for the next two years, 60 percent of its taxable value for the next year, 40 percent of its taxable value for the next year, and 20 percent of its taxable value for the last year. 
c.  Exemptions from ad valorem taxation of real property within a zone under this Act may not be granted for the taxable value of improvements which are used for the primary purpose of the processing or handling of hazardous or medical waste not generated on the site where the improvement is located. 
(2)  A zone shall exist for ten years after the effective date of its creation and at the end of this period the zone and all exemptions established therein pursuant to this Act shall be abolished. 
(3)  Any tax exemptions granted under this Act shall be restricted to residential or commercial purpose improvements made after the effective date of the creation of the zone. If the value of the improvements exceeds the value of the land as of the date of the creation of the zone by a factor of eight or more, then the full value of the real property shall be eligible for the exemption granted under this Act. 
(4)  The determination of whether or not a structure qualifies as a historic multifamily structure shall be based upon a plan for historic preservation which contains standards and criteria for such determination and which plan has been duly adopted by the city council. Further, all rehabilitation improvements to any historic structure shall be consistent with Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings issued by the Secretary, U.S. Department of the Interior, as revised 1983 or as subsequently amended. 
(5)  A zone for mixed-use commercial and residential purposes shall not be abolished or reduced in size nor shall the amounts of exemptions from ad valorem taxation be altered by action of the city council or board of commissioners after adoption of a resolution or ordinance creating the zone. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 8; 1989 Ga. Laws, page 4342, § 1; 1990 Ga. Laws, page 3765, § 2; 1991 Ga. Laws, page 3642, §§ 3, 4; 1994 Ga. Laws, page 5055, §§ 6, 7; 1996 Ga. Laws, page 3623, § 1) 
Sec. 9-69. - Limitations on taxable value of inventories and properties in determining exemptions. 
(a)  A zone in which inventories are to be exempted from ad valorem taxation under this Act may not be created nor may additional classes of inventories within an existing zone be exempted when the taxable value of the inventories to be exempt within the proposed or existing zone, respectively, plus the taxable value of inventories already exempt, under this Act, from taxation within all existing zones exceeds 10 percent of the current taxable value of all inventories within the city. 
(b)  A zone in which real property is to be exempted from ad valorem taxation under this Act may not be created nor may real property within an existing zone be first granted an exemption when the taxable value of real property to be exempt within the proposed or existing zone, respectively, plus the taxable value of real property already exempt under this Act from taxation within all existing zones exceeds 10 percent of the total taxable value of all real property located within the city. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, taxable value shall be taxable value for city purposes and shall be determined without regard to any exemption authorized by this Act. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 9) 
Sec. 9-70. - Time limitations. 
(a)  The creation of a zone shall become effective on January 1, immediately following the adoption by the city council of an ordinance creating the zone; provided, however, that the effective date for the creation of a zone may be postponed for up to two years by ordinance of the city council. 
(b)  Exemptions from ad valorem taxes for city or county purposes upon inventory or real property in a zone shall become effective on January 1, immediately following the adoption of the appropriate ordinance by the city council or appropriate resolution by the board of commissioners, respectively, unless the effective date is postponed as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  No exemption from ad valorem taxation upon inventory may be granted unless application by the owner thereof is filed with the tax assessors of Fulton County on or before the tax return date of the year for which the exemption is sought. The application shall contain such information as the tax assessors may require, including, but not limited to, the value of all such inventory for which the exemption is sought. The tax assessors shall determine the value of any exemption granted under this section. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 10; 1989 Ga. Laws, page 4101, § 1; 1994 Ga. Laws, page 5055, § 8) 
Sec. 9-71. - Identification of exempted property. 
The tax commissioner of Fulton County shall identify upon the tax digest of the city, including without limitation the copy of that digest submitted to the state revenue commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-302, that property exempted from taxation under this Act and the amount of that exemption. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 11) 
Sec. 9-72. - Annual report. 
The clerk of council shall annually submit a report to the board of commissioners, the Department of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia, and the local legislative delegations of the city and county. The report shall include: 
(1)  The location, boundary, and size of all zones created in the immediately preceding calendar year and created since the effective date of this Act; 
(2)  The current value of tax exemptions under this Act which became effective in the immediately preceding calendar year and since the effective date of this Act; 
(3)  The current market value of all improvements and inventories in each zone as compared to that value upon the effective date of the creation of that zone; 
(4)  For zones created for commercial, industrial, mixed-use commercial and industrial, and mixed-use commercial and residential purposes, the current number of jobs and types of jobs in each zone as compared to the number and types of jobs upon the effective date of the creation of that zone; and 
(5)  For zones created for residential and mixed-use commercial and residential purposes, the current number of housing units and types of housing units in each zone as compared to the number and types of housing units upon the effective date of the creation of that zone. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 12; 1994 Ga. Laws, page 5055, § 9) 
Sec. 9-73. - Authority to promulgate rules and regulations. 
The city council may authorize the promulgation of rules and regulations to carry out the purposes and intent of this Act. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 4164, § 13) 
Secs. 9-74—9-90. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Homestead Exemption From City Taxes 

Sec. 9-91. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for city purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for city purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Atlanta, but not including taxes to retire bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 7007, § 1) 
Sec. 9-92. - Amount of exemption. 
Each resident of the City of Atlanta is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Atlanta ad valorem taxes for city purposes in the amount of $15,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 7007, § 2) 
Sec. 9-93. - Duties of Fulton County tax commissioner. 
The tax commissioner of Fulton County or the designee thereof shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by this Act, shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the eligibility of the owner for the exemption, and may require periodic certification by the owner that the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 7007, § 3) 
Sec. 9-94. - Renewal of exemption. 
The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead and the owner certifies when requested by the tax commissioner of Fulton County or the designee thereof that the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act to notify the tax commissioner of Fulton County or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. Any person who, as of January 1 of the year immediately preceding the year the homestead exemption provided under this Act first becomes applicable, has applied for and is eligible for a homestead exemption from City of Atlanta ad valorem taxes shall be eligible for the exemption granted under this Act without further application if that person has applied for and been eligible for the immediately preceding year for such exemption. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 7007, § 4) 
Sec. 9-95. - Applicability. 
The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, City of Atlanta School District taxes for educational purposes, county taxes for county purposes, or county school district taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by this Act shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption applicable to City of Atlanta ad valorem taxes for city purposes. A person entitled to an exemption under local law or local constitutional amendment in an amount greater than this exemption shall be entitled to such exemption in lieu of the exemption granted by this Act. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 7007, § 5) 
Sec. 9-96. - Determination of years exemption is applicable. 
The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1 of the year in which the amount of the Fulton County tax digest attributable to the residential classification increases by 30 percent or more over the amount of the 1990 Fulton County tax digest attributable to the residential classification. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 7007, § 6) 
Secs. 9-97—9-110. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Homestead Exemption From School Taxes 

Sec. 9-111. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for educational purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for educational purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Atlanta School District, but not including taxes to retire school bond indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 7003, § 1) 
Sec. 9-112. - Amount of exemption. 
Each resident of the City of Atlanta School District is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Atlanta School District ad valorem taxes for educational purposes in the amount of $15,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 7003, § 2) 
Sec. 9-113. - Duties of Fulton County tax commissioner. 
The tax commissioner of Fulton County or the designee thereof shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by this Act and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the eligibility of the owner for the exemption and may require periodic certification by the owner that the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 7003, § 3) 
Sec. 9-114. - Renewal. 
The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead and the owner certifies when requested by the tax commissioner of Fulton County or the designee thereof that the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act to notify the tax commissioner of Fulton County or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. Any person who, as of January 1 of the year immediately preceding the year the homestead exemption provided under this Act first becomes applicable, has applied for and is eligible for a homestead exemption from the City of Atlanta, shall be eligible for the exemption granted under this Act without further application if that person has applied for and has been eligible for the immediate preceding year for such exemption. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 7003, § 4) 
Sec. 9-115. - Applicability. 
The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, City of Atlanta taxes for city purposes, county school district taxes for educational purposes, or county taxes for county purposes. The homestead exemption granted by this Act shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption applicable to City of Atlanta School District ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. A person entitled to an exemption under local law or local constitutional amendment in an amount greater than this exemption shall be entitled to such exemption in lieu of the exemption granted by this Act. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 7003, § 5) 
Sec. 9-116. - Determination of years exemption is applicable. 
The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1 of the year in which the amount of the Fulton County tax digest attributable to the residential classification increases by 30 percent or more over the amount of the 1990 Fulton County tax digest attributable to the residential classification. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 7003, § 6) 
Secs. 9-117—9-125. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Homestead Exemption From School Taxes For Elderly Persons 

Sec. 9-126. - Granted. 
The homestead of each resident of the independent school district of the City of Atlanta who is 62 years of age or over and who does not have an income from all sources, including the income from all sources of all members of the family residing within said homestead, exceeding $6,000 per annum, shall be exempt from all ad valorem taxation for educational purposes levied for and in behalf of such school system. 
(1974 Ga. Laws, page 2006, § 1) 
Sec. 9-127. - Affidavit required; forms. 
No such exemption shall be granted unless an affidavit of the owner of the homestead is filed with the governing authority of the City of Atlanta, or with a person designated by the governing authority of such city, giving the age of the owner, the amount of income which he received for the immediately preceding calendar year, the income which the members of his family residing within the homestead received for such period, and such other additional information relative to receiving the benefits of the exemption granted by this act as will enable the governing authority of such city, or the person designated by the governing authority of such city, to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to said exemption. The governing authority of the city, or the person designated by the said governing authority, shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. 
(1974 Ga. Laws, page 2006, § 2) 
Sec. 9-128. - Requirements. 
The exemption granted to the homestead within this act shall extend to and shall apply to those properties, the legal title to which is vested in one (1) or more title holders, if actually occupied by one (1) or more such owners as a residence, and one (1) or more such title holders possesses the qualifications provided for in this act. In such instances, such exemptions shall be granted to such properties, if claimed in the manner herein provided by one (1) or more of the owners actually residing on such property. Such exemptions shall also extend to those homesteads, the title to which is vested in an administrator, executor or trustee, if one (1) or more of the heirs or cestui que uses residing on such property shall possess the qualifications provided for herein and shall claim the exemptions granted by this act in the manner herein provided. 
(1974 Ga. Laws, page 2006, § 3) 
Sec. 9-129. - Effective date. 
The exemption provided for by this act shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1972. 
(1974 Ga. Laws, page 2006, § 4) 
APPENDIX A - GEORGIA CONSTITUTION 1983[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix are selected provisions from the Georgia Constitution of 1983. History notes show the source of amendments. The absence of a history note means that the provisions remain unchanged from the original Georgia Constitution of 1983. All numbers, capitalization and spelling are as found in the Georgia Constitution of 1983. 

ARTICLE IX. - COUNTIES AND MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS 
**** 
SECTION II. HOME RULE FOR COUNTIES AND MUNICIPALITIES 
Paragraph III. Supplementary powers. 
(a)  In addition to and supplementary of all powers possessed by or conferred upon any county, municipality, or any combination thereof, any county, municipality, or any combination thereof may exercise the following powers and provide the following services: 
(1)  Police and fire protection. 
(2)  Garbage and solid waste collection and disposal. 
(3)  Public health facilities and services, including hospitals, ambulance and emergency rescue services, and animal control. 
(4)  Street and road construction and maintenance, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights, and devices to control the flow of traffic on streets and roads constructed by counties and municipalities or any combination thereof. 
(5)  Parks, recreational areas, programs, and facilities. 
(6)  Storm water and sewage collection and disposal systems. 
(7)  Development, storage, treatment, purification, and distribution of water. 
(8)  Public housing. 
(9)  Public transportation. 
(10)  Libraries, archives, and arts and sciences programs and facilities. 
(11)  Terminal and dock facilities and parking facilities. 
(12)  Codes, including building, housing, plumbing, and electrical codes. 
(13)  Air quality control. 
(14)  The power to maintain and modify heretofore existing retirement or pension systems, including such systems heretofore created by general laws of local application by population classification, and to continue in effect or modify other benefits heretofore provided as a part of or in addition to such retirement or pension systems and the power to create and maintain retirement or pension systems for any elected or appointed public officers and employees whose compensation is paid in whole or in part from county or municipal funds and for the beneficiaries of such officers and employees. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided by law. 
(1)  No county may exercise any of the powers listed in subparagraph (a) of this Paragraph or provide any service listed therein inside the boundaries of any municipality or any other county except by contract with the municipality or county affected; and 
(2)  No municipality may exercise any of the powers listed in subparagraph (a) of this Paragraph or provide any service listed therein outside its own boundaries except by contract with the county or municipality affected. 
(c)  Nothing contained within this Paragraph shall operate to prohibit the General Assembly from enacting general laws relative to the subject matters listed in subparagraph (a) of this Paragraph or to prohibit the General Assembly by general law from regulating, restricting, or limiting the exercise of the powers listed therein; but it may not withdraw any such powers. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (b) of this Paragraph, the General Assembly shall act upon the subject matters listed in subparagraph (a) of this Paragraph only by general law. 
APPENDIX B - OFFICIAL CODE OF GEORGIA ANNOTATED[1] 
TITLE 21. ELECTIONS 
*** 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix are selected provisions from the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended through the 2005 session of the General Assembly. All numbers, capitalization and spelling are as found in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

21-2-403. - Time for opening and closing of polls. 
At all primaries and elections the polls shall be opened at 7:00 A.M. eastern standard time or eastern daylight time, whichever is applicable, and shall remain open continuously until 7:00 P.M. eastern standard time or eastern daylight time, whichever is applicable, at which time they shall be closed; provided, however, that, in all cities having a population of 300,000 or more according to the United States decennial census of 1970 or any future such census, the polls shall remain open continuously until 8:00 P.M. eastern standard time or eastern daylight time, whichever is applicable, during the cities general elections, at which time they shall be closed and provided, further, that, in a special election held to fill a vacancy in an office in which the district represented by such office lies wholly within the boundaries of a city, the polls shall close at the same time as for a municipal general election in such city. 
TITLE 35. LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
*** 
CHAPTER 35. HOME RULE POWERS 
36-35-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as 'The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965.' 
36-35-2. - Incorporation, dissolution, merger, and boundary changes by local Act or under general law; annexation of deannexed property. 
(a)  No municipal corporation shall be incorporated, dissolved, merged, or consolidated with any other municipal corporation, or have its municipal boundaries changed except by local Act of the General Assembly or by such methods as may be provided by general law. 
(b)  Whenever any local Act of the General Assembly deannexes property lying within the boundaries of a municipal corporation, such property shall not be subject to annexation under Chapter 36 of this title by the municipal corporation from which the property was deannexed for a period of three years from such deannexation. 
36-35-3. - Adoption of ordinances, rules, and regulations; amendment of municipal charters by ordinance; amendment of charters and amendment or repeal of ordinances, rules, and regulations by petition and referendum. 
(a)  The governing authority of each municipal corporation shall have legislative power to adopt clearly reasonable ordinances, resolutions, or regulations relating to its property, affairs, and local government for which no provision has been made by general law and which are not inconsistent with the Constitution or any charter provision applicable thereto. Any such charter provision shall remain in force and effect until amended or repealed as provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. This Code section, however, shall not restrict the authority of the General Assembly, by general law, to define this home rule power further or to broaden, limit, or otherwise regulate the exercise thereof. The General Assembly shall not pass any local law to repeal, modify, or supersede any action taken by a municipal governing authority under this Code section, except as authorized under Code Section 36-35-6. 
(b)  Except as provided in Code Section 36-35-6, a municipal corporation may, as an incident of its home rule power, amend its charter by following either of the following procedures: 
(1)  Municipal charters may be amended by ordinances duly adopted at two regular consecutive meetings of the municipal governing authority, not less than seven nor more than 60 days apart. A notice containing a synopsis of the proposed amendment shall be published in the official organ of the county of the legal situs of the municipal corporation or in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipal corporation once a week for three weeks within a period of 60 days immediately preceding its final adoption. The notice shall state that a copy of the proposed amendment is on file in the office of the clerk or the recording officer of the municipal governing authority and in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county of the legal situs of the municipal corporation for the purpose of examination and inspection by the public. The recording officer of the municipal governing authority shall furnish anyone, upon written request, a copy of the proposed amendment. No amendment under this paragraph shall be valid to change or repeal an amendment adopted pursuant to a referendum as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection or to change or repeal a local Act of the General Assembly ratified in a referendum as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection or to change or repeal a local Act of the General Assembly ratified in a referendum by the electors of the municipal corporation unless at least 12 months have elapsed after such referendums. No amendment under this paragraph shall be valid if provision has been made therefor by general law; or 
(2)  (A)  Amendments to charters or amendments to or repeals of ordinances, resolutions, or regulations adopted pursuant to subsection (a) of this Code section may be initiated by a petition, filed with the governing authority of the municipal corporation, containing, in cases of municipal corporations with a population of 5,000 or less, the signatures of at least 25 percent of the electors registered to vote in the last general municipal election; in cases of municipal corporations with a population of more than 5,000 but not more than 100,000, at least 20 percent of the electors registered to vote in the last general municipal election; and in cases of municipal corporations with a population of more than 100,000, at least 15 percent of the electors registered to vote in the last general municipal election. The petition shall specifically set forth the exact language of the proposed amendment or repeal. The governing authority shall determine the validity of such petition within 50 days of its filing with the governing authority. In the event that the governing authority determines that such petition is valid, it shall be the duty of such authority to issue the call for an election for the purpose of submitting such amendment or repeal to the registered electors of the municipal corporation for their approval or rejection. Such call shall be issued within one week after the determination of the validity of the petition. The governing authority shall set the date of the election as provided in Code Section 21-2-540. The governing authority shall cause a notice of the date of the election to be published in the official organ of the county of the legal situs of the municipal corporation or in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipal corporation once a week for two weeks immediately preceding such date. The notice shall also contain a synopsis of the proposed amendment or repeal and shall state that a copy thereof is on file in the office of the clerk or the recording officer of the municipal governing authority and in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county of the legal situs of the municipal corporation, for the purpose of examination and inspection by the public. The recording officer of the municipal governing authority shall furnish anyone, upon written request, a copy of the proposed amendment. If more than one-half of the votes cast on the question are for approval of the amendment or the repeal, the same shall become of full force and effect; otherwise it shall be void and of no force and effect. The expense of the election shall be borne by the municipal corporation. It shall be the duty of the governing authority to hold and conduct such election. The election shall be held under the same laws and rules and regulations as govern special elections of the municipal corporation, except as otherwise provided in this subparagraph. It shall be the duty of the governing authority to canvass the returns and to declare and certify the result of the election. It shall be the further duty of the governing authority to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. A referendum on any such amendment or repeal shall not be held more often than once each year. No amendment under this subparagraph shall be valid if provision has been made therefor by general law. 
(B)  In the event that the governing authority determines that the petition is not valid, it shall publish in explicit detail the reasons why such petition is not valid. Such publication shall be in the official organ of the county of the legal situs of the municipal corporation or in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipal corporation, in the week immediately following the date on which the petition is declared to be not valid. In any proceeding in which the validity of the petition is at issue, the tribunal considering such issue shall not be limited by the reasons assigned. 
(C)  The sponsor of a petition authorized by this paragraph shall obtain copies of all official petitions from the clerk of the governing authority. The clerk of the governing authority shall approve all petitions as to form. The clerk of the governing authority shall provide a place on each form for the person collecting signatures to provide his or her name, street address, city, county, state, ZIP Code, and telephone number and to swear that he or she is a resident of the municipality affected by the petition and that the signatures were collected inside the boundaries of the affected municipality. The collection of signatures for the petition shall begin on the day the clerk of the governing authority provides official copies to the sponsor of the petition. A petition authorized by subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall not be accepted by the governing authority for verification if more than 60 days have elapsed since the date the sponsor of the petition first obtained copies of the petition from the clerk of the governing authority. Any petition being circulated pursuant to subparagraph (A) of this paragraph on July 1, 1989, shall be filed with the clerk of the governing authority by not later than July 11, 1989. The clerk of the governing authority shall, within seven days, provide the sponsor with official petitions. The sponsor shall have 60 additional days after obtaining official petitions to collect the remaining number of required signatures. Nothing in this subparagraph shall invalidate otherwise valid signatures collected on or before July 1, 1989. 
(c)  Any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, subsection (b) of this Code section shall not apply to any city-county consolidated government in existence on January 1, 1976, and any such city-county consolidated government shall not be authorized to amend its consolidated government charter pursuant to subsection (b) of this Code section. 
36-35-4. - Compensation and benefits for employees and members of governing authority; conditions and requirements governing increases for elective members of governing authority. 
(a)  The governing authority of each municipal corporation is authorized to fix the salary, compensation, and expenses of its municipal employees and the members of its municipal governing authority and to provide insurance, retirement, and pension benefits, coverage under federal old-age, survivors and disability programs, hospitalization benefits, and workers' compensation benefits for its employees, their dependents, and their survivors and for members of the municipal governing authority, their dependents, and their survivors, when such benefits are provided to municipal employees. Any previous actions to extend insurance, federal old-age, survivors and disability programs, retirement, hospitalization, and workers' compensation benefits to members of the municipal governing authority are validated. With the exception of the provision of insurance, federal old-age, survivors and disability programs, retirement, hospitalization, and workers' compensation benefits, any action to increase the salary or compensation of the elective members of the municipal governing authority shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  Any such increase shall not be effective until after the taking of office of those elected at the next regular municipal election which is held immediately following the date on which the action to increase the compensation was taken; 
(2)  Such action shall not be taken during the period of time beginning with the date that candidates for election to membership on the municipal governing authority may first qualify as such candidates and ending with the date members of the municipal governing authority take office following their election; and 
(3)  Such action shall not be taken until notice of intent to take the action has been published in a newspaper of general circulation designated as the legal organ in the county and in the municipal corporation at least once a week for three consecutive weeks immediately preceding the week during which the action is taken. 
(b)  As used in subsection (a) of this Code section, the phrase 'elective members of the municipal governing authority' means, notwithstanding any terminology or designation of a municipal governing authority or governing body contained in any municipal charter, any elective municipal official who exercises any executive or legislative or executive and legislative powers of the municipal corporation, specifically including a mayor, vice-mayor, president or chairman of a municipal council, member of a municipal council, member of a board of aldermen, or member of a board of commissioners. Such phrase shall also include any person who is appointed to fill a vacancy in any such elective office. 
(c)  As used in subsection (a) of this Code section, the words 'salary or compensation,' as applied to the elective members of a municipal governing authority, shall include any expense allowance or any form of payment or reimbursement of expenses, except reimbursement for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by members of a municipal governing authority in carrying out their official duties. The governing authority of each municipal corporation shall be authorized to provide by ordinance for the reimbursement of such actual and necessary expenses. 
(d)  As used in subsection (a) of this Code section, the words 'retirement' and 'pension' shall mean termination from municipal service with the right to receive a benefit based upon all or part of such municipal service in accordance with the terms of the ordinance or contract pursuant to which the municipality provides for payment of such benefits. The General Assembly declares and affirms that the Act approved April 17, 1981 (Ga. L. 1981, p. 1741) was intended to assure that prior advertisement of actions to provide insurance, federal old-age, survivors and disability programs, retirement, pension, hospitalization, and workers compensation benefits to elected members of the municipal governing authority, their dependents, and their survivors is not required. 
36-35-4.1. - Reapportionment of election districts for municipal elections. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations provided by this Code section, the governing authority of any municipal corporation is authorized to reapportion the election districts from which members of the municipal governing authority are elected following publication of the United States decennial census of 1980 or any future such census. Such reapportionment of districts shall be effective for the election of members to the municipal governing authority at the next regular general municipal election following the publication of the decennial census. 
(b)  The municipal governing authority shall by ordinance amend its charter pursuant to paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of Code Section 36-35-3 to reapportion the districts in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)  Each reapportioned district shall be formed of contiguous territory; and the boundary lines of such district shall be the center lines of streets or other well-defined boundaries; 
(2)  Variations in population among such districts shall comply with the one person-one vote requirements of the United States Constitution; and 
(3)  The reapportionment shall be limited to adjusting the boundary lines of the existing districts only to the extent reasonably necessary to comply with the requirements of paragraph (2) of this subsection; and the number of members of the municipal governing body and the manner of electing such members, except for the adjustment of district boundary lines, shall not be changed by the municipal governing authority. 
(c)  In addition to reapportionment following publication of the decennial census, a municipal governing authority shall reapportion districts pursuant to this Code section if the annexation of additional territory to the corporate boundaries of the municipality has the effect of denying electors residing within the newly annexed territory the right to vote for members of the municipal governing authority on substantially the same basis as the other electors of the municipality vote for members of the municipal governing authority. The reapportionment provided for in this subsection shall meet the criteria specified in subsection (b) of this Code section and shall be further limited to making only those adjustments in district boundary lines as may be reasonably necessary to include the newly annexed territory within such districts. Reapportionment under this subsection shall be effective for the next regular general municipal election following the annexation. 
(d)  This Code section shall not prohibit the General Assembly from enacting a local law at any time to amend the charter of a municipality to reapportion or otherwise change election districts from which members of the municipal governing authority are elected. If such action is taken by the General Assembly following publication of a decennial census, but before the first regular general municipal election following the publication of such census, the local Act of the General Assembly shall nullify the power given to the municipal governing authority by subsections (a) and (b) of this Code section to reapportion districts following publication of that decennial census. If such action is taken by the General Assembly in conjunction with the annexation, by local Act of the General Assembly, of additional territory to the corporate boundaries of the municipality, the local Act of the General Assembly shall nullify the power and duty given to the municipal governing authority by subsection (c) of this Code section to reapportion districts as a result of that annexation. 
(e)  In addition to reapportionment following publication of the decennial census, the governing authority of any municipal corporation with a population of 40,000 or more according to the latest United States decennial census is authorized not more than one time during the ten-year period between the publication of consecutive decennial censuses to reapportion or modify the election districts from which members of the municipal governing authority are elected; provided, however, that (1) no such reapportionment shall result in the redistricting of more than 600 persons, (2) no such reapportionment shall occur within 180 days of a general or special municipal election or primary, and (3) a map reflecting any changes and copies of any communications to or from the United States Department of Justice relating to such changes are furnished to the Secretary of State and the Legislative Reapportionment Office within 30 days after such change or communication. Such reapportionment of districts shall be effective for the election of one or more members to the municipal governing authority at the next regular general municipal election or special municipal election following such reapportionment. 
36-35-5. - Filing of charter amendments or revisions, notices, and affidavits; publication and distribution of amendments and revisions by Secretary of State. 
No amendment or revision of any charter made pursuant to this chapter shall become effective until a copy of the amendment or revision, a copy of the required notice of publication, and an affidavit of a duly authorized representative of the newspaper in which the notice was published, to the effect that the notice has been published as provided in this chapter, has been filed with the Secretary of State and in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county of the legal situs of the municipal corporation. The Secretary of State shall provide for the publication and distribution of all such amendments and revisions at least annually. 
36-35-6. - [Powers granted]. 
(a)  The power granted to municipal corporations in subsections (a) and (b) of Code Section 36-35-3 shall not be construed to extend to the following matters or to any other matters which the General Assembly by general law has preempted or may hereafter preempt; but such matters shall be the subject of general law or the subject of local Acts of the General Assembly to the extent that the enactment of such local Acts is otherwise permitted under the Constitution: 
(1)  Action affecting the composition and form of the municipal governing authority, the procedure for election or appointment of the members thereof, and the continuance in office and limitation thereon for such members, except as authorized in Chapter 2 of Title 21 or as provided in Code Section 36-35-4.1; 
(2)  (A)  Action defining any offense, which so defined, is also an offense under the criminal laws of Georgia; 
(B)  Action providing for confinement in excess of six months; and 
(C)  Action providing for fines and forfeitures in excess of $1,000.00; 
(3)  Action adopting any form of taxation beyond that authorized by law or by the Constitution; 
(4)  Action affecting the exercise of the power of eminent domain; 
(5)  Action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission beyond that authorized by charter or general law or by the Constitution; 
(6)  Action affecting the jurisdiction of any court; and 
(7)  Action changing charter provisions relating to the establishment and operations of an independent school system. 
(b)  The power granted in subsections (a) and (b) of Code Section 36-35-3 shall not include the power to take any action affecting the private or civil law governing private or civil relationships, except as is incident to the exercise of an independent governmental power. 
(c)  Nothing in this Code section shall affect Code Sections 36-35-4 and 36-35-5. 
36-35-6.1. - Limitations on home rule powers. 
A municipality shall be prohibited from restricting the use of any language other than English on signs for privately owned businesses. This Code section shall not restrict the municipality's right to enact any other restrictions on signs. 
36-35-7. - Provisions of chapter general law; enactment of local or special laws on subject matters covered by chapter; effect of chapter upon amendment of municipal charters. 
It is declared to be the intention of the General Assembly that the provisions of this chapter are general laws within the meaning of Article III, Section VI, Paragraph IV(a) of the Constitution. No local or special laws shall be enacted on subject matters over which municipal corporations are authorized to act pursuant to this chapter. Any provision of any municipal charter heretofore enacted covering subject matters over which municipal corporations are authorized to act pursuant to this chapter shall be amended, modified, superseded, or repealed only in accordance with subsection (b) of Code Section 36-35-3. 
36-35-8. - Effect of conflict with Chapter 34. 
In the event of a conflict between this chapter and Chapter 34 of this title, this chapter shall control. 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - ACTS 
This table shows the location of the sections of acts contained in the Charter and Related Laws thereto made by acts. 

 
ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of ordinances found in the Charter and Related Laws. 

 