Chapter 22 - AVIATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Helicopter landings prohibited in parks, § 110-74. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; aviation generally, O.C.G.A. § 6-1-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 22-1. - Penalty for violation.     Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1977, § 12-1006) 
Secs. 22-2—22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-71, § 61, approved Sept. 16, 2002, repealed §§ 22-26—22-33 in their entirety. Subsequently, §§ 62—68 of said ordinance, pertaining to similar subject matter, provided for the inclusion of §§ 22-26—22-32 to read as herein set out. Charter reference— Department of aviation, app. IV, §§ 1(b), 13 et seq. Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq. 
Sec. 22-26. - Additional qualifications of aviation general manager; duties of aviation general manager. (a)  In addition to the general qualifications specified in section 2-221, the aviation general manager shall possess knowledge of the factors affecting airport management and service, including a demonstrated experience in the operation of a large organization or supervision of engineering services. The aviation general manager must also have the capacity to plan for expansion for services and locations. Such experience may be in either previous private employment or previous government employment in the aviation industry. (b)  It shall be the responsibility of the aviation general manager to: (1)  Direct the general management, operation and administration of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, which consists of municipal, airline, concessionaire, consulting and contracted employees; (2)  Maintain effective working relationships with representatives of the United States Government, including but not limited to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), and other agencies that provide guidelines and funding for airport operations; (3)  Make recommendations to the mayor, chief operating officer and city council on policy issues and actions related to aviation administration; (4)  Oversee the development of marketing, public relations and operational strategies to ensure that the airport will maintain and improve its national and international ranking among airports; (5)  Represent the department of aviation in public appearances to promote programs and enhance the city's level of competitiveness in national and international arenas; (6)  Direct the overall planning and development on the ongoing expansion of airport facilities; (7)  Manage and direct the collection of revenues and capital projects at the airport; (8)  Negotiate and administer, in conjunction with the chief procurement officer, all contracts for construction, concession and other facilities or amenities at or in support of the airport; (9)  Maintain effective working relationships with other jurisdictions as they relate to general and commercial aviation matters; and (10)  Collaborate with other public officials, airlines, concessionaires and representative groups in the negotiation of policies, rules and regulations that will serve to increase the traffic of flights, passengers and cargo transactions at the airport. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 62, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04) 
Sec. 22-27. - Bureaus within department of aviation.     The department of aviation shall consist of the following: (1)  Bureau of airport maintenance, operations and safety; (2)  Bureau of airport planning and development; (3)  Bureau of airport business and finance; (4)  Bureau of airport administration; and (5)  Office of airport information services. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 63, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 22-28. - Function and duties of bureau of airport planning and development; additional qualifications of director. (a)  The functions and duties of the bureau of airport planning and development are: (1)  Directing the design, award, and completion of engineering and construction projects; (2)  Preparing construction budget and management of all construction on airport property; (3)  Providing technical support and management of immediate and long-range airport planning programs; (4)  Administering an airport noise mitigation program; and (5)  Provide continuous reviews of environmental practices to ensure compliance with environmental regulations. (b)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in section 2-221 the director of the bureau of airport planning and development shall possess, at a minimum: (1)  A baccalaureate degree in engineering, architecture, planning or a related field from an accredited college or university; (2)  Eight years experience at a supervisory level, which includes no fewer than five years in aviation-related administration, engineering, architecture, planning or a related field; or (3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications in subsections (1) and (2). (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 64, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 22-29. - Functions and duties of bureau of airport business and finance; additional qualifications of director. (a)  The functions and duties of the bureau of airport business and finance are to: (1)  Provide acquisition, leasing and management services for land and facilities; (2)  Coordinate financing to fund capital improvement projects and manage accounts payable and receivable; (3)  Implement policies to safeguard airport assets; (4)  Manage ground transportation activities related to the airport; (5)  Direct, plan and coordinate airport parking operations; (6)  Manage marketing and public relations activities to include interacting with local, state and federal officials; and (7)  Manage internal audit activities. (b)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in section 2-221 the director of the bureau of airport business and finance shall possess: (1)  A baccalaureate degree in management, business administration, public administration, aviation administration or a related field from an accredited college or university; (2)  Eight years experience at a supervisory level, which includes no fewer than five years in aviation-related administration, accounting management, financial management, marketing or a related field; or (3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications in subsections (1) and (2). (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 65, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 22-30. - Functions and duties of bureau of airport maintenance, operations and safety; additional qualifications of the director. (a)  The functions and duties of the bureau of airport maintenance, operations and safety shall include: (1)  Administering and supervising the airport certification program, as required by federal aviation regulations, which establish operational standards for the airport; (2)  Administering and supervising the airport security program required by federal aviation regulations; (3)  Ensuring the maintenance and repair of buildings, roadways, runways, taxiways, lighting facilities, landscaping and drainage systems comply with federal, state and city regulations; (4)  Providing liaison services between the department, fire, police and federal agencies assigned to the airport; (5)  Administering an airport safety program to include continuous analyses and program development to ensure a safe occupational environment of the airport; and (6)  Maintaining adequate materials, supplies, and equipment for the continuous operation of all physical facilities; and (7)  Ensuring the ongoing and continuous operation of the airport maintaining a constant state of readiness to include managing the coordination of air traffic control and managing the inspection of the airfield, terminal, concourses, parking decks, roadway systems and other facilities. (b)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in section 2-221 the director of the bureau of airport maintenance, operations and safety shall possess, at a minimum: (1)  A baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in management, industrial management, operations management, aviation administration, public administration, business administration, or a related field from an accredited college or university; (2)  Eight years experience at a supervisory level, which includes no fewer than five years in the fields listed above; or (3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications in subsections (1) and (2). (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 66, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 22-31. - Functions and duties of bureau of airport administration; additional qualifications of director. (a)  The functions and duties of the bureau of airport administration are to: (1)  Direct and manage the development of annual capital and operating budgets; (2)  Assist in the development and implementation of the Strategic Plan and Global Scorecard; (3)  Provide continuous reviews of airport operating procedures and performance; and (4)  Direct and manage airport employee, customer service and procurement programs. (b)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in section 2-221 the director of the bureau of airport administration shall possess: (1)  A baccalaureate degree in management, business administration, public administration, aviation administration or a related field from an accredited college or university; (2)  Eight years experience at a supervisory level, which includes no fewer than five years in aviation-related administration or a related field; or (3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications in subsections (1) and (2). (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 67, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 22-32. - Functions and duties of office of airport information services; additional qualifications of director. (a)  The functions of the office of airport information services are to: (1)  Coordinate and manage all information technology efforts, requirements, processes and procedures; (2)  Develop and implement a Internet/Intranet/Extranet focused IT infrastructure requirements; (3)  Manage department of aviation communications infrastructure, inclusive of data, voice and video communications; and (4)  Set technological platform standards to guide the priorities of the department in the promotion and use of technology. (b)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in section 2-221 the director of the office of airport information services shall possess: (1)  A baccalaureate degree in information technology or a related field from an accredited college or university; (2)  Five years experience at a supervisory level, which includes no fewer than three years in aviation-related information technology or a related field; or (3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications in subsections (1) and (2). (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 68, 9-16-02) 
Secs. 22-33—22-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HARTSFIELD-JACKSON ATLANTA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 8, 2004 renamed art. III to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article was entitled Hartsfield Atlanta International. Cross reference— Naming of public facilities and streets in honor of persons, § 2-2; vending machines on city property and in city facilities, § 2-3. Land development code reference— Airport zoning district, § 16-22.001 et seq. State Law reference— Acquisition, construction and maintenance of airports by municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 22-56. - Definitions. (a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Aircraft means any contrivance designed, invented or used for navigation or flight in the air, except a parachute or other contrivance used primarily as safety equipment.     Airport means Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International and all properties located within the boundaries thereof or any other airport which may be operated by the city.     Aviation general manager means the designated manager of the airport or that official's representative.     Bus means the same as defined in section 22-201.     Central passenger terminal complex or CPTC means the landside terminal buildings and the concourse buildings, the FIS facility, the mechanical building; the aircraft parking and ramp area, the pedestrian mall; the automatic guideway transit systems (AGTS); and all related facilities, certain additions and improvements thereto and certain additional passenger terminal facilities at the airport.     City airlines or signatory airlines means all of the airlines serving Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International who hold certificates from the United States Department of Transportation or its successor agency to transport passengers, mail and property to and from the airport on a regularly scheduled basis and who have entered into an airport use agreement with the city.     Commercial operations means all operations of aircraft for commercial purposes and shall include, without limitation, the following: (1)  Operations by a scheduled air carrier not holding a formal agreement with the city for use of the airport; (2)  Operation of nonscheduled air service for transportation of freight, express or passenger or charter service; and (3)  Scheduled operations, as further defined in this section.     Courtesy cars means the same as defined in section 22-201 (courier vehicle and courtesy vehicle).     FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration or other such agency created by the federal government for the control of civil aviation.     Gross weight means the maximum allowable gross landing weight of aircraft, as determined by the FAA or other governmental agency having jurisdiction.     Host lessee means any person or any other legal entity holding a lease, sublease or any other form of rental or concession agreement on the airport property which has the capability of parking aircraft for passenger, mail or cargo loading and unloading or for the sale, servicing or repair of aircraft.     Landed weight means the total weight of all aircraft landed at the airport, based on the Federal Aviation Administration's certificated maximum gross landing weight, per type of aircraft, by the city airlines during the 12-month period immediately preceding May 1 of each year.     Landing area means all aircraft operation areas, including runways, taxiways, ramps and aprons.     Limousine means the same as defined in section 22-201.     Nonsignatory landing fee means the charge made by the city for each nonsignatory air carrier, air taxi and general aviation aircraft operation, based upon the rate determined by the procedures set out in section 22-87.     Public parking facilities means all parking facilities provided by the city for the public at or in conjunction with the airport.     Scheduled operations means all operations of aircraft by scheduled air carriers holding certificates of convenience and necessity from the United States Department of Transportation designating the city as a service point and holding a formal airport use agreement with the city authorizing use of the airport.     Security identification display area or (SIDA) means all areas of the airport except those areas open to the public and sterile area, including but not limited to, the landing field, runways, taxiways, non-licensed vehicle roads, aircraft ramps or any air operations areas, hangers, aircraft parking aprons, or any area designated by the aviation general manager or as promulgated from time to time by the TSA pursuant to TSA Part 1542 as an area wherein an airport approved badge must be worn at all times unless under an airport approved escort.     Solicitation or to solicit means to directly or indirectly, actively or passively, openly or subtly, ask, request, importune, seek or try to obtain.     Sterile area means a portion of the airport that provides passengers access to boarding aircraft and to which the access generally is controlled by TSA, or by an aircraft operator under TSA Part 1544 or a foreign air carrier under TSA Part 1546 through the screening of persons and property.     Taxicab or taxi means the same as defined in section 22-201.     Tenant or lessee means any person engaged in business on the airport under authority granted by the aviation general manager or by virtue of a contract with the city.     Transient aircraft means an aircraft not using the airport as its permanent base of operations. (b)  Words relating to aeronautical practices, processes and equipment shall be construed according to their general usage in the aviation industry. (Code 1977, § 12-2002; Ord. No. 1999-77, § 1, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2018-20(18-O-1297), §§ 1, 2, 6-13-18 ) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-57. - Official name of airport.     The airport owned and operated by the city is named the "William B. Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport" and shall be known as "Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International." (Code 1977, § 12-2001; Ord. No. 2004-51, § 1, 8-20-04) 
Sec. 22-58. - Operation in public interest.     In the exercise and performance of its powers and duties under O.C.G.A. tit. 6, ch. 3, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq.), the uniform airports law, the council recognizes and declares that Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International is being operated in the public interest and declares its intention to encourage and develop air transportation for the citizens of the state and in particular for the citizens of the greater Atlanta area and to that end pledges the use of the airport for public, governmental and municipal purposes. (Code 1977, § 12-2003; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04) 
Sec. 22-59. - Emergency procedures.     When an emergency exists at the airport, the aviation general manager shall be empowered to take that action which, within the manager's discretion and judgment, is necessary or desirable to protect the health, welfare and safety of persons and property and to facilitate the operation of the airport. (Code 1977, § 12-3007) 
Sec. 22-60. - Compliance required.     Any permission granted by the city, directly or indirectly, expressly or by implication or otherwise to any person to enter or to use the airport or any part thereof is conditioned upon strict compliance with this Code and the ordinances of the city. It shall be the duty and obligation of all those entering the premises of the airport to be familiar with this article. (Code 1977, § 12-3001) 
Sec. 22-61. - Space occupancy permit or contract.     Occupancy and use of any space or the conduct of any business, commercial enterprise or other form of revenue-producing activity on the airport shall not be permitted unless a written contract or permit for such occupancy, use or conduct of business has first been obtained from the city or, where appropriate, approved by the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-6001) 
Sec. 22-62. - Commercial activity.     No person shall occupy or rent space and no person shall carry on any business, commercial enterprise or other form of revenue-producing activity on the airport without first obtaining written permission from the city. (Code 1977, § 12-3002) 
Sec. 22-63. - Agreement or permit required for use of airport for commercial operations. (a)  Any person desiring to conduct commercial operations at the airport, which operations require the use of facilities under a lease with the city or a sublease or other arrangements with a host lessee, shall first enter into an airport use agreement with the city or obtain an airport use permit from the aviation general manager which shall set forth the terms and conditions under which such operations may be conducted and which shall provide for the payment to the city of landing fees and other charges, for indemnification of the city, for the posting of bonds or deposits and for other requirements appropriate to such commercial operation. The landing fee rate to be paid by signatory airlines shall be computed in the manner set forth in the airport use agreement, which shall be the same for all signatory airlines. The landing fee rate to be paid by nonsignatory airlines under an airport use permit shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 22-87(b). (b)  The aviation general manager is authorized to issue an airport use permit to any person who holds all necessary certificates from federal or state agencies having jurisdiction to provide air transportation of passengers, mail or cargo at the airport and who elects not to execute an airport use agreement with the city. As a condition for obtaining and holding such permit, such person shall agree to comply with terms and conditions designed to ensure that the fees and charges due the city in connection with such operations and all expenses or costs incurred by the city as a result of such operations shall be paid in a timely manner and to ensure that the city will be indemnified against claims from third parties arising as a result of such operations and to ensure that all obligations and duties assumed by such person, whether express or implied, in connection with such operations shall be carried out fully and faithfully. (Code 1977, §§ 12-2006, 12-2007) Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. 
Sec. 22-64. - Commercial advertising and display.     No person shall post, distribute or display commercial (for profit) advertisements, literature, circulars, pictures, sketches, drawings or other forms of printed or written matter without first obtaining written permission from the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-3003) 
Sec. 22-65. - Damage to airport property.     Damage, destruction or defacement of airport property is covered by O.C.G.A. § 16-7-24. No person shall alter, make additions to or erect any building or sign on the airport or make any excavations on the airport or willfully abandon any personal property on the airport. Any person causing or being responsible for the injury, destruction, damage or disturbance shall report such damage to the office of the aviation general manager and, upon demand by such office, shall reimburse the city for the full amount of damage. (Code 1977, § 12-3004) 
Sec. 22-66. - Restricted area, security identification display area. (a)  Restricted areas. No person shall be permitted to walk or drive across or upon the restricted areas of the airport without possessing and displaying a proper photo identification badge, which has been approved by the aviation general manager. Occasional visitors must wear other identification approved by FAA pursuant to an approved airport security plan. All areas of the airport except those areas open to the public are restricted, including but not limited to the landing field, runways, taxiways, nonlicensed vehicle roads, the ramps, any of the air operations areas, and any hangar or the aprons of the airport, as provided in the airport security plan. Further, no person shall be permitted access to the concourses or public aircraft departure areas of the airport terminal without passing through the security screening points established in compliance with federal aviation regulations, unless such access is to be gained in accordance with procedures approved by the aviation general manager. (b)  Security identification display area. (1)  No person shall enter into or walk or drive across or upon the areas of the airport that have been designated as security identification display areas or SIDA without possessing and continuously displaying a proper and valid SIDA badge issued by the aviation general manager or other identification authorized pursuant to the airport's FAA approved security plan, or unless such person is escorted by a person possessing and displaying an appropriate identification. A SIDA badge will be deemed to be properly displayed only if it is continuously worn on the outermost garment between the waist and neck. (2)  No person shall allow others to enter into a security identification display area without swiping each individual SIDA badge for each person entering such area, unless the person is being escorted by a person possessing a SIDA badge. (3)  No person shall use or attempt to use or display an expired, suspended, revoked or a counterfeit SIDA badge, nor shall any person use or attempt to use or display a SIDA badge unless such person is the actual authorized holder of such badge. (4)  Any person to whom a SIDA badge is issued shall immediately report to his/her supervisor or airport police the presence of any person observed not displaying proper identification in a secured area. Persons must maintain observation of the individual or escort the individual out of the secured area. (5)  Persons who are authorized to escort others into a secured area must at all times direct and control the movement of the person or persons being escorted while within the secured area. (c)  Sanctions. The aviation general manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke SIDA badges; require security procedures retraining and assess fees arising out of violations of this section. A violator and/or violators company will be responsible for any monetary fees assessed by the aviation general manager and any additional fines imposed by FAA against the airport as a result of the violation. The aviation general manager is also authorized to impose progressive disciplinary measures for violations of this code section, which shall consist of the following: (1)  First offense: The aviation general manager will cause the issuance of a written citation notifying the individual of the specific security rule that has been violated, with a copy to the company responsible for the individual's SIDA badge. Within seven days of a final determination that a violation has occurred. Violators will be required to retake the airport's FAA required security awareness training class and may be assessed pay a $50.00 retraining fee. The aviation general manager may also assess a $250.00 fee against the responsible company based upon the severity of the violation and previous violations by employees of the company. (2)  Second offense occurring within 12 months of the first offense: The violator and his or her supervisor must meet with the airport security manager or his/her designee, they must together attend the airports FAA required security awareness training class. A fee of $100.00 may be assessed against the violator and a fee of $500.00 may be assessed against the violators responsible company based upon the severity of the violation and previous violations by employees of the company. Unescorted access privileges may be suspended for a period of up to 30 days. (3)  Third offense occurring within 24 months of the first offense: The violator's unescorted access privileges may be suspended for 12 months by the airport general manager. The violator may be accessed a $200.00 retraining fee and the violators responsible company may be required to pay a fee of $1,000.00 based upon the severity of the violation and previous violations by employees of the company. (4)  Revocation: Any person violating the provisions contained in this section shall be subject to the revocation of their unescorted access privileges and the confiscation of their SIDA badge. (d)  Process and appeals. (1)  Prior to the imposition of any fee, suspension, or revocation, of unescorted access privileges, the aviation general manager shall notify in writing the violator and the company that he or she works for, so that the violator or the company might present any defense that he or she may have to the proposed fee, suspension or revocation. Such defense shall be presented in writing or the violator or company may request to present the defense orally within three days of receipt of such notices of the proposed action. Notices of proposed actions shall be either delivered personally to the violator and the company or shall be mailed to the last known address of the company as same appears in the files of the airport. Such notices shall set forth the grounds upon which the proposed fee, revocation or suspension is predicated. a.  The violator and the responsible company may request that the aviation general manager reconsider a breach of security ruling and/or suspension of unescorted access privilege on behalf of its employee. b.  All appeals must be submitted in writing to Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Office of General Manager, Attention: Aviation Security Division, 6000 North Terminal Parkway, Suite 314, Atlanta, Georgia, 30320 or via facsimile at (404) 530-6839. c.  The appeal must arrive within 24 hours of the notice of a breach of security ruling or suspension. Failure to comply with this requirement may result in an immediate denial of the appeal. d.  The aviation general manager will issue a final ruling on the matter. (Code 1977, § 12-3005; Ord. No. 1999-77, § 2, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04) 
Sec. 22-67. - Applicability of fire code.     The provisions of the city's fire code are adopted by reference in this article and apply to the airport. Copies of the fire code are available from the municipal clerk and the department of fire. All fueling and defueling operations must comply with all applicable FAA regulations. (Code 1977, §§ 12-3051, 12-3052) Cross reference— Fire prevention and fire safety standards, § 78-56 et seq. 
Sec. 22-68. - Smoking. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other smoking equipment in any manner or form. (b)  No person shall smoke or carry lighted cigarettes, cigars, pipes, matches or any open flame in or upon buildings and facilities owned or operated by the city department of aviation, except in designated areas. (c)  A smoking area may not be designated in: (1)  An elevator; (2)  A rest room; (3)  A service line, ticket line or over-the-counter sales area; (4)  A gate hold area, common traffic area or baggage claim area, unless such area is fully enclosed and ventilated, and there shall not be more than two such areas on any concourse; or (5)  A place in which smoking is prohibited by the fire code or other law, ordinance or rule. (d)  Each employer who operates a place of employment within the boundaries of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International shall, subject to the other provisions in this section, maintain a written smoking policy consistent with this section that accommodates the wishes of smoking and nonsmoking employees by designating smoking areas. If a dispute arises, the preferences of nonsmokers shall be accommodated. However, the employer is not required to make structural or physical modifications to accommodate the smoking area, and existing physical barriers and ventilation systems shall be used to minimize the effect of smoke adjacent to nonsmoking areas. (e)  The management of a restaurant, bar or other eating establishment that has a seating capacity of more than 25 persons shall designate a smoking area proportionate in size to the number of customers normally requesting a smoking area. This policy does not prohibit a proprietor from designating a restaurant or bar in its entirety as a nonsmoking area. (f)  The management of a fully enclosed restaurant or bar with a seating capacity of less than 25 persons or a fully enclosed concession area with less than 4,000 square feet of retail floor space may designate the area in its entirety as a smoking area. If the restaurant, retail space or bar is designated in its entirety, that fact shall be posted conspicuously at all entrances to the premises. (g)  All persons responsible for implementing this policy shall post, in a conspicuous place, signs in any areas designated as smoking areas. The aviation general manager shall cause to have posted at all entrances to the terminal buildings and at the entrances of all city employee occupied buildings, signs stating: "Smoking is Prohibited Except in Designated Areas." (h)  All persons responsible for implementing this policy shall make a reasonable effort to prevent smoking by posting signs as required in this section and asking smokers to refrain from smoking in all areas not designated as smoking areas. (i)  This section does not prohibit an employer or other proprietor with a business located on airport property from adopting a more stringent policy. (j)  Each employer required to adopt a written policy under this section shall provide proof of same to the office of the aviation general manager within 120 days from the date the business begins to operate on airport property. (k)  The director of airport operations shall be responsible for implementing this section. (l)  Fully enclosed offices or rooms occupied exclusively by smokers shall be exempt from this section. (m)  Appropriate signage shall be installed throughout the public areas of the airport by the department of aviation, except that employers or tenants whose businesses are located in exclusively leased areas not ordinarily accessible by the general public may utilize their own design or signs so long as the signs are clearly visible and are not inconsistent with other department of aviation regulations or policies. (n)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any employer, tenant or other proprietor may delegate to the department of aviation, in writing, the responsibility of designating smoking areas within their respective areas. This provision shall not, however, relieve the employer, tenant or proprietor from the other requirements of this section. (o)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed to enter the designated smoking rooms provided by this section, and appropriate signage shall be posted to that effect. (p)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1977, §§ 12-3010, 12-3011; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04) Cross reference— Smoking generally, § 86-31 et seq.; smoking in certain areas within city buildings and facilities, § 106-9. 
Sec. 22-69. - Operation of common-use airport facilities; enforcement.     The aviation general manager may establish and issue rules, procedures and regulations to govern the operation of passenger terminal building facilities, apron facilities, ramp locations and other airport facilities designated as common-use airport facilities by the aviation general manager and may, from time to time, revise such rules, procedures and regulations. All users of common-use airport facilities shall comply with any such rules, procedures and regulations. The aviation general manager may establish and collect fines and may provide for non-pecuniary penalties for the failure of any user of common-use airport facilities to comply with rules, procedures and regulations issued under this section. (Ord. No. 2007-24(07-O-0674), § 1, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 22-70. - Airside operating permit (AOP). (a)  General. Any company desiring to do business at the airport and requiring airside access, but does not have an executed lease or contract with the city, shall first apply for an airside operating permit (AOP). If a company is granted an AOP, the company and its employees shall comply with all City of Atlanta ordinances, including all rules, procedures, and regulations found in the airside operating permit terms and conditions. The aviation general manager or designee may, from time to time, revise such rules, procedures, and regulations.     The AOP application shall be completed prior to the beginning of the security badging process.     The AOP shall be valid for a period of 12 consecutive months from the date of department of aviation (DOA) approval. The AOP shall terminate at the end of 12 months.     The permittee is required to pay the administrative fee only once within 12 calendar months of DOA approval. If the permittee returns to work at the airport within this specified time frame for another project, the permittee is required to reapply and update all application information for each project.     The permittee shall reapply for the AOP prior to the end of 12 months. At the time of renewal, the permittee shall update all application information for each project and remit the administrative fee for the next 12-month period.     The aviation general manager or designee reserves the right to review previous offenses and current financial standing with the city. The city reserves the right to deny the AOP renewal.     The AOP fee shall be assessed by the aviation general manager or designee. A fee schedule shall be approved by the aviation general manager or designee at least 30 days prior to its implementation.     A permit may be cancelled at any time by either party, upon not less than 15 calendar days notice in writing, to the other party. Cancellation shall not relieve the permittee of any liabilities or obligations incurred and accrued prior to the effective date of such cancellation. (b)  Sanctions. The aviation general manager or designee may, in the manager's discretion, suspend or revoke the AOP for a definite or indefinite period, or impose fines arising out of violations to any of the City of Atlanta ordinances or any terms and conditions of the AOP. The company shall be responsible for any monetary fees assessed by the aviation general manager or designee. The aviation general manager or designee is authorized to impose progressive disciplinary measures for violations of any city ordinance, which shall consist of the following: (1)  First offense: The company may be assessed a $250.00 fine. (2)  Second offense: The company may be assessed a $500.00 fine within 12 months of the first offense. (3)  Third offense: The company may be assessed a $1,000.00 fine within 12 months of the first offense. (4)  Suspension: The company's AOP may be suspended by the aviation general manager or designee. (5)  Revocation: Any company violating any city ordinance shall be subject to revocation of its AOP. (c)  Process and appeals. (1)  Prior to the imposition of any fine, suspension, or revocation, the aviation general manager or designee shall notify in writing the company so that the company may present any defense that the company may have to the proposed fine, suspension, or revocation. Such defense shall be presented in writing or the company may request to present the defense orally within three business days of receipt of such notice. Notices of proposed actions shall be either delivered personally to the company or shall be mailed to the last known address of the company as same appears in the files of the airport. a.  The company responsible may request that the aviation general manager or designee reconsider any fine, suspension, or revocation. b.  All appeals must be submitted in writing to Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Attention: Assistant General Manager of Airport Operations, Security, and Maintenance, 6000 North Terminal Parkway, Atlanta, Georgia, 30320 or via facsimile at (404) 209-4154. c.  The appeal must arrive within five business days of the imposed fine, suspension, or revocation. d.  The aviation general manager or designee will issue a final ruling on the matter. (Ord. No. 2009-37(09-O-1047), § 1, 7-13-09) 
Sec. 22-71. - Exterior mural displays on property leased from the city.     Lessees of the city at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport shall be permitted to incorporate large murals on the exterior of buildings leased from the city or on buildings constructed on land leased from the city when the lease terms so provide and when such displays are, in the judgment of the aviation general manager, consistent with the marketing, public relations and operational strategies of the city and the department of aviation to ensure that the airport will maintain and improve its national and international ranking among airports.     It is the purpose of this section to permit the large buildings which are unique to the environment of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport to utilize exterior mural displays to provide a rich and varied visual experience for the general public, visitors and air travelers consistent with the operation of the airport in the public's interest and the city's intention to encourage and develop air transportation for the citizens of the state and in particular for the citizens of the greater Atlanta area.     To that end, the city limits the use of exterior mural displays to the following leased areas: (1)  Airline hangars; (2)  Airline office buildings; (3)  Technical operation facilities; and (4)  Other like facilities as determined by the aviation general manager. In the areas listed herein above exterior mural displays may be permitted by lease(s) that meet the following criteria: a.  The lease shall contain the general consent of the city to allow exterior mural displays on the exterior of buildings leased from the city or on buildings constructed on land leased from the city; b.  The lease shall contain the lessee's agreement that the permission to utilize exterior mural displays is subject to the approval of the aviation general manager as set forth in section 22-64 of this Code; c.  The lease shall contain the lessee's agreement that the permission to utilize only the approved and specific exterior mural displays when granted by the lease is for the purpose of ensuring consistency with the marketing, public relations and operational strategies of the city designed to ensure that the airport will maintain and improve its national and international ranking among airports and is not an abridgement of the right of the lessee to express a viewpoint protected by the Constitution of the State of Georgia or the Constitution of the United States; d.  The lease shall contain the lessee's agreement that the permission to utilize exterior mural displays is not a right under the lease that may be assigned except with the express permission of the aviation general manager; and e.  No freestanding sign shall be permitted to be part of any exterior mural display without regard to whether such freestanding sign is attached to the building on which the exterior mural display is to be created. ( Ord. No. 2013-58(13-O-1347), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Sec. 22-72. - Airport service contractor worker retention program. (a)  This section shall be known as the "Airport Service Contractor Worker Retention Program." (b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Winning offeror is defined as an actual offeror who has been awarded a contract as defined in Atlanta City Code Section 2-1102.     Service contract means a city contract of the department of aviation in excess of $100,000.00, or generating any amount of revenue for the city, including but not limited to providing food, beverage, retail or lounge services for airport passengers and with a contract term of at least one year where the services to be performed are substantially similar to the service contract recently terminated or expired (as opposed to the purchase of goods or other property).     Service employee means any person employed as a service employee of a department of aviation contractor or subcontractor.     Subcontractor means any business that is not a service employee who enters into a contract with a contractor to assist the contractor in performing a service contract and who employs its own service employees.     Terminated or expired contract includes but is not limited to: (1) the completion of the service contract at the end of the contract term; (2) early termination of the service contract in whole or in part for any reason; (3) an amendment that reduces services provided under the service contract, in whole or in part, that subsequently requires the city to competitively procure for those reduced services. (c)  Service contract transition and retention requirements. Winning offerors who receive a service contract solicited by the city's department of aviation to replace an expired contract will be required to enter into an agreement with the city which will, among other things, require the following: (1)  To retain, for a 90-day trial employment period, service employees of the former employer with a service contract with the city that have been employed for at least the immediately preceding six months with that former employer, provided the service employee meets the following requirements: a.  passes the selected winning offeror's established requirements for background checks and drug and alcohol testing in addition to any applicable department of aviation security requirements; and b.  the employee desires to work for the winning offeror for the 90-day trial employment period. (2)  To evaluate each service employee retained from a former employer during the 90-day trial period. (3)  To offer the service employee continued employment under terms and conditions established by the selected winning offeror, subject to applicable city requirements, if in the sole discretion of the winning offeror the service employee's performance during the 90-day trial period is satisfactory. (4)  To refrain from releasing from employment the service employee during the 90-day trial period unless such release from employment is for cause as determined by the winning offeror. (5)  This section will not apply to managerial employees or executives, including those who would be so defined under the Fair Labor Standards Act. (6)  If at any time a selected winning offeror determines that fewer employees are required than were required by the former employer, the winning offeror will retain the service employees applicable in this Code Section by seniority, which should be based on original date of hire within the job classification. (7)  During the 90-day trial employment period, the winning offeror will be required to maintain a preferential hiring list of eligible service employees not retained by the winning offeror from which the winning offeror will hire additional employees if necessary. ( Ord. No. 2017-82(17-O-1659), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
Secs. 22-73—22-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FEES AND CHARGES 
Sec. 22-81. - Purpose of fees and charges.     It is the purpose of the city in establishing charges, fees and tolls for the use of the airport to provide for the cost of constructing, paying debt service on maintaining and operating the airport, together with the incidental navigation facilities, and maintaining the airport in a reasonably safe condition. No part of such charges, fees and tolls shall be added to the general funds of the city. (Code 1977, § 12-2005) 
Sec. 22-82. - Payment of charges.     Any user of the airport or any part thereof operating under written permission shall pay all charges and fees under the terms thereof. Any user operating without written permission shall pay all reasonable charges upon demand. (Code 1977, § 12-3008) 
Sec. 22-83. - Waiver of certain technical code permit fees.     No contractor, subcontractor, tenant, subtenant or any other person shall be required to pay the fees specified for permits or inspections under the provisions of any plumbing ordinance or code; any electrical ordinance or code; any heating, ventilating or air conditioning ordinance or code; any sanitary or sewer ordinance or code; or any other similar code or ordinance which may be in force and effect in the city when the work requiring such permits and inspections: (1)  Is to be performed on the premises of the airport or the approaches thereto; (2)  Is directly related to airport facilities or access thereto; and (3)  Will be paid for in whole or in part by funds received from grants by the federal government. (Code 1977, § 12-3009) 
Sec. 22-84. - Transient aircraft servicing fees.     All charges and fees due the city for service performed to or for transient aircraft at the airport or for damages caused by such aircraft at the airport shall be paid before such aircraft shall be cleared for departure from the airport, unless prior satisfactory credit arrangements have been made with the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-6002) 
Sec. 22-85. - Aircraft and equipment parking fees. (a)  Aircraft and equipment parked on aircraft parking and ramp areas, and equipment stored in equipment storage areas, assigned or leased to fixed base operators, airlines, or other airport tenants, shall be charged parking and storage fees as permitted under the respective lease/permit in effect governing said areas. In such case where the respective lease/permit does not specify the rates permitted to be charged, the rate shall be determined by the fixed base operator or the airline or other airport tenant, provided that in no case shall such rates exceed the rates then in effect for comparable areas under the control of the department of aviation and designated common-use areas. (b)  Aircraft and equipment parked on aircraft parking and ramp areas, and equipment stored in equipment storage areas, that are controlled by the department of aviation and designated as common-use areas by the aviation general manager, shall be charged parking and storage fees at the rate established by the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-6003; Ord. No. 2002-8, § 2, 3-5-02) 
Sec. 22-86. - Motor vehicle impound charges.     If impound action is necessary for any motor vehicle at the airport, the following charges shall be assessed: (1)  A service fee of $25.00 for each vehicle impounded; and (2)  A storage fee of $2.50 for each day or portion of a day the vehicle remains impounded after the first day. (Code 1977, § 12-6004) 
Sec. 22-87. - Landing fees. (a)  Landing fees shall be assessed on all aircraft operations at the airport. The landing fees shall be payable to the city or its duly authorized representatives immediately upon landing at the airport, unless other arrangements have previously been made with the city in writing. Aircraft landing weights are gross weights as defined in section 22-56. (b)  The amount of the nonsignatory landing fee shall consist of a basic landing fee of $0.19 and an airfield improvements landing fee of $0.63 for a total landing fee of not less than $1.52 per 1,000 pounds based on the maximum certificated gross landing weight of the aircraft. (c)  Unless prior credit arrangements are established with the aviation general manager or host lessee, all landing fees and all other charges shall be payable to the city or host lessee prior to the departure of the aircraft concerned. If prior credit arrangements are made only with host lessee without the approval of the aviation general manager, the host lessee may be held responsible for the collection of the landing fee. When prior credit arrangements are established with the host lessee or the aviation general manager, the aircraft owner or operator shall be provided an invoice at a later date based upon the information submitted by the aircraft owner or operator or the host lessee. The aviation general manager shall determine what procedures and forms shall be used for billing purposes. (d)  Because the host lessee is performing a service for the city in collecting the landing fees and in so doing is incurring certain expenses, the host lessee shall be entitled to retain 15 percent of the gross landing fees collected in order to defray these expenses. (e)  If the operator of any aircraft required by this section to pay landing fees shall fail or refuse to do so, the aviation general manager is authorized to serve such operator or the owner of the aircraft with a notice that the city claims a lien upon the aircraft or any other aircraft of the owner or operator for the landing fees. Following the service of such notice, it shall be an offense against the city for the operator or owner of such aircraft to remove the aircraft from the airport or to move the aircraft to any point on the airport. (Code 1977, §§ 12-6011—12-6015; Ord. No. 1995-64, § 1, 10-7-95; Ord. No. 2001-1, § 1, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 2002-48, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-02; Ord. No. 2003-91, §§ 1, 2, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 2006-95, § 1, 12-13-06) Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2003-91, adopted Sept. 23, 2003, states: That the above increase in the non-signatory landing fee [subsection (b)] shall be effective on the 31st day after the date on which the Mayor of the City of Atlanta approves this ordinance, Sept. 23, 2003]. 
Sec. 22-88. - Security services fees.     The aviation general manager shall be authorized to assess fees for the issuance of security badges, badge renewals and any other security services at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. A fee schedule shall be approved by the aviation general manager at least 30 days prior to its implementation. (Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 22-89. - Fees and charges for common-use airport facilities.     The aviation general manager may establish and collect reasonable fees and charges for the use of common-use airport facilities and may, from time to time, revise such fees and charges. All users of common-use airport facilities shall be required to pay such fees and charges as provided in section 22-82. (Ord. No. 2007-24(07-O-0674), § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 22-90. - Live fire training center fees.     The aviation general manager shall be authorized to assess fees for any aircraft rescue and firefighting training or instruction provided at Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport's live fire training facility. A fee schedule shall be approved by the aviation general manager at least 30 days prior to its implementation. ( Ord. No. 2015-29(15-O-1261), § 1, 6-24-15 ) 
Secs. 22-91—22-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERSONAL CONDUCT 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 
Sec. 22-101. - Lost and found articles; disposal of unclaimed articles.     Any person finding lost articles in any area of the airport shall promptly deposit them at the office of the aviation general manager or with any city police officer on duty. Articles with an estimated value of $500.00 or more which are unclaimed within 60 days shall be disposed of to the highest bidder at public sale. Articles with an estimated value of less than $500.00 which are unclaimed within 60 days shall be disposed of on the open market and without the acceptance of bids. The estimated value of any personal property to be sold shall be in the sole and absolute discretion of the mayor or the designee of the mayor. Nothing in this section will be construed to deny the right of airport tenants to maintain lost and found services for property of passengers. (Code 1977, § 12-3031) 
Sec. 22-102. - Accident reports required.     All persons involved in any accident at the airport, whether personal, aircraft or automotive, shall make a full report to the nearest official of the airport as soon after the accident as possible. (Code 1977, § 12-3032) 
Sec. 22-103. - Obedience to signs, fences and barricades.     The public shall observe and obey all posted signs, fences and barricades prohibiting entry upon aircraft operations areas (AOAs) of the airport or governing the activities and demeanor of the public while on the airport. (Code 1977, § 12-3021) 
Sec. 22-104. - Sanitation.     No person shall keep uncovered trash containers in any area of the airport. No vehicle used for hauling trash, dirt or any other materials shall be operated on the airport unless such vehicle is constructed to prevent the contents thereof from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. Areas to be used for trash or garbage containers shall be designated by the aviation general manager, and no other areas shall be used. Such areas shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times. (Code 1977, § 12-3038) 
Sec. 22-105. - Disorderly conduct; intoxication. (a)  No person shall commit any disorderly, obscene or indecent act or commit any act of nuisance on the airport. (b)  No person shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in the airport, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. (Code 1977, § 12-3023) State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 22-106. - Garbage disposal; use of comfort stations; food or beverages in transportation mall; expectorating.     No person shall dispose of garbage, paper or refuse or other material on the airport property except in receptacles provided for that purpose or use a comfort station other than in a clean and sanitary manner or eat food nor drink beverages in the transportation mall or expectorate on the floors, walls or other surfaces of the CPTC. (Code 1977, § 12-3024) Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 130. State Law reference— Littering generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 
Sec. 22-107. - Model aircraft and similar contrivances.     No person shall operate or release any model aircraft, rocket, kite, balloon, parachute or other similar contrivance at or upon the airport without the prior written approval of the aviation general manager. This section shall not extend to the airport weather station when such activity is a regular operational function on its part. (Code 1977, § 12-3026) 
Sec. 22-108. - Pets.     No person shall enter the terminal complex at the airport with any pet except the following: (1)  Seeing eye or hearing-ear guide or service dogs; and (2)  Pets that are to be or have been transported by air, provided that any such pets are in containers or are put in containers as soon as practical or leave the airport as soon as practical after being taken out of the containers. (Code 1977, § 12-3027) Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
Sec. 22-109. - Livestock.     Except as provided in section 22-108 and except for livestock that are to be or have been transported by air and are properly confined for air travel, no person shall permit livestock or any other animal under such person's control or custody to enter the airport. Any such livestock or animal on the airport will be removed or otherwise disposed of by the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-3028) Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
Sec. 22-110 - Dangerous weapons prohibited. (a)  No person shall possess a dangerous weapon in any area of the airport. This includes, but is not limited to, all airport buildings, airport terminals, airfields. restricted parking lots, aircraft and vehicles using the airport, and any building that opens onto the airfield. (b)  For purposes of this section, dangerous weapon includes, but is not limited to, any explosives, razor, slingshot, spring stick, metal knucks, blackjack, sand club, sandbag, bow and arrow, any flailing, instrument consisting of two or more rigid parts connected in such a manner as to allow them to swing freely, which may be known as a nun chahka, nun chuck, nun cacao shuriken, or fighting chains, any disc of whatever configuration, having at least two points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, any mechanism designed to emit an electronic, magnetic, or other type of charge that exceeds the equivalency of a five milliamp 60 hertz shock and used for the purpose of temporarily incapacitating a person, which may be known as a stun gun, any mechanism designed to emit all electronic magnetic, or other type of charge or shock through the use of a projectile and used for the purpose of temporarily incapacitating a person, which may be known as taser. (c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: (1)  Persons possessing a dangerous weapon that is properly encased for transshipment by air in accordance with the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) regulations: (2)  Federal, state, or local law enforcement officers required to carry dangerous weapons while in the performance of their official law enforcement duties; (3)  Persons who need the dangerous weapon while in the performance of their duties for legitimate airport purposes, such as armored security services personnel. (d)  The provisions of this ordinance do not apply to firearms or knives, as those terms are defined under state law. (Code 1977, § 12-3029; Ord. No. 2008-57(08-O-1256), § 1, 7-16-08; Ord. No. 2010-59(10-O-1719), § 1, 10-27-10) 
Sec. 22-111. - Travel on designated roads and rights-of-way.     No person shall travel upon the airport other than on roads, walks or other rights-of-way provided for such specific purpose. Persons authorized access to the rampways may cross the rampways only at those points so marked as crosswalks and at no other point. (Code 1977, § 12-3030) 
Sec. 22-112. - Tampering or interference with aircraft.     No person shall tamper or interfere with any aircraft at the airport or put in motion the engine of such aircraft or use any aircraft, aircraft parts, instruments or tools without permission of the owner or by specific instructions of the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-3034) 
Sec. 22-113. - Throwing paper, cigarettes and other refuse.     No person shall throw paper, cigars or cigarettes, bottles or other material from the windows or roofs of any building or structure on the airport. (Code 1977, § 12-3035) State Law reference— Littering generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 
Sec. 22-114. - Picketing, marching, demonstrations and handbilling. (a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Aviation general manager means the designated manager of the airport or that official's representative.     Demonstration includes but is not limited to picketing, sit-ins, protest marches, speeches and acts ordinarily associated with demonstrating, such as parading, singing and display of placards.     Picket includes any person who induces, informs or attempts to induce or inform anyone not to enter the airport or patronize a tenant therein or to observe the premises in question so as to ascertain who enters or patronizes the premises or who by any means follows employees or patrons of the airport so as either to observe them or attempt to persuade them to cease entering or patronizing the airport or tenants therein.     Picketing includes the stationing or posting of one's person or of others to induce or inform anyone not to enter the airport or patronize a tenant therein or to observe the premises so as to ascertain who enters or patronizes the premises or to follow employees or patrons of the airport or tenants therein to observe them or attempt to persuade them to cease entering or patronizing the picketed premises. This section also applies to informational picketing conducted inside or outside the terminal buildings and concourses and handbilling conducted outside the terminal buildings and concourses.     Restricted area includes the following: (1)  Any space exclusively leased to a tenant of the airport; (2)  Locations within 30 feet of any security checkpoint; or (3)  Any space reserved for particular uses, such as restaurants, restroom facilities, parking areas and baggage claim areas. (b)  Places where authorized. Picketing, marching and demonstrating at the airport shall be conducted only in the nonsecured public use areas which are authorized in writing by the aviation general manager. No such activity shall be conducted in any restricted areas at the airport. (c)  Permit. Any person or group of persons intending to picket or to demonstrate at the airport shall apply to the aviation general manager for a permit no less than 48 hours or more than 30 days in advance of the time picketing is scheduled to begin. The application shall include the dates and hours during which the activities are proposed to be carried out and the expected duration of the proposed activities. The aviation general manager shall respond to the application in a manner timely enough to accommodate the intended purpose of the picketing, but shall not respond later than 24 hours after entry of the application. In the review of the permit application, the aviation general manager shall exercise no judgment regarding the purpose or content of the proposed activities. However, the aviation general manager shall grant permits so as to ensure the proper and orderly functioning of the airport, as well as the safety and welfare of its patrons and employees. Each permit shall be issued for a period of 30 days. (d)  Number of persons allowed. (1)  The total number of persons engaged in picketing or demonstrating at any given time in each concourse shall not exceed two persons. (2)  If the number of persons desiring to picket or demonstrate in any given concourse at any one time exceeds the number specified in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the aviation general manager may impose such reasonable and equitable restrictions as to allowable dates or hours for the conduct of such activities as may reasonably be required to provide as fair and as equal an opportunity as possible for all persons desiring to conduct such activities, while ensuring the safe and efficient operation of the airport. (3)  The aviation general manager may move such permitted activities from one concourse to another and among the different concourses upon reasonable written notice to each affected person when, in the judgment of the aviation general manager, such move is necessary to ensure the safe and orderly operation of the airport. (e)  Restrictions. No picket line, picketing, demonstration or other assemblage shall be permitted in areas determined by the aviation general manager to be restricted areas nor shall it form any obstacle to the free ingress to or egress from any entrance to the airport or to any restricted area nor shall any portion of such entrance be barricaded, obstructed or interfered with in any manner as will prevent free ingress to or egress from the airport or any restricted area. (f)  Conduct of participants. (1)  All participants in any picket line, picketing, demonstration or other assemblage shall conduct themselves in an orderly manner. No participant shall indulge in any shouting, screaming or yelling or emit noise loud enough to disturb the patrons and employees in the safe and proper function of the airport. No participant shall engage in any abusive or threatening language or conduct, physical harm, molestation, harassment of persons, breach of peace or other unlawful conduct. Use of sound-amplifying or voice-amplifying apparatus or noise-making devices on the premises of the airport is prohibited. (2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in concert with others, by the use of insulting, threatening or obscene language, to interfere with, hinder, obstruct or intimidate another in the exercise of the other's lawful right to work or to enter upon the premises for the performance of any lawful vocation or to freely enter or leave any premises. (g)  Size of signs. Placards or signs shall not exceed the body width of the person carrying the sign or be no longer than two feet by two feet by four inches, whichever is larger. Placards or signs may be worn or carried but shall not be affixed to any wooden, plastic or other type of support. No signs shall be draped or affixed to any airport property. (h)  Storage of materials. Persons shall not store any literature or any other materials in any public use area or in any parking area, restroom facility, terminal door, stairway, vestibule or storage area used by the airport and its lessees where such materials will be an obstruction to persons using the airport facilities, or create a health, safety or security risk. Persons may store literature or other materials in a carry bag which must be carried or harnessed so as not to extend beyond the holder's body width. (i)  Conduct. Any activities conducted as prescribed by this section shall be conducted in a peaceful and orderly manner, without hinderance to or interference with the safe, orderly and efficient operation of the airport as set forth and enforced by and pursuant to the authority granted the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-3006) 
Sec. 22-115. - [Loitering prohibited.] (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in any waiting room, hold room, lobby, concourse, terminal or any other portions of the airport. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or remain in the airport for the purpose of lodging. As used in this section lodging means to sleep or remain for a period of time in any public area of the airport for the purpose of sleeping or using the airport for temporary accommodations except in a hotel located on the airport premises or except in the case of severe weather, delays in flights or flight equipment problems or other conditions causing disruption to airport activity which are beyond the control of the airport wherein such person is a ticketed passenger and is caused to remain at the airport. Notwithstanding the prohibition contained in this subsection, the aviation general manager may declare an emergency and suspend the operation of this subsection (b). (c)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any persons from occupying such airport for the purpose of meeting or greeting arriving and departing passengers, or otherwise prohibiting persons with legitimate reasons from remaining on said premises. As used herein the term "legitimate reasons" shall mean but is not limited to being on airport premises for the purpose of shopping or dining at the airports shops or restaurants or observing arriving and departing aircraft in areas permitted by airport tenants or any other area designated, or to be designated for such purpose, by the aviation general manager. (d)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impractical, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section a law enforcement officer shall: (1)  Afford the person the opportunity to explain their presence or dispel the alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity of such person, and (2)  Upon failure of such person to explain their presence in accordance with paragraph (c) above, advise the person that this section prohibits loitering and lodging at the airport as described herein, and afford the person the opportunity to leave the premises. (e)  Violations of this offense shall be punishable as set forth in code of ordinance section 1-8. (Ord. No. 1996-41, § 1, 6-24-96) 
Sec. 22-116. - Rules and regulations governing skycap services. (a)  Any skycap employed by any airline or entity contracted with any airline to provide skycap services shall have a photographic identification card identifying the employee. Any skycap employed by, or pursuant to a contract provides service for, an airline who is issued a photographic identification (security badge) which provides access to the restricted areas of the airport, shall be issued a stamp or other identification as determined by the aviation general manager which shall be affixed to the photo ID at no additional cost. All others must obtain a photographic identification from the aviation general manager. The fee for such identification shall not exceed $10.00. (b)  Photographic identification cards issued by the aviation general manager are valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance or the last day of the month indicated on the identification card. The photograph identification card shall be worn above the waist and shall be visible at all times during which the person is engaged in skycap activities. (c)  Skycaps are prohibited from assisting persons arriving at the airport to take a departing flight by unloading their baggage at curbside locations outside the landside terminal buildings adjacent to baggage claim areas (as such curbside locations are shown in red on the diagram marked exhibit "A", hereby incorporated herein by reference and which is on file in the office of the municipal clerk and the office of the aviation general manager) or transporting their baggage from any of those locations to ticketing or baggage check-in areas of or adjacent to the landside terminal buildings. (d)  Skycaps shall not solicit or attempt to solicit, persuade or urge by words, gestures or otherwise, any person for the purpose of soliciting any person to hire any particular ground transportation provider. (e)  The aviation general manager shall be authorized to establish rules and regulations governing the conduct of skycaps consistent with other requirements of this section upon 30 days' written notice to the skycap and the companies. These rules and regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the aviation general manager. The aviation general manager may establish and revise such rules and regulations from time to time when necessary in order to protect the health, welfare and safety of persons and property and to facilitate the operation of the airport. (Ord. No. 1996-31, § 1, 6-10-96) 
Sec. 22-117. - Definitions.     For purposes of this article the following definitions will apply:     Airport will mean the William B. Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport which is owned and operated by the City of Atlanta.     Company will mean any corporation, partnership or other legal entity that employs skycaps to provide skycap services at the airport.     Skycap will mean any person who is employed by an airline or another company to assist passengers in transporting their baggage: (1)  From any curbside location adjacent to the landside terminal buildings to curbside or terminal ticketing or baggage check-in areas; or (2)  From baggage claim areas in the landside terminal buildings to curbside or ground transportation service areas outside the landside terminal buildings.     Skycap services will mean the services described in this section. (Ord. No. 1996-31, § 2, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04) 
Sec. 22-118. - Revocation or suspension of permits. (a)  The aviation general manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the permission to provide skycap services at the airport of any skycap who violates section 22-116 of this Code or any of the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to section 22-116(c) of this Code, provided that such suspension or revocation by the aviation general manager shall comply with the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section. (b)  Prior to any revocation or suspension, the aviation general manager shall notify in writing the skycap and company that he or she works for that the skycap or the company might present any defense that he or she may have to the proposed suspension or revocation. Such defense shall be presented in writing or the skycap or company may request to present the defense orally within three days of receipt of such notice of proposed action. Notices of proposed actions shall be either delivered personally to the skycap and the company or shall be mailed to the last known address of the company as the same appears in the files of the department. Such notices shall set forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation or suspension is predicated. (c)  The aviation general manager or her designee is also authorized to impose progressive disciplinary measures for violation of these rules and regulations which shall consist of: (1)  First offense will result in a verbal warning to the skycap along with a copy of the rules; (2)  Second offense will result in suspension of permission of the skycap to provide skycap services at the airport for one day; (3)  Third or subsequent offenses will result in suspension of permission of the skycap to provide skycap services for a period up to 30 days and/or revocation of such permit, in accordance with this Code. (Ord. No. 1996-31, § 3, 6-10-96) 
Sec. 22-119. - Personal transportation devices. (a)  Definitions.     Airport property shall include the airport terminals, concourses, air operations area (as defined in section 22-191), ramps and parking areas.     Authorized employees shall include City of Atlanta/Department of Aviation employees, employees of the Atlanta Police Department, employees of the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department, employees of other local, state or federal law enforcement or public safety agencies or departments, employees of airlines, concessionaires, tenants, contractors and vendors approved by the Department of Aviation.     Personal transportation devices ("PTDs") shall include, but are not limited to bicycles, tricycles, unicycles, skateboards, roller skates (including retractable roller shoes), rollerblades, recreational scooters, motorized or electric carts, Segways, hoverboards or any similar devices. The definition of PTDs shall not include any mobility aids or mobility devices used by individuals with disabilities as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12102. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any individual with a disability from operating a mobility aid or mobility device. (b)  Use and operation. (1)  No person shall operate any PTD on airport property except the following: Authorized employees and individuals with disabilities. (2)  Authorized employees may only use the following PTDs on airport property: bicycles, motorized or electric carts, Segways or other approved devices for airport business purposes. (3)  All PTD operators shall exercise reasonable care in the operation of PTDs at all times. (4)  All PTD operators shall operate their PTDs at the pedestrian speed of traffic. (c)  Transport and storage. Passengers traveling with PTDs must adhere to all laws and regulations imposed by the Transportation Security Administration ("TSA"), Federal Aviation Administration ("FAA") and the air carriers regarding security screening and storage of PTDs. (d)  Policies. The Aviation General Manager, or his designee, is authorized to issue written policies, directives, manuals, memoranda, notices or other documents to implement this section. (e)  Violations. Violations of this offense shall be punishable as set forth in City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances section 1-8. ( Ord. No. 2016-08(16-O-1131), § 1, 4-27-16 ) 
Secs. 22-120—22-125. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Tenants and Lessees 
Sec. 22-126. - Use of equipment and facilities.     All shops, garages, equipment and facilities at the airport are expressly for the conduct of the tenant's or lessee's business and operations. No person other than employees of the tenant or lessee shall use these facilities or loiter around such premises without individual and specific permission of the tenant or lessee. (Code 1977, § 12-3037) 
Sec. 22-127. - Duty of airline and fixed base operators for safety of premises.     It shall be the sole responsibility of the airline operators and fixed base operators at the airport to see that, on the premises under their control, all gate chains and other public safeguards are continuously and conscientiously used in a manner to protect all persons. (Code 1977, § 12-3036) 
Sec. 22-128. - Cleanliness of floors.     All tenants and lessees on the airport shall keep the floors of the hangars, hangar areas, terminal apron and ramp areas leased by them, respectively, or used in their operations clean and clear of oil, grease and other materials or stains. (Code 1977, § 12-3039) 
Sec. 22-129. - Storage of hazardous material and equipment.     No tenant or lessee on the airport shall store or stack material or equipment in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to personnel or property. (Code 1977, § 12-3040) 
Sec. 22-130. - Parking and storing ramp equipment.     All ramp equipment at the airport shall be parked and kept in a neat and orderly manner. No receptacle, chest, case or housing shall remain on the apron or ramp area which does not fit in with the general architectural and cleanliness standards of the installation. Final approval on these items rests with the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-3041) 
Sec. 22-131. - Maintenance of leased property.     All tenants and lessees at the airport shall maintain their leased properties in a condition as to repair, cleanliness and general maintenance in a manner agreeable to the aviation general manager or in accordance with their individual lease agreements. (Code 1977, § 12-3042) 
Sec. 22-132. - Structural or decorative changes. (a)  No tenant or lessee at the airport shall effect structural or decorative changes, including signs, or additions of any type without prior written permission of the aviation general manager or in accordance with the tenant's or lessee's individual lease agreement. (b)  Any person desiring to erect or construct any building on the airport shall be required to submit plans and specifications for the building to the aviation general manager. The plans shall include a general layout, drawn to scale, showing the desired amount of ground actually required for the operation of such building, in addition to the portion occupied by the building proper. All buildings erected upon the airport shall conform to the airport building development standards, as well as the building code requirements of the city and shall be approved by the department of fire. (Code 1977, § 12-3043) 
Sec. 22-133. - Responsibility for damages.     Tenants and lessees at the airport shall be fully responsible for all damages to buildings, equipment, real property and appurtenance in ownership or custody of the airport caused by negligence, abuse or carelessness on the part of their employees, agents, customers, visitors, suppliers or persons with whom they may do business. (Code 1977, § 12-3044) 
Sec. 22-134. - Delivery of goods or materials.     No person shall make or cause to be made deliveries of goods, materials or merchandise to any premises within any airport passenger terminal building by way of routes which traverse public circulation areas of such building without specific written authorization from the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-3046) 
Sec. 22-135. - Removal of leasehold improvements and equipment.     Approval may be granted for a tenant at the airport to remove leasehold improvements or equipment financed by the city only under all of the following conditions: (1)  The lease does not prohibit such removal and all conditions imposed by the lease upon such approval will be met; (2)  If the improvements to be removed were financed by the tenant, the tenant must agree to restore the premises to their original condition before such improvements were constructed or installed; (3)  If the improvements to be removed were financed by the city, the aviation general manager shall first make a determination of whether the improvements to be removed could be desirable for proper and efficient use of the premises in the future and: a.  If it is determined that the improvements might be needed in the future, the tenant must agree to pay to the city in cash, prior to removal, the unamortized principal balance of the cost thereof; or b.  If it is determined that the improvements will not be needed in the future, the tenant shall have the option to post with the city for the unamortized principal balance a letter of credit, payment bond or other form of rental payment guarantee acceptable to the chief financial officer, in lieu of paying the unamortized principal balance of the cost of such improvements; and c.  The tenant must agree to restore the premises to their original condition before the improvement was constructed or installed. (Code 1977, § 12-3047) 
Secs. 22-136—22-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DISTRIBUTION OF LITERATURE AND SOLICITATION OF FUNDS[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30; charitable solicitations, ch. 42. 
Sec. 22-146. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Area means any one of those areas which are numbered and circumscribed in red on the floor plan of the airport terminal building, which appears on a two-page diagram thereof, marked exhibit A, fully incorporated in this section by reference and on file in the office of the municipal clerk and the bureau of airport operations and safety. (Code 1977, § 12-3064) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-147. - Scope.     Any person or organization desiring to distribute literature free of charge at any airport owned by the city or to solicit funds in the exercise of constitutional freedoms shall be permitted to do so in accordance with this article. The sale of literature shall be permitted only through airport newsstands or other appropriate concessions as determined by aviation general manager operating by virtue of a contract with the city or a contract with a city contractor. The city further prohibits the solicitation of funds which calls for the immediate exchange of such funds on the premises of the airport, except in designated locations. (Code 1977, § 12-3061) 
Sec. 22-148. - Violations.     Any violation of this division shall constitute an offense for the purposes of section 1-8. (Code 1977, § 12-3080) 
Sec. 22-149. - Registration required.     Any person desiring to distribute literature or solicit funds at assigned locations on the premises of the airport shall first register with the aviation general manager by completing a registration form setting forth the following: (1)  If for a period longer than a single 24-hour period: a.  Full name, mailing address, and telephone number, if any, of: 1.  The persons who will be distributing the literature or soliciting funds at the airport; 2.  The persons or organizations sponsoring or promoting distribution of literature or solicitation of funds; 3.  The contact person who will have supervision of and responsibility for the persons working at the airport; b.  The dates on and hours during which the distribution and/or solicitation are proposed to be conducted and the duration of the proposed activities; and c.  A description of the proposed activity, e.g., distribution of literature or solicitation of funds. (2)  If only for a single 24-hour period: a.  The full name of the person who will be distributing the literature at the airport; b.  The full name, mailing address and telephone number, if any, of the contact person who will have supervision of and responsibility for the persons working at the airport; and c.  A description of the proposed activity, e.g., distribution of literature or solicitation of funds. (Code 1977, § 12-3062) 
Sec. 22-150. - Issuance of identification card. (a)  Upon receipt of a registration form containing the information required in section 22-149(a), the aviation general manager shall forthwith issue the person an identification card which shall indicate that person's identification number and date of expiration and shall designate to which area of the airport that person has been assigned. The aviation general manager shall exercise no judgment regarding the purpose or content of the proposed activities and shall exercise no discretion over the issuance of an identification card under this section, it being the intent of this division that the issuance of an identification card by the aviation general manager shall be a routine, clerical and mandatory function. The identification card shall be issued for a period of 30 days. (b)  Upon receipt of a registration form containing the information required in section 22-149(b), the aviation general manager shall issue an identification card for a single period of 24 hours on a first come, first served basis for any unutilized or unassigned area of the airport that the person has been assigned. Registration forms for the identification cards to be used for Saturday and Sunday will be accepted and cards issued on the preceding Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. (c)  Any persons distributing literature or soliciting funds shall keep the identification card on their person at all times while conducting the activity regulated hereunder and shall display such card in a conspicuous manner. (Code 1977, § 12-3063) 
Sec. 22-151. - Restricted areas. (a)  The distribution of literature at the airport shall be conducted only in the nonsecured, public use areas defined in section 22-146. Under no circumstances shall such activity be conducted: (1)  In any space exclusively leased to a tenant of the airport; (2)  Within 30 feet of any security checkpoint; (3)  In any space reserved for particular uses, such as restaurants, restroom facilities, parking areas or baggage claim areas; or (4)  At any location on the premises of the airport not designated as an "area" in section 22-146. (b)  The solicitation of funds and immediate receipt of such funds shall be conducted only on the sidewalk areas outside the north and south terminal buildings of the airport at locations designated by the aviation general manager. Persons conducting such activities shall not obstruct the ingress and egress of persons entering and exiting the airport terminal and shall not otherwise violate any of the regulations contained in section 22-158. (c)  The sale of literature or other printed material other than through airport newsstands, or other appropriate concessions as provided for in section 22-147, and the solicitation of funds which calls for the immediate receipt of such funds, is prohibited in the concourses and terminal buildings of the airport. (Code 1977, § 12-3065) 
Sec. 22-152. - Number of persons involved. (a)  The total number of persons distributing literature in areas 1 and 4 as defined in section 22-146 shall not exceed four at any one time. In areas 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10 the total number of persons shall be limited to two at any one time. (b)  If two or more persons or organizations seek to use any one location at the same time, the commissioner shall assign the available areas between or among them as equally as possible. (c)  If the number of persons desiring to distribute literature at the airport exceeds the number specified in subsection (a) of this section, the aviation general manager may impose such reasonable and equitable restrictions as to allowable dates and hours therefor as may be reasonably required to provide as fair and as equal an opportunity for all such persons, while ensuring the efficient and effective operation of the transportation functions of the airport. (d)  The aviation general manager may move the areas for distribution of literature from one location to another and disperse such activity among the various areas upon reasonable notice to each affected person when in the judgment of the aviation general manager such is necessary to the efficient and effective operation of the transportation function of the airport. (e)  The total number of persons soliciting funds in the areas defined in section 22-151 as designated by the aviation general manager shall be limited to two persons in each area. If the number of persons desiring to solicit funds exceeds the numbers specified in this section, the aviation general manager may impose reasonable and equitable restrictions as to allowable dates and hours therefor as may be reasonably required to provide as fair and as equal an opportunity for all persons desiring to solicit funds, while ensuring the efficient and effective operation of the transportation functions of the airport. The aviation general manager is further authorized to move the areas for solicitation of funds which seek the immediate receipt of such funds from one location to another and disperse such activity among the various areas upon reasonable notice to each affected person when in the judgment of the aviation general manager such is necessary to ensure the efficient and effective operation of the transportation function of the airport. (Code 1977, § 12-3066) 
Sec. 22-153. - Prohibited activities.     The distribution of literature and solicitation of funds referred to in this division shall be conducted strictly in conformity with the terms and conditions of this division. In conducting such activities, no person shall: (1)  In any way intentionally obstruct, delay or interfere with the free movements of any other person or seek to coerce or physically disturb any other person. (2)  Use any sound-amplifying or voice-amplifying apparatus or noise-making devices on the premises of the airport. (3)  Receive or accept any payment or donation of money from any person except as provided for in sections 22-151 and 22-152. (4)  Indicate in any way that such person is a representative of the city, the airport or any airline, or any other airport tenant. (5)  Repeatedly attempt to give literature or solicit funds to any person who has indicated that such person does not wish to accept the literature or to make a donation. (6)  Set up or use any table, counter or stand; however, chairs or stools may be used if approved by the aviation general manager. (7)  Drape or attach any materials to any booth provided by the city for conducting any activities referred to in this division nor drape or attach materials to any property of the city in the area provided by the city for conducting the activities referred to in this division. (8)  Wear or carry a sign or placard larger than two feet by two feet four inches in size. (9)  Misrepresent such person's identity or misrepresent the organization or purpose for which funds are being solicited. (10)  Persons shall not store any literature or any other materials in any public use area, or in any parking area, restroom facilities, terminal doors, stairways, vestibules or storage areas used by the airport and its lessees except in a carry bag which must be carried or harnessed so as not to extend beyond the holder's body width, where such materials will be an obstruction to persons using the airport facilities, or create a health, safety or security risk. (Code 1977, § 12-3067) 
Sec. 22-154. - Revocation or suspension of registration. (a)  The aviation general manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the registration of any person who violates any of the terms, conditions or any of the rules and regulations of this division, provided that such suspension or revocation by the aviation general manager shall comply with the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. (b)  Prior to any revocation or suspension, the aviation general manager shall notify in writing the registered person that such person may present any defense that such person may have to the proposed suspension or revocation. Such defense shall be presented within three days for registrants who have been granted permission to distribute literature for periods in excess of five days. For registrants who have been granted permission of periods of less than five days, such defense shall be submitted within 24 hours. Such notices shall either be delivered personally or shall be mailed to the last known address of the registrant as the same appears in the files of the department. Such notices shall set forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation or suspension is predicated. (c)  The aviation general manager shall further be authorized under emergency circumstances to revoke or suspend registration. If done verbally, it shall be followed by written confirmation, within 24 hours of such emergency revocation or suspension. (Code 1977, § 12-3068) 
Secs. 22-155—22-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITIES 
Sec. 22-166. - General rules. (a)  Conformity to federal guidelines and orders. All aeronautical activities at the airport and all flying aircraft departing from or arriving in the airspace above the airport shall be conducted in conformity with the pertinent provisions of the FAA and United States Department of Transportation and orders issued by the aviation general manager. The FAA regulations for operation of aircraft on or about the airport are adopted by reference and shall have the same effect as if enumerated in this section. Copies are on file in the office of the chief controller, FAA, airport tower. All aircraft operators are requested to follow preferential runway procedures. (b)  Release of liability. The aircraft owner, pilot, agent or duly authorized representative agrees to release or discharge the city, its officers and its employees of and from liability for any damage which may be suffered by any aircraft and its equipment and for personal injury or death, except where such damage, injury or death is due solely to the negligence of the city. (c)  Liability for property damage. All persons using any part of the airport shall be held liable for any property damage caused by carelessness and negligence on or over the airport, and any aircraft being operated so as to cause such property damage may be retained in the custody of the city, and the city may have a lien on the aircraft until all charges for damages are paid. Any person liable for such damage agrees to indemnify fully and to save and hold harmless the city, its officers and its employees from claims, liabilities and causes of action of every kind, including attorney's fees, connected therewith and from the expenses of the investigation thereof. (d)  Accident reports. The pilot or operator of any aircraft involved in an accident causing personal injury or property damage shall, in addition to all other reports required to be made to other agencies, make a prompt and complete report concerning the accident to the aviation general manager. When a written report of an accident is required by the civil air regulations, a copy of the report may be submitted to the aviation general manager in lieu of the report required in this subsection. Persons on the airport who witness any aircraft accident are required to render a prompt detailed report thereof, including the names and addresses of all witnesses, to the aviation general manager. (e)  Removal of disabled aircraft. Subject to compliance with appropriate federal regulations, the aircraft owner shall be responsible for the prompt removal of all disabled aircraft and parts of such aircraft at the airport, as reasonably directed by the aviation general manager. If the aircraft owner fails or refuses to comply with such directions, the disabled aircraft or any and all parts thereof may be removed by the aviation general manager at the owner's expense and without liability for damage which may be incurred as a result of such removal. (f)  Authority to close airport and delay or restrict operations. The aviation general manager shall have the right at any time to close the airport in its entirety or any portion thereof to air traffic, to delay or restrict any flight or other aircraft operation, to direct refusal of takeoff permission to aircraft and to deny the use of the airport or any portion thereof to any specified class of aircraft or to any individual or group, when the aviation general manager considers any such action to be necessary and desirable to avoid endangering persons or property and to be consistent with the safe and proper operation of the airport. If the aviation general manager believes the condition of the airport to be unsafe for landings and takeoffs, it shall be within the aviation general manager's authority to issue or cause to be issued a NOTAM (notice to airmen) closing the airport or any portion thereof. (g)  Two-way radio communication. All aircraft landing and taking off at the airport shall have a properly functioning two-way radio capable of communicating, under normal conditions within ten miles, with the airport FAA control tower. (h)  Radio failure. Aircraft suffering radio failure at the airport shall acknowledge reading the tower when on the ground or in flight by blinking the navigation lights or movement of ailerons. (i)  Payment of rentals, fees and charges. The payment of rentals, fees and charges relating to the use of airport premises and facilities shall be made before takeoff. In lieu of such payment, satisfactory credit arrangements shall be made by the pilot or owner of the aircraft with the office of the aviation general manager before such pilot leaves the airport. (Code 1977, § 12-4001) 
Sec. 22-167. - Air traffic rules. (a)  In advance of any flight test, practice instrument flight or practice low approach to be conducted within the airport terminal control area, the pilot shall make the necessary arrangements with the FAA airport traffic controller on duty and shall receive clearance before starting such maneuvers. (b)  No experimental flight, stunt flying or ground demonstration shall be conducted on or above the airport without the express approval of the aviation general manager. (c)  The aviation general manager may delay or restrict any flight or other operations at the airport and may refuse takeoff clearance to any aircraft for any reason the aviation general manager believes justifiable. (d)  No motorless aircraft shall land or take off from the airport. (e)  No aircraft shall be operated on the surface of the landing area, public aircraft ramp and apron area, public passenger ramp and apron area, public cargo ramp and apron area or public aircraft parking and storage area: (1)  In a careless or negligent manner or in disregard of the rights and safety of others; (2)  Without due caution and circumspection; (3)  At a speed or in a manner which endangers unreasonably persons or property; (4)  While the pilot or other person aboard controlling any part of the operation thereof is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any narcotic or habit-forming drug; or (5)  If such aircraft is so constructed, equipped or loaded as to endanger unreasonably or to be likely to endanger persons or property. The aviation general manager shall have the right to deny the use of the airport to any aircraft or pilot violating city or federal regulations, whether at the airport or elsewhere. (f)  All aircraft operations shall be confined to hard-surfaced runways, taxiways and aprons. (g)  Taxiways shall not be used for takeoffs or landing of aircraft. (h)  No student pilot training will be permitted at the airport. (Code 1977, § 12-4002) 
Sec. 22-168. - Taxiing and ground rules. (a)  No aircraft engine shall be started or run at the airport unless a pilot or a certified airframe and powerplant (A & P) mechanic qualified to run the engines of that particular type of aircraft is attending the controls. Blocks shall always be placed in front of the wheels before starting the engine unless the aircraft is provided with adequate parking brakes. (b)  Aircraft on the airport shall perform warm-up or prolonged engine test operations only in approved areas. (c)  No person shall run the engine of any aircraft at any location on the airport in such manner as to cause damage to other aircraft or property or in such manner as to blow paper, dirt or other materials across taxiways or runways as to endanger the safety or operations on the airport. Starting engines shall be prohibited until proper clearance has been given by ground personnel and until all standard safety procedures have been met. Propeller and exhaust noises shall be kept to a minimum at all times. Operation of aircraft engines shall be restricted to qualified personnel. (d)  Aircraft shall be taxied in accordance with the prescribed taxiing patterns when any particular runway is in use. (e)  No person shall taxi an aircraft on the airport until such person has ascertained that there will be no danger of collision with any persons or objects. (f)  All aircraft shall be taxied at a safe and reasonable speed. (g)  Aircraft shall not be taxied, towed or pushed on any part of the field, runway or taxiway exits until specifically cleared to do so by ground control. (h)  No aircraft shall be operated on the airport in a careless or reckless manner. (i)  Any person damaging any light or fixture because of contact with aircraft shall report such damage to the aviation general manager immediately and shall be fully responsible for any costs required to repair or replace the damaged facility. (j)  No aircraft shall taxi between the airline passenger terminal gates and aircraft parked on the terminal ramp. (k)  Where taxiing aircraft are converging, the aircraft involved shall pass each other bearing to the righthand side of the taxiway, unless otherwise instructed by ground control. (l)  No aircraft shall be taxied into or out of any hangar under its own power. (m)  All aircraft being taxied, towed or otherwise moved at the airport shall proceed with navigation lights on during the hours between sunset and sunrise. (n)  Aircraft engines shall be started or operated only in the places designated for such purposes by the aviation general manager. Engine run-ups for test or maintenance purposes between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall be permitted only in specific locations approved by the aviation general manager for such purposes during such period. (o)  All repairs to aircraft or engines shall be made in the areas designated for this purpose. Minor adjustments and repairs may be performed on air carrier aircraft at gate positions on the terminal ramp when such repairs can be accomplished without inconvenience to other persons. Any aircraft being repaired at a gate position shall be removed immediately upon the request of the aviation general manager. No aircraft engine shall be run up for test purposes at any gate position. (p)  Aircraft and related equipment shall not be parked or stored on the airport except in areas and in the manner designated by the aviation general manager, or on premises leased for such purposes, and shall pay the parking fees established for the privilege of parking therein. Aircraft and equipment operators parking and storing aircraft and/or equipment at the airport shall do so at their own risk. (q)  Aircraft shall not be washed except in areas and in the manner designated by the aviation general manager. (r)  Any parts of the landing areas or runways temporarily unsafe or unavailable shall be clearly marked, both day and night, with standard instruction markers and when so marked are not to be used. (s)  General aviation and military aircraft shall not use any passenger gate of the central passenger terminal complex for boarding or discharging any passengers or crew nor shall any commercial aircraft arriving from an unsecured airport be allowed to discharge passengers into the concourse unless prior arrangements for security screening have been accomplished by the requesting carrier. (t)  No person or individual shall push back or power back any aircraft from gate areas or guide any arriving aircraft into gate areas unless at least two wing walkers are deployed. The wing walkers shall position themselves on each side of the aircraft to exercise pedestrian and vehicle control. No person or individual shall put into motion or cause to be put into motion any aircraft in such a manner that the movement of such aircraft presents an endangerment to persons or property. (Code 1977, § 12-4003; Ord. No. 1996-20, § 1, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 1999-70, § 1, 9-29-99; Ord. No. 2002-8, § 3, 3-5-02; Ord. No. 2015-21(15-O-1185), § 1, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 22-169. - Helicopter operations. (a)  Helicopter aircraft arriving and departing the airport shall operate under the direction of the FAA control tower at all times while in the airport terminal control area. (b)  Helicopter aircraft shall avoid fixed-wing aircraft traffic patterns and altitudes to the maximum extent possible. (c)  Helicopters shall not be taxied, towed or otherwise moved with rotors turning unless there is a clear area of at least 50 feet in all directions from the outer tips of the rotors. (d)  Helicopter aircraft shall not be operated within 200 feet of any areas on the airport where unsecured light aircraft are parked. (e)  During landings and takeoffs, helicopter aircraft shall not pass over any airport buildings, structures, their adjacent auto parking areas or passenger concourses. (Code 1977, § 12-4004) 
Secs. 22-170—22-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MOTOR VEHICLE TRAFFIC[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 150. 
Sec. 22-181. - Operator's license required; operation under influence of alcohol or drugs; access to restricted areas; markings of vehicles used for servicing aircraft. (a)  No person shall operate motorized equipment of any kind on the airport unless possessed of a current and valid motor vehicle operator's license nor shall any person operate any vehicle on the airport under the influence of alcohol or drugs. (b)  No vehicle shall have access to restricted areas of the airport without written authorization from the aviation general manager. No vehicle shall be given authorization to enter restricted areas of the airport without filing and maintaining with the aviation general manager a valid certificate of automobile liability insurance coverage for such vehicle from an insurer licensed to do business in the State of Georgia, in the minimum amount of $10,000,000.00 combined single limit for personal injury and property damage, naming the City of Atlanta, its elected officials, officers, agents, and employees as additional named insureds thereunder, and bearing an endorsement by the insurer that such coverage will not be modified or canceled without at least 15 days' prior written notice to the aviation general manager. (c)  Vehicles being operated by tenants on the ramp which are specifically designed for performing functions associated with aircraft servicing or related work and not designed for ordinary public roadway use shall be conspicuously and permanently painted or marked with the operator's company name, logo or colors or any combination thereof. These markings must be acceptable to the aviation general manager. (d)  Vehicles which require access to restricted areas on an occasional or nonrecurring basis may be granted such access when escorted by a vehicle which meets the requirements for such access including the requirements for automobile insurance coverage as set forth in paragraph (b) above, covering both vehicles. Any operator of such escort vehicle shall remain with the vehicle being escorted at all times and must assume all responsibility and liability for the actions of such vehicle and its operator. (Code 1977, § 12-5001; Ord. No. 1998-73, §§ 1, 2, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 1999-31, § 1, 3-5-99) State Law reference— Driving under influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 
Sec. 22-182. - General traffic rules. (a)  The traffic regulations in chapter 150 of this Code, insofar as applicable, shall apply to the airport as modified by this division. (b)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, the aviation general manager shall establish regulations relating to traffic and traffic control and shall install official traffic control devices and signs pursuant thereto. These shall include but not necessarily be limited to regulations for parking, standing, stopping, one-way traffic, speed restrictions, crosswalks, safety zones, bus stops, matters pertaining to all forms of commercial ground transportation including but not limited to delivery vehicles of all kinds, traffic lanes, signal devices, limitations on roadway use and restricted areas. These regulations shall be filed in the office of the aviation general manager as well as with the municipal clerk. (c)  The aviation general manager shall cause to be erected all signs, markers and devices pertaining to traffic control within the boundaries of the airport. Failure to comply with the directions indicated on the signs, markers or devices erected or placed in accordance with this subsection shall be a violation of this section and of the applicable provisions of the traffic rules and regulations as contained in this Code. (d)  No person shall operate upon the airport premises any motor vehicle which: (1)  Is so constructed, equipped or loaded or is in such physical or mechanical condition as to endanger persons or property; or (2)  Has attached thereto any object or equipment, including that which is being towed, which drags, swings or projects so as to be hazardous to persons or property. (e)  Unless prior written approval is obtained from the aviation general manager, only motor vehicles licensed to travel on the public highways of the state shall be permitted on the airport streets, roads or aprons. (f)  No motor vehicle shall be parked on any portion of the AOA or landing area except those trucks and other vehicles necessary for the servicing of aircraft and the maintenance of the airport, all of which vehicles shall have complied with section 22-181. (g)  No vehicle shall be parked in a manner so as to block: (1)  The gates or emergency entrances to an AOA; (2)  Fire hydrants; or (3)  Building entrances and exits on the airport. (h)  No person shall park a motor vehicle in any place marked for parking of vehicles in such manner as to occupy a part of another marked space. No person shall park a motor vehicle in any area requiring payment for parking thereon without paying the required parking fee. (i)  All motor vehicles not licensed by the state shall be equipped with two headlights and one or more red taillights, and all lights shall be kept lighted between sunset and sunrise unless the vehicle is in a designated vehicular parking area. Operators of such vehicles shall dim or lower the beams of headlights or other lights on such vehicles when meeting an oncoming vehicle. All vehicles operated on the airport will be maintained in safe operating condition, especially with respect to brakes, steering gear and electrical systems. (j)  No person shall clean or make any repairs to motor vehicles anywhere on the airport other than in areas designated for this purpose, except for minor repairs necessary for a temporarily disabled vehicle, nor shall any person move or interfere or tamper with any motor vehicle or put in motion the engine or take or use any motor vehicle part, instrument or tool thereof without the permission of the owner or satisfactory evidence of the right to do so duly presented to the aviation general manager. (k)  Driving of motor vehicles across any passenger loading lane on the terminal apron is prohibited while aircraft are positioned at the gate, except in areas approved by the aviation general manager for multiple aircraft loading at each gate. (l)  All vehicles operating on or across taxiways or runways shall be equipped with a two-way radio and must be in continuous communication with the control tower, except when under escort by a vehicle properly authorized and equipped. (m)  Aircraft shall at all times have the right-of-way over other vehicular traffic. All vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft. (n)  Vehicles with permits to operate on the restricted areas of the airport shall not proceed closer than 225 feet to the edge of the runway or cross the runways prior to being cleared by the control tower. It is the responsibility of all vehicle operators to be conversant with the standard air traffic control light signals, whether or not the vehicle is radio equipped. (o)  No person operating a motor vehicle on the airport shall fail to give proper signals or fail to observe the directions of posted traffic signs. (p)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle at the airport overloaded or carrying more than that for which the vehicle was designed. No person shall ride the running board, stand up in the body of a moving vehicle or ride on the outside of the body of a moving vehicle or ride with arms or legs protruding from the body of a motor vehicle. (q)  Luggage trains shall not exceed a number of trailers to be prescribed from time to time by the aviation general manager. (r)  No vehicle shall be operated on the airport if it is so constructed or equipped or loaded as to endanger persons or property. (s)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle without having the exhausts protected by screens or baffles to prevent the escape of sparks or the propagation of flame in any hangar on the airport. (t)  Vehicles on AOA, when parking adjacent to the runway, must park parallel to the runway and at least 225 feet to the outside of the runway lights, except emergency equipment. (u)  When backing fuel tenders, a signal person must be available to guide the driver. The driver must remain in the vehicle cab and is forbidden to stand on the running board or fender while backing. Fuel tenders will at no time be blocked or so positioned as to prevent rapid removal of such tender. (v)  Only authorized city department of aviation, airport fire and airport police personnel in city or city-authorized vehicles shall be permitted to operate such vehicles within 150 feet of an active taxiway or upon or within 225 feet of an active runway. All other persons are prohibited from operating vehicles upon active runways and taxiways or within the boundaries described in this subsection without prior written authorization from the aviation general manager or unless escorted by authorized department of aviation, airport fire or airport police personnel. Operation of vehicles on or near active taxiways or runways shall at all times be in accordance with applicable rules and regulations promulgated by the aviation general manager or the Federal Aviation Administration. (w)  Authorized law enforcement officers shall when enforcing traffic regulations prescribed in this Code of Ordinances for violations of laws regulating applicable rules of the road such as stopping and parking in the restricted airfield operations area ("AOA") issue uniform traffic citations; as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 and such citations shall be referred to the municipal court for adjudication. (Code 1977, § 12-5002; Ord. No. 1997-05, § 1, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 1999-70, § 2, 9-29-99; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 22-183. - Accident procedure.     The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident on the airport which results in injury or death to any person or damage to any property shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident, render such assistance as may be needed and give name, address, operator's license, registration number and the name and address of such driver's insurance company to any person or party to the accident or any police officer requesting such information. Any damage to city property shall be reported immediately to the city police. (Code 1977, § 12-5003) 
Sec. 22-184. - Speed limits.     The speed at which motor vehicles may be driven on the streets and other vehicular traffic areas on the airport, including parking areas, shall be 25 miles per hour, unless otherwise indicated on signs posted and maintained by authority of the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-5004) 
Sec. 22-185. - Designated one-way drives.     Vehicular traffic on the entrance and exit drives serving the airport terminal complex shall be one-way and shall be so designated by signs posted and maintained by authority of the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-5005) 
Sec. 22-186. - Public parking. (a)  No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, on the airport, except within areas designated therefor and then only in accordance with the regulations governing the use of the areas. (b)  Operators of motor vehicles using the public parking facilities at the airport shall observe and comply with regulatory and directional traffic signs for entering and departing the facilities and shall pay the posted parking charges for the right and privilege of parking therein. (c)  No person shall stop a motor vehicle for loading, unloading or any other purpose on the airport other than in areas specifically designated for such use and only in the manner prescribed by signs, lines and other means provided and only for the length of time posted. (d)  No person shall park any vehicle in any reserved parking area without a valid permit issued by the aviation general manager permitting parking in the reserved area. Each vehicle parking in the reserved area shall prominently display the identifying insignia provided by the aviation general manager or shall bear other markings acceptable to the aviation general manager, and every vehicle shall be parked only in the space or area specifically assigned to it. (Code 1977, § 12-5006) 
Sec. 22-187. - Impound procedures generally. (a)  The aviation general manager is authorized to create a vehicle pound to which automobiles and other vehicles may be removed from the airport by the police in the manner provided in this section. Such pound shall be located at such place as shall be designated by the aviation general manager. (b)  Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any place at the airport where parking is not permitted at that time or whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the rules and regulations prescribed for the parking of vehicles at the airport, such vehicles may be removed and conveyed by any member of the police by means of towing the vehicle or other means to a vehicle pound. (c)  The officer impounding a vehicle shall enter such action on a log provided for such purpose at the police office at the airport. (d)  A fee in the amount established by the city to cover the cost of removal and storage for each day or fraction of a day the impounded vehicle is stored in excess of the first 24 hours such vehicle is impounded shall be assessed against the owner or other person having a right to possession of an impounded vehicle. (e)  Any person claiming a vehicle impounded under this section shall produce evidence of such person's identity and ownership or right of possession to the sergeant on duty in the police office at the airport. Upon payment of fees for removal and storage to the officer, such person shall obtain a release in the form of a receipt from a duplicate receipt book and shall in turn give a receipt for such impounded vehicle to the officer. Such receipt shall definitely identify the vehicle impounded and shall become a permanent record of the department of aviation. The police shall turn in to the department of aviation each day all monies collected from such fees. (f)  Impounded automobiles uncalled for as long as 30 days shall be disposed of in accordance with procedures set out in section 150-88. (Code 1977, § 12-5007) 
Sec. 22-188. - Impound procedures for parking lots. (a)  Whenever any motor vehicle has remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days, as determined by a regularly conducted parking lot inventory, in any of the public parking lots at the airport, the aviation general manager shall report such vehicle as unclaimed to the state revenue commissioner and shall be authorized to cause such vehicle to be removed to a vehicle storage pound where the vehicle shall be stored, subject to claim, for an additional period of 80 days. (b)  After the expiration of the 80-day storage period, the aviation general manager shall be authorized to cause the vehicle to be sold at public auction. For such purposes the aviation general manager shall put an advertisement in the newspaper in which the city's advertisements are published, describing the vehicle and giving such information about it as will put the owner or other persons having knowledge thereof in possession of the facts, stating that the auto is in the possession or control of the aviation general manager and that, at the expiration of ten days, it will be exposed for sale, at the place where the vehicle is kept or stored, and the proceeds shall be applied against the parking fees and storage and towing charges which have accrued and any excess will be deposited in the airport revenue fund. (c)  Any person claiming a vehicle impounded under this section shall produce evidence of such person's identity and ownership or right of possession and shall pay to the aviation general manager all parking fees and storage and towing charges which shall have accrued with respect to the vehicle, for which a receipt shall be given and an order issued to the person in charge of the pound to discharge the vehicle and to deliver the vehicle to such person. Thereupon, the impounded vehicle shall be surrendered by the person in charge thereof, who shall take a receipt for the vehicle. Such receipt shall identify the vehicle and shall become a permanent record in the office of the aviation general manager. (d)  Following the sale of such vehicle, the aviation general manager shall apply and dispose of any funds realized therefrom in the manner set out in subsection (b) of this section. (Code 1977, § 12-5008) 
Sec. 22-189. - Authorization to move vehicles.     City police officers may remove or cause to be removed from any restricted or reserved areas, any roadway or right-of-way or any other area on the airport any vehicle which is disabled, abandoned or illegally or improperly parked or which creates an operational problem. Any such vehicle may be removed or caused to be removed by the police to the official vehicle impound area designated by the aviation general manager. Any such vehicle may be released or disposed of in accordance with sections 22-187 and 22-188. (Code 1977, § 12-5009) 
Sec. 22-190. - Delivery vehicles using curbsides of terminal.     Use of the curbsides of the passenger terminal buildings on the airport by delivery vehicles of all kinds is prohibited without special authorization from the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-5010) 
Sec. 22-191. - Issuance of notices of violation ("NOVs") for the unsafe or improper operation of motor vehicles and for the implementation of safety regulations in the ramp areas. (a)  [ Generally. ] Section 22-191 of the Atlanta City Code be and hereby is amended. Designated supervisory and managerial personnel of the department of aviation may issue an NOV for the unsafe or improper actions of airport employees and other individuals present in the air operations area. NOVs may be issued for unsafe or improper acts that occur within the AOA, which will include the ramps, NLVR, and perimeter roadways. The specific offenses for which NOVs may be issued and the point values associated with each offense shall be promulgated by the aviation general manager. The offenses are described in the Ramp Safety Standards Manual, as it may be revised from time-to-time. The aviation general manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke driving or SIDA badge access privileges and require corrective training for such offenses. NOVs may be issued in addition to any uniform traffic citation that may be issued by the Atlanta Police Department. (b)  Definitions. (1)  Air operations area ("AOA") consists of all restricted ground areas of the airport, including taxiways, runways, loading ramps, vehicle roadways and parking areas. (2)  Movement area means the aircraft movement area that is under the control of the air traffic control tower, i.e. runways / taxiways. (3)  Non-licensed vehicle roadway ("NLVR") consists of the designated roadways available for vehicular traffic within the AOA. (4)  Non-movement area means the area, other than that described as the movement area, used for the loading, unloading, parking and movement of aircraft on the airside of the airport (including ramps, ramp areas and on-airport fuel farms). (5)  Safety management systems ("SMS") means the formal, top-down, organization-wide approach to managing safety risk and assuring the effectiveness of safety risk controls. It includes systematic procedures, practices, and policies for the management of safety risk. (6)  Security identification display area ("SIDA") means- the term "SIDA" has the same meaning given to that term in section 22-56. (c)  Violation sanction system. For the purposes of the sanction system, violations of Airport rules and regulations fall into four categories: Warning, Class I, Class II and Class III. The following point values are assigned to each category: • Warning — No points. • Class I — 1 point. • Class II — 2 points. • Class III — 3 points. (d)  Violations, sanctions and sanction points. The accumulation of sanction points will be tracked by the department of aviation and the following sanctions will be imposed: (e)  Warning notices: (1)  To companies. Warnings may be issued to companies for violations in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the Ramp Safety Standards Manual. (2)  To individuals. Warnings may be issued to individuals at the sole discretion of the person issuing the NOV for a Class I violation. Two or more warnings given to the same individual within a 365 consecutive calendar day period may result in the issuance of an NOV for a Class I violation to such individual. For the NOV to constitute a warning, the issuer must, at the time of issuance, provide in the violation details the notation "WARNING ONLY." (f)  Violations: (1)  Class I: For a Class I violation, the violator must view and pass the tests on the SMS module and the non-movement area driving module and/or such other prerequisites for driving on the AOA as may then be currently in force and effect. A Class I violation carries one sanction point. (2)  Class II: For a Class II violation, the violator must view and pass the tests on the SMS module and the non-movement area driving module and/or such other prerequisites for driving on the AOA as may then be currently in force and effect. In addition, all of the violator's driving privileges shall be suspended for two days. A Class II violation carries two sanction points. (3)  Class III: For a Class III violation, the violator must view and pass the tests on the SMS module and the non-movement area driving module and/or such other prerequisites for driving on the AOA as may then be currently in force and effect. In addition, all of the violator's driving privileges shall be suspended for seven days. A Class III violation carries three sanction points.     A violator seeking a SIDA badge without driving privileges during a suspension must submit a completed badge application signed by the authorized signatory to the department of aviation's security division badge office and meet any and all eligibility requirements for badge issuance as established by the security division. (g)  Violation points accumulation; revocation of privileges. All SIDA badges are the property of the City of Atlanta. The aviation general manager may permanently revoke all of the violator's driving or SIDA badge access privileges under the following circumstances: (i) after the accrual of seven sanction points within any 12-month period; (ii) for a violator's failure to complete any required corrective training; or (iii) at any time deemed necessary due to the severity of the offense. (h)  NOV record. Each SIDA badge holder's NOV record will be maintained and tracked by the department of aviation for one year (12 months) after the most recent offense. (i)  Appeals process. (1)  NOV letters. After an NOV is issued, the aviation general manager, or his or her designee, shall issue a letter ("NOV letter") to the violator and his or her employer. NOV letters shall be mailed to the last known address of the company as same appears in the files of the airport security office. NOV letters may also be e-mailed if the company has an e-mail address on file with the airport security office. (2)  SMS review. If the violator or the employer seek to challenge the NOV, any defenses or challenges to the NOV must be presented in writing ("Request for Review") within three business days of receipt of the NOV letter by any of the following methods: a.  Mail: SMS Manager, P.O. Box 20509, Dept. of Aviation, Atlanta, GA 30320; or b.  E-mail: rampsafety@atlanta-airport.com or any e-mail address that the Department of Aviation subsequently designates; or c.  Hand delivery: SMS Manager, 6000 N. Terminal Parkway, Suite 4000, Atlanta, GA 30320. The SMS manager, or his or her designee, shall review the defenses and/or challenges presented by the violator or the employer and uphold, dismiss, or modify the NOV. A written notification ("SMS decision") shall be delivered to the company's last known address or last known e-mail address on file with the airport security office. (3)  Appeals. After the NOV has been reviewed by the SMS manager or his or her designee, the violator or the employer may request that the aviation general manager reconsider the ruling set forth in the SMS decision or the assessment of points issued for any Class I, Class II, or Class III violation ("appeal"). (3.1)  All appeals must be submitted to the aviation general manager or his or her designee in writing within 24 hours of receipt of the SMS decision by one of the following methods: a.  Mail: Aviation General Manager, P.O. Box 20509, Dept. of Aviation, Atlanta, GA 30320; b.  E-mail: rampsafety@atlanta-airport.com or any e-mail address that the department of aviation subsequently designates; or c.  Hand delivery: Aviation General Manager, 6000 N. Terminal Parkway, Suite 4000, Atlanta, GA 30320. (3.2)  The aviation general manager or his or her designee will issue a final ruling on the matter and will notify the violator and the violator's employer of the ruling. Such notices shall be delivered to the company's last known address or last known e-mail address on file with the airport security office. (4)  Additional procedures. In the event the due date for a request for review or appeal falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the violator or the employer may submit the request for review or appeal on the next business day. Failure to comply with this requirement may result in an immediate denial of the request for review or appeal. Depending on the severity of the offense, the aviation general manager may suspend or revoke driving or SIDA badge access privileges prior to the resolution of a request for review or appeal. ( Ord. No. 2014-08(14-O-1087), § 2, 3-12-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-22(15-O-1186), § 1, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 22-192. - Reflective safety wear standards.     All employees, contractors, vendors, tenants, and visitors must wear reflective safety wear at all times in the performance of their assigned duties. This provision applies to the air operations area, movement area, non-movement area and security identification display area of the airport as referenced in section 22-191.     Definition . Reflective safety wear: Any clothing accepted as appropriate warning vests or other suitable garments marked with or made of reflectorized or high-visibility material that meets the requirement of American National Standards Institute 107.     Violation and sanction system. (1)  For the purposes of the violation and sanction system, violations of 22-192 shall be a warning or Class I category. (2)  The accumulation of violation points will be tracked by the Department of Aviation and sanctions will be imposed as referenced in Section 22-191. ( Ord. No. 2018-19(18-O-1296), § 1, 6-13-18 ) 
Secs. 22-193—22-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - GROUND TRANSPORTATION SERVICES[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Cross reference— Vehicles for hire, ch. 162. 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 
Sec. 22-201. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Bus means any vehicle with a designed seating capacity of not less than 23 passengers.     Car rental means any transaction in which a vehicle is made available to a person for any length of time from a fleet of vehicles maintained for such purpose and for which title to such vehicle remains in the rental or leasing company and in which no particular vehicle is reserved for the use of the renter.     Contracted taxi service means prior arrangements for taxi service from a particular taxicab company or driver by or on behalf of a business, firm or other organization for its officers, employees, agents or customers.     Consolidated rental car facility (CONRAC) means the facility to be designed and operated as a single, consolidated facility for the operation of all off-airport rental car companies and on-airport rental car companies at the airport. All customers utilizing the services of a car rental company shall be transported between the central passenger terminal complex and the CONRAC Facility by the use of a common transportation system.     Courier vehicle means any motorized vehicle used to transport small packages, luggage or similar items to and from the airport, provided that such vehicle shall not have an overall length greater than 20 feet and shall be clearly marked in permanent lettering as to the name of the firm holding the permit to operate the vehicle.     Courtesy vehicle means any motorized vehicle used to transport persons to and from the airport without a direct fee being paid by the persons transported for the service so rendered. The overall length of a courtesy vehicle shall not be greater than 20 feet, and each vehicle shall clearly display in permanent lettering the name of the hotel, parking lot, car rental firm or other establishment for which the service is being rendered, except that limousines as defined in this section shall not be required to display permanent lettering.     Cruising means driving around the airport terminal roadways with the apparent purpose of soliciting patrons.     Customer facility charge (CFC) means a charge imposed on each airport car rental transaction, which shall be a fixed uniform amount applied to each car rental transaction day of each customer's car rental contract and shall be added to the amount collected from the customer by every off-airport rental car company and on-airport rental car company.     Driver means any driver for any permit holder as provided in this division. The definition of driver includes taxicab drivers, limousine drivers, sedan drivers and rideshare drivers.     Ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit means the permit of a person, association, corporation or other organization to engage in the business of operating taxicab services, limousine services, or rideshare services at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport.     Limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for a luxury limousine with a designed seating capacity for no more than nine passengers with a minimum of five seats located behind the operator of the vehicle and which does not have a door at the rear of the vehicle designed to allow passenger entry or exit. No vehicle shall be permitted to be operated both as a taxicab and a limousine.     Local airport taxicab means a taxicab which is authorized by permit to pick up passengers by prior arrangement at a location designated by the aviation general manager and to carry passengers to local destinations not more than five miles from the airport terminal complex, which destinations are within the corporate limits of College Park, Hapeville, East Point, Forest Park, Riverdale or within Unincorporated South Fulton County and North Clayton County.     Metro area means the area within the counties of Fulton, Clayton, DeKalb, Gwinnett and Cobb.     Minibus means any vehicle with a designed seating capacity of not less than 16 and not more than 22 passengers.     Non-metro area means all areas outside the area of the five counties named in the definition of the term "metro area."     On-airport rental car company means a commercial business entity that is engaged in the rental of passenger motor vehicles to customers at the airport, having rental transaction facilities at the airport, including, but not limited to, rental counters, vehicle storage areas and kiosks and having a concession contract, or lease with the city for the use of facilities on the airport.     Off-airport rental car company means a commercial business entity that is engaged in the rental of passenger motor vehicles to customers at the airport but does not have transaction facilities at the airport and does not have a concession contract or lease with the city for the use of facilities on the Airport.     Prearranged taxi service means prior arrangements for taxi service from a particular taxicab company or driver by or on behalf of an individual.     Rideshare driver means an individual who uses his or her personal passenger car, to provide transportation for passengers arranged through a rideshare service. This includes transportation network company drivers, or individuals who use or permit to be used their personal vehicle to provide transportation network company services. Such drivers need not be employees of a transportation network company.     Rideshare service means any person or entity that uses a digital network or Internet network to connect passengers to ride share drivers for the purpose of prearranged transportation for hire or for donation. This includes transportation network companies, or corporations, partnerships, sole proprietorships, or other entities that use a digital network or other means to connect customers to transportation network company drivers for the purposes of providing transportation for compensation including, but not limited to, payment, donation, or other item of value. The term shall not include emergency or nonemergency medical transports, and shall not include any corporate sponsored vanpool, which means a rideshare program sponsored by an employer in which the employer pays all or some of the costs associated with the transportation of its employees to a single work reporting location and all the vehicles used in the program have a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of not more than 10,000 pounds and are designed to carry not more than 15 passengers including the driver; or exempt rideshare which means: (1)  Government endorsed rideshare programs; (2)  Rideshare programs in which a rideshare driver seeks reimbursement for, or the rideshare participants pool or otherwise share, rideshare costs such as fuel; or (3)  The leasing or rental of a vehicle, in the ordinary course of the lessor's or renter's business, for rideshare purposes as part of a government endorsed rideshare program, or for rideshare under a contract requiring compliance with subparagraph (2) of this paragraph provided that such corporate sponsored vanpool or exempt rideshare is not operated for the purpose of generating a profit.     Sedan means any sedan-type vehicle which has a seating capacity of not more than five passengers and the driver and which is classified as a luxury sedan by the IRS for tax and depreciation purposes and which renders service to the public not over fixed route on basis of telephone or written contract.     Shuttle service vehicle means any bus, van or minibus used to transport persons to and from the airport under the provisions of a contract or permit between the company providing the shuttle service and the city.     Taxi starter means the person authorized by the aviation general manager to assist taxi patrons in securing a taxicab in the taxi loading zone at the airport.     Taxicab or taxi means any automobile that transports passengers; uses a taximeter; and is authorized to provide taxicab services pursuant to chapter 162, article II of this Code.     Taxicab company means a person, association, corporation or other organization operating or intending to engage in the business of operating a taxicab or taxi.     Taximeter means an instrument or device attached to a vehicle and designed to measure mechanically or electronically the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the times the vehicle travels or is in waiting and to indicate the fare to be charged.     Van means any vehicle with a designed seating capacity of not less than seven and not more than 15 passengers.     Vehicle leasing means any transaction in which a vehicle is made available to a person for a period of at least one year under a lease agreement which gives title to such person or to such person's employer for the duration of such lease agreement and in which a particular vehicle is reserved at all times during the term of such lease agreement for the use of the lessee and no others. (Code 1977, § 12-5021; Ord. No. 1995-38, § 8, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2004-92, § 1, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 1, 9-28-16; Ord. No. 2017-27(17-O-1221), § 1, 5-15-17 ) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-202. - Fees. (a)  Established; permit application fee. Fees for the permits authorized under this division are established as set forth in this division. All applications for permits under this division shall be accompanied by a payment of $20.00 as an application fee. Additional fees shall be computed for each type permit in the manner set forth in this section. (b)  Vehicles for hire. To secure a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit, taxicab, commercial limousine, and rideshare companies shall be required to pay an annual permit fee which shall be $50.00 per vehicle to be operated at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, such fee not to exceed $100,000.00 per year. During the permit year, a ground transportation vehicle for-hire permit holder may increase the number of vehicles to be operated under its permit upon payment of the $50.00 fee, except that the total fee charged in one permit year shall not exceed $100,000.00 per year. (c)  Security fee. At the time a taxicab, commercial limousine, or rideshare company applies for, or renews, their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit, such company shall be required to declare whether any of its vehicles to be operated in accordance with this division shall be operated by drivers that have secured or intend to secure aprivate background check certification authorized by state law in lieu of a for-hire license endorsement issued by the Georgia Department of Driver Services during the permit year. If at the time of the application or renewal, the ground transportation for-hire company indicates that any of such drivers shall have secured or intend to secure a private background check certification in lieu of a for-hire license endorsement, the company shall be required to pay an airport terminal security fee which shall be $2.35 per trip originating at the airport. (d)  Charter services. Fees for charter services shall be as follows: (1)  Charge for each available seat in a vehicle transporting passengers away from the airport, per seat shall be $0.10. (2)  Minimum charge based on the rate in subsection (d)(1) of this section shall be $2.00. (e)  Courtesy vehicles. Fees for courtesy vehicles shall be as follows: (1)  Rental car companies. A rental car company without a contract with the city, whose patrons are picked up at or from the airport and transported to such company's off-airport facilities, shall pay to the city a fee computed on the basis of a percentage of gross receipts derived from the patrons picked up at or from the airport, at the percentage rate of eight percent for each calendar year. a.  The term "gross receipts," as used in this subsection, means and includes all moneys paid or payable to such company by patrons picked up at the airport by or for such company for the following, regardless of when or where paid or whether or not paid and regardless of the manner in which or the place at which the orders for the vehicles are received: 1.  The aggregate amount of time, mileage and service charges made for cash, credit, exchange or otherwise of every kind, name and nature. 2.  All amounts paid or payable to such company for rental of vehicles supplied by such company to patrons picked up at the airport. 3.  All amounts paid or payable to such company on any vehicles exchanged downtown or at any point where exchange for vehicles originally rented to patrons picked up at the airport is permitted. 4.  All amounts paid or payable to such company for rental of vehicles supplied to patrons at any off-airport location. 5.  All amounts paid or payable to such company for personal accident insurance policies sold by such company to patrons picked up at the airport and for other personal services approved by the aviation general manager. 6.  All amounts paid or payable to such company for collision damage waiver or other charges that serve the same purpose, purchased by or for patrons picked up at the airport. 7.  Credits given to patrons for such things as deposits and out-of-pocket purchases of gas, oil or emergency services, regardless of where made. b.  The term "gross receipts," as used in this subsection, shall not include the following: 1.  Gas charges for vehicles rented at dry rates. 2.  Charges to patrons for repairs to vehicles or property of such company damaged by such patrons. 3.  Amounts collected from such patrons for federal, state, county or municipal taxes. 4.  Amounts received for loss, conversion or abandonment of vehicles of such company. (2)  Hotel and motel courtesy vehicles. Fees for hotel and motel courtesy vehicles shall be as follows: a.  The charge for each vehicle used to transport patrons to and from the airport, per vehicle per year shall be $360.00. b.  The charge based on number of rooms in each hotel or motel, per room per year shall be $10.00. c.  The maximum annual charge based on the rates stated in subsections (e)(2)a and (e)(2)b of this section shall be $3,600.00 for hotels and motels located within a radius of two miles or less from the west curbside of the terminal or $2,400.00 for those hotels and motels located within a radius of more than two miles but less than five miles from the west curbside or $600.00 for those hotels and motels located a radius of five miles or more from the west curbside. (3)  Parking lot courtesy vehicles. Fees for parking lot courtesy vehicles shall be as follows: a.  The charge for each vehicle used to transport patrons to and from the airport, per year, shall be $360.00. b.  The charge based on number of available parking spaces in the lot, per space per year, shall be $10.00. (4)  Vehicle leasing company courtesy vehicles. The fees for vehicle leasing company courtesy vehicles shall be as follows: a.  The charge for each vehicle used to transport patrons to and from the airport, per year, shall be $360.00. b.  The charge based on number of trips through the courtesy vehicle loading area, per trip, shall be $5.00. (5)  Other courtesy vehicles. The fees for other courtesy vehicles, including apartment complexes, restaurants and organizations transporting their own personnel, shall be as follows: a.  The charge for use of a designated loading area, per year, shall be $120.00. b.  The charge for each vehicle used to transport residents, per vehicle per year, shall be $60.00. c.  The maximum charge based on the rates stated in subsections (e)(5)a and (e)(5)b of this section, per year, shall be $240.00. (f)  Metro area scheduled service. Metro area scheduled service permit holders shall pay a monthly fee to the city in the amount of five percent of the monthly gross receipts not in excess of $400,000.00 of gross receipts and seven percent of all monthly gross receipts in excess of $400,000.00 of gross receipts derived by the permit holder from transporting people to and from the airport. (1)  Maximum trip fees. Permit holders transporting people from the airport under this section may not charge per trip fees from the airport ("maximum trip fees") that exceed the following amounts: Downtown: ..... $16.50. Midtown: ..... $18.50. Buckhead: ..... $30.00. The aviation general manager may revise the maximum trip fees by issuing a written notice to permit holders at least 30 days prior to implementation. The geographical boundaries of Downtown, Midtown, and Buckhead shall be set forth in the permits issued pursuant to this section. (g)  Non-metro area scheduled service. Non-metro area scheduled service permit holders shall pay fees as follows: (1)  The charge for use of a designated loading area, per year, shall be $600.00. (2)  The charge for each vehicle in the company's fleet, per year, shall be $100.00. (h)  Courier vehicles. The fees for courier vehicles shall be as follows: (1)  The permit fee, based on the number of vehicles registered under the permit for airport service per year, per vehicle, shall be $100.00. (2)  The parking fee, in the amount of the applicable parking charge for the public parking lot where the loading area is located, shall be paid by the driver upon exiting the lot each trip. (i)  Commercial vans/minibus service. Fees for commercial vans/minibus services shall be as follows: (1)  The permit fee, based on the number of vehicles registered under the permit for airport service per year, per vehicle, shall be $100.00. (2)  The parking fee, in the amount of the applicable parking charge for the public parking lot where the loading area is located, shall be paid by the driver upon exiting the lot each trip. (Code 1977, §§ 12-5091—12-5099; Ord. No. 2009-16(09-O-0545), § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 2, 9-28-16; Ord. No. 2017-27(17-O-1221), § 2, 5-15-17 ) 
Sec. 22-202.1. - Vehicle for hire fees; ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits required. (a)  Taxicabs. (1)  All taxicabs entering the Airport's Taxi Assembly Area for the purpose of originating a trip from the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport shall pay $1.50 as an access fee each time they enter the taxi assembly area. (2)  All taxicab operators must affix an airport issued AVI Tag to each vehicle operating at the airport in order to record the number of trips taken by taxicab operators at the airport. (3)  The AVI Tag shall be provided to taxicab operators at no cost. Any replacement AVI Tag shall be $25.00. (4)  Only taxicabs affiliated with a taxicab company holding a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit, and displaying an airport issued monthly or annual decal, shall be allowed to utilize the airport's taxi assembly area. (b)  Rideshare. (1)  All rideshare vehicles originating a trip from Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport shall pay $1.50 per trip as a loading and curbside access fee. (2)  All rideshare companies holding a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit must transmit the number of trips taken by their rideshare vehicle operators at the airport pursuant to an aviation general manager approved method. (3)  Only rideshare vehicles affiliated with a rideshare company holding a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit, and displaying an airport issued monthly or annual decal, shall be allowed to originate trips from Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, which shall include any utilization of the rideshare assembly area. (c)  Limousines. (1)  All limousine vehicles originating a trip from Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport shall pay $1.50 per trip as a limousine loading area and curbside access fee. (2)  All limousine companies holding a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit must transmit the number of trips taken by their limo operators at the airport pursuant to an aviation general manager approved method. (3)  Only limo vehicles affiliated with a limousine company holding a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit, and displaying an airport issued monthly or annual decal, shall be allowed to originate trips from Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. (d)  At no time shall a vehicle operate while displaying more than one airport issued monthly or annual decal. (e)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holders shall comply with city Ordinances, state, and federal laws which are reasonably related to the operation of vehicles for hire. (Ord. No. 2009-16(09-O-0545), § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 3, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-203. - Permits required; administrative penalties, revocation, suspension or non-renewal of permits. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab, limousine, or rideshare vehicle, or other vehicle for hire, to transport or attempt to transport persons from the premises of the airport without obtaining a ground transportation vehicle for-hire permit in accordance with this division, and without paying the fees established therefor. (1)  Upon conviction by the municipal court, a violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a mandatory fine of no less than $300.00 and no more than $1000.00. (2)  The language in this code section shall not prohibit the municipal court from imposing a term of imprisonment in the city jail, and or a sentence of probation for a violation of this section in addition to the imposition of the mandatory fine set forth herein. (b)  (1)  The aviation general manager is authorized to prescribe specific administrative penalties to be assessed against ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holders for violations of this chapter. Such administrative penalties shall not exceed $1000.00 per violation. A table of such administrative penalties shall be made available for public notice by the aviation general manager on the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport website and shall be on file with the municipal clerk's office. (2)  Administrative penalties assessed against ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holders for violations of this chapter may include fines, suspension, revocation, or the refusal to renew a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit. (3)  The procedures set forth in chapter 162 of the city of Code of Ordinances, section 162-29, 162-30, and 162-40 regarding the process for appeals of administrative penalties assessed against ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holders in accordance with this chapter shall be utilized. Any fines payable in accordance therewith, shall be payable by money order, certified check or cashier's check in the same manner as the fees set forth in section 22-202.1 of this article. (c)  (1)  Assessment of administrative penalties imposed as a result of a violation of this article may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal within 14 days of the date of notification of the assessment of such administrative penalty. (2)  The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalties or other enforcement decisions. (3)  In any appeal filed in accordance with this section, the ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity for an evidentiary hearing under judicial forms of procedure, after notice of the assessment of such penalties is served in person or by mail. (4)  The notice of assessment of administrative penalty shall include: a.  A statement regarding the time, place, and nature of the hearing; b.  A statement of the legal authority under which, and venue wherein the hearing is to be held; c.  A reference to the particular provision of this division allegedly violated. d.  A short and plain statement of the matters asserted including civil penalties assessed. (d)  In the case of all other permits issued in accordance with this article, the aviation general manager may revoke or suspend temporarily the airport ground transportation service permit granted under this division whenever it shall be determined that the holder of such permit has violated any section of this article, has made any false statement in the application for such permit, has been convicted of a crime affecting the permit holder's capability to provide service, is in default in payment of fees prescribed in section 22-202 or is otherwise in violation of any of the conditions of the permit. However, prior to any revocation or suspension, the aviation general manager shall notify in writing such permit holder that there appear to be grounds for the revocation or suspension of such permit and shall further notify such permit holder that the permit holder may, within five days, present any defense that the permit holder may have to the proposed suspension or revocation of such permit. The notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the permit holder as the address appears in the files of the department of aviation. Such notice shall set forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation or suspension is predicated. (Code 1977, § 12-5082; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 4, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-204. - Unlawful conduct; impoundment of vehicle for violation of permit. (a)  It shall be unlawful for operator of any airport ground transportation service vehicle authorized under this division to: (1)  Cruise the premises of the airport for the purpose of soliciting business or fares. (2)  Park to load or unload passengers in any areas other than those designated by the aviation general manager. (3)  Fail to obey promptly any lawful command by any city police officer, airport operations representative or other duly authorized representative of the city. (4)  Fail to provide identification, logs and other documents that might be requested by any duly authorized representative of the city. (5)  Solicit or attempt to solicit, persuade or urge, by words, gestures or otherwise, including parking in any location, whether authorized by permit or not, for the apparent purpose of soliciting any person to use or hire a vehicle or accept transportation in a vehicle operated by a permit holder or any other person. (6)  Park in any area controlled by parking meters. (7)  Stop, stand or park on the upper level public curbsides of the terminal buildings, except while unloading passengers, unless the driver has in possession a valid written permit authorizing patrons to board the vehicle. (8)  Allow any personnel, other than the driver operating a vehicle, to enter the loading area designated by the aviation general manager for use by such operator at the airport, without separate, specific written permission from the aviation general manager. (9)  Allow a driver to leave the vehicle while in the designated loading area at the airport, except when assisting patrons in boarding the vehicle or loading luggage for patrons. (10)  Fail to instruct personnel to obey all terms and conditions and rules and regulations of the permit at all times. (11)  Fail to observe the schedule of arrival and departure times approved by the aviation general manager or changing a schedule without prior approval of the aviation general manager. (12)  Place any sign on airport premises without separate, specific prior written permission from the aviation general manager. (13)  Leave a vehicle unattended while in the designated loading area at the airport. (b)  The aviation general manager is authorized to impound any ground transportation vehicle which is operated upon the premises of the airport without the requisite permit provided for under this division or which is operated in violation of the conditions of a permit. If impound action is necessary, the action shall be carried out pursuant to section 22-187. (Code 1977, § 12-5081) 
Sec. 22-205. - Car rentals.     Every person engaged in a car rental business who desires to serve passengers or other patrons at or from the airport shall comply with the following, in addition to any other applicable sections of this Code: (1)  No person shall carry on, conduct or engage in the business of renting motor vehicles to passengers at or from the airport in any manner, including but not limited to picking up patrons at or from the airport, without first either entering into a written contract with the city or obtaining a rental car courtesy vehicle permit from the aviation general manager. (2)  Except as provided otherwise by contract with the city or permit from the aviation general manager, no person shall solicit the rental of vehicles at the airport.     Consolidated rental car facility (CONRAC). The aviation general manager shall designate a consolidated rental car facility at the airport. The CONRAC facility shall be designed and operated as a single, consolidated location for all off-airport and on-airport rental car company operations. All customers using the services of all on-airport and off-airport rental car companies will be transported between the central passenger terminal complex and the CONRAC facility by the use of a common transportation system. This designation becomes effective when the CONRAC facility begins operations, as determined by the aviation general manager. The aviation general manager shall likewise designate successor and substitute facilities. After a designation becomes effective: (1)  The designated CONRAC facility becomes part of the terminal complex at the airport; and (2)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing, controlling, or operating a commercial passenger vehicle to cause or allow any passenger to board the vehicle, or to alight from the vehicle, anywhere at the central passenger terminal complex or the airport's public parking facilities by use of an off-airport or on-airport rental car company courtesy bus, shuttle or other vehicle. All off-airport rental car companies shall pick up and drop off their customers at the CONRAC facility and all off-airport and on-airport rental car companies shall utilize the APM system to transport their customers.     Customer facility charge. A resolution by the city council shall establish, and periodically adjust as needed, a daily customer facility charge to be added to each off-airport and on-airport rental car company's customer's car rental contract. (1)  The customer facility charges collected by the off-airport and on-airport rental car companies shall be held in trust by the off-airport and on-airport rental car companies for the benefit of the airport and shall be remitted to the city in accordance with procedures established by the aviation general manager. (2)  Off-airport and on-airport rental car companies and their agents hold only a possessory interest in the customer facility charge, and no legal or equitable interest. (Code 1977, § 12-5041; Ord. No. 2004-92, § 2, 12-10-04) 
Secs. 22-206—22-220. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Courtesy Vehicles 
Sec. 22-221. - Conditions for use of vehicles with permits.     The aviation general manager is authorized to designate an area at the airport for the exclusive use of courtesy vehicles. Use of the area shall be subject to the following conditions: (1)  The company operating courtesy vehicles who desires to use such designated area shall, for each such vehicle: a.  Obtain from the aviation general manager a written permit authorizing use of such designated area at the airport; and b.  Pay the fee required for the permit. (2)  Courtesy vehicles shall be operated at the airport in accordance with procedures designated from time to time by the aviation general manager. (3)  Operators of courtesy vehicles or company personnel who may accompany them are prohibited from soliciting business in any manner at the airport. (Code 1977, § 12-5031) 
Sec. 22-222. - Conditions for use of vehicles without permits.     With respect to the operation of courtesy vehicles at the airport without permits issued in accordance with section 22-221, the following shall apply: (1)  Courtesy vehicles without permits shall not cruise on the airport premises and shall enter upon the airport premises only to load or unload passengers or luggage for passengers who shall have previously requested the service. (2)  Drivers of courtesy vehicles without permits or company personnel who may accompany them are prohibited from soliciting business in any manner at the airport. (Code 1977, § 12-5032) 
Secs. 22-223—22-235. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Taxicabs Generally 
Sec. 22-236. - Conditions for use at airport.     All ground transportation vehicle for hire permit holders operating taxicabs at the airport shall comply with the following, in addition to other applicable sections of this Code: (1)  Before being permitted to load passengers at the terminal complex, a taxicab must be operated under a Certificate of Public Necessity and Convenience (CPNC) in accordance with chapter 162, article II of this Code, the taxicab company with which such CPNC is affiliated must secure a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit in accordance with this article, and shall pay to the department of aviation, in the manner prescribed by the aviation general manager, the fees required for permission to load passengers, and each taxicab approved for operation at the airport shall receive a distinctive decal. There shall be no fee imposed for the issuance of this decal. (2)  Taxicab operators shall conduct their business at the Airport at places to be designated from time to time by the aviation general manager and in accordance with all laws and regulations applicable thereto. (3)  All taxicabs shall be stopped or parked only in such manner and in such areas as may be designated by the aviation general manager. (4)  Operators of all taxicabs, except contracted taxi service, local airport taxicab service or prearranged taxi service, as defined in section 22-201, shall not load passengers on the north or south curbsides of the terminal complex, but shall load passengers only in the designated loading zone on the west curbside in such manner as may be prescribed by the aviation general manager. (5)  Taxicab starters at the airport shall at all times be subject to approval by the aviation general manager. (6)  No person shall solicit taxicab fares at the airport. Upon request, taxicab drivers shall courteously inform any person of alternative means of ground transportation. (7)  Taxicab drivers shall refrain from cruising in taxicabs at the airport and shall pass through the taxi assembly area before entering the designated loading zone. (8)  Beginning on January 1, 2017, no taxicab having a vehicle age greater than seven years may be operated by a taxicab company holding a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit. For purposes of this article, the term "vehicle age" shall be determined based on the vehicle's model year, and a "year" shall be measured through the last day of that respective calendar year (for example, a vehicle with a model year of 2016 shall have a vehicle age of one year as of January 1, 2017). (Code 1977, § 12-5022; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 5, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-237. - Contracted and prearranged service. (a)  At the airport, taxicabs providing contracted taxi service, for which a letter giving the name and address of such company or driver has been filed with the aviation general manager, shall be allowed to pick up arriving international passengers on the east end of the lower level curbside of the north terminal building, provided that: (1)  The letter has been filed with the aviation general manager; (2)  The driver shall have in possession while at the airport a completed log or other documentation showing the patron's name, destination, arriving flight number, arrival time and the relationship of the patron to the firm or organization who contracted for the service; and (3)  The driver shall remain with the vehicle at all times. (b)  Taxicabs providing prearranged taxi service shall be allowed to pick up arriving international passengers on the east end of the lower level curbside of the north terminal building in such manner and in such area as is designated by the aviation general manager, provided that: (1)  The driver of such taxicab shall have in possession while at the airport a completed log or other documentation showing the patron's name, destination, arriving flight number, arrival time and the date and time that the arrangements for the service were made and shall make the log available for inspection immediately upon request by any city personnel. (2)  The driver shall remain with the vehicle at all times. (3)  When prior arrangements are made by a taxi starter for a patron, the driver shall use the designated area only for loading patrons and not for parking and waiting. (c)  Taxicabs providing contracted taxi service, for which a letter giving the name and address of such company or driver has been filed with the aviation general manager, shall be allowed to pick up patrons in the inner lane of the west curbside south of the taxi starter's booth in an area designated by the aviation general manager, provided that: (1)  A letter from the contracting organization for whom the service is being provided, giving the name and address of the company or driver with whom the service has been contracted, has been filed with the aviation general manager; (2)  The driver shall first advise the taxi starter that the driver is present to make a contract service pickup and shall present proper evidence of such contract for inspection if requested prior to parking in the designated area; (3)  The driver shall have in possession a completed log or other documentation showing the patron's name, destination, arrival flight number and arrival time and shall make the information available for inspection immediately upon request from the taxi starter or any city personnel; and (4)  The driver shall remain with the vehicle at all times. (d)  Taxicabs providing prearranged taxi service shall be allowed to pick up arriving domestic passengers in the inner lane of the west curbside south of the taxi starter's booth in an area designated by the aviation general manager, provided that: (1)  The driver shall first advise the taxi starter that the driver is present to make a prearranged pickup and show the proper evidence of such arrangement if requested; (2)  The driver shall have in possession while at the airport a completed log or other documentation showing the patron's name, destination, arrival flight number and date and time that the arrangements for the service were made and shall make the information available for inspection upon request by the taxi starter or any city personnel; and (3)  The driver shall remain with the vehicle at all times. (Code 1977, § 12-5023) 
Sec. 22-238. - Unlawful conduct of driver. (a)  It shall be unlawful for a taxicab driver operating at the airport to do any of the following: (1)  Enter the taxicab assembly area with a passenger or an animal; (2)  Enter the taxicab assembly area without having first paid the requisite fee; (3)  Fail to pull up the taxicab while waiting in the taxicab assembly area to be notified of a fare; (4)  Make repairs to a vehicle, unless such repairs are for an emergency, i.e., a flat tire or dead battery or any other repairs that would be necessary in order to drive the vehicle; (5)  Litter; or (6)  Violate any laws of the state or any section of this Code. (b)  Violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the driver's permission to operate a taxicab from the airport. (Code 1977, § 12-5024) 
Sec. 22-239. - Inspections, generally. (a)  Taxicabs operated by taxicab companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be subject to random inspection of taximeter and otherwise for compliance with this article while within the taxicab assembly area. (b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the inspection of a vehicle for hire based upon the reasonable suspicion of violations under this article by a code enforcement agent or police officer. (d)  There shall be no fees imposed for inspections performed under this article. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-240. - Taximeters. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Basic distance rate means the maximum charge for distance for all intervals except the initial interval.     Basic time rate means the maximum charge for time for all intervals except the initial interval.     Cleared means a taximeter is inoperative with respect to all fare indication, when no indication of fare or extras is shown and when all parts are in those positions in which they are designed to be when the vehicle on which the taximeter is installed is not engaged by a passenger.     Extras means charges to be paid by a passenger in addition to the fare, including any charge for the transportation of baggage.     Face means that side of a taximeter upon which passenger charges are indicated.     Fare means that portion of the charge for the hire of a taxicab that is automatically calculated by a taximeter through the operation of the distance or time mechanism. Any fares shall be the maximum fare which may be charged, but which shall not prohibit lower amounts being charged.     Fifth wheel test means a distance test similar to a road test except that the distance traveled by the vehicle under test is determined by a mechanism known as a "fifth wheel" that is attached to the vehicle and that independently measures and indicates the distance.     Flag means a plate at the end of the lever arm or similar part by which the operating condition of a taximeter is controlled.     Hired means a taximeter that is operative with respect to all applicable indications of fare or extras. The indications of fare include time and distance where applicable unless qualified by another indication of the term "time not recording" or an equivalent expression.     Initial distance of time interval means the interval corresponding to the initial money drop.     Money drop means an increment of fare indication. The initial money drop is the first increment of fare indication following activation of the taximeter.     Multiple-tariff taximeter means one that may be set to calculate fares at any one of two or more rates.     Road test means a distance test, over a measured course, of a complete taximeter assembly when installed on a vehicle, the mechanism being actuated as a result of vehicle travel.     Rolling circumference means the straight line distance traveled per revolution of the wheel that actuates the taximeter. If more than one wheel actuates the taximeter, the rolling circumference is the average distance traveled per revolution of the wheels.     Simulated road test means a distance test during which the taximeter may be actuated by some means other than road travel. The distance traveled is either measured by a properly calibrated roller device or computed from rolling circumference and wheel-turn data.     Single-tariff taximeter means one that calculates fares at a single rate only.     Subsequent distance or time intervals means the intervals corresponding to money drops following the initial money drop.     Taximeter means a device that automatically calculates, at a predetermined rate, and indicates the fares based upon distance, time and mileage. (b)  Criteria. All taxicabs shall comply with the following at all times, and all random inspections shall be conducted by the department at designated inspection stations and shall consist of the following: (1)  Taximeters. a.  Design of indicating elements. 1.  Generally. A taximeter shall be equipped with a primary indicating element. 2.  Advancement of indicating elements. Except when a taximeter is being cleared, the primary indicating elements shall be susceptible of advancement only by the rotation of the vehicle wheels or by the time mechanism. 3.  Visibility of indications. Except when a taximeter is being cleared, indications of fare and extras shall be clearly visible at all times and at least ten mm high for the fare and four mm high for all other indications. 4.  Actuation of fare-indicating mechanism. When a taximeter designed to calculate fares upon the basis of a combination of distance traveled and time elapsed is operative with respect to fare indication, the fare-indicating mechanism shall be actuated by the distance mechanism whenever the vehicle is in motion at such a speed that the rate of distance revenue equals or exceeds the time rate and may be actuated by the time mechanism whenever the vehicle speed is less than this and when the vehicle is not in motion. Means shall be provided for the vehicle operator to render the time mechanism either operative or inoperative with respect to the fare-indicating mechanism. b.  Operating condition. 1.  Generally. Whenever the indicating elements of a taximeter are set to indicate a charge for the hire of the vehicle, the character of the fare indication shall be clearly shown on the taximeter face. When a taximeter is cleared, the indication "not registering," "vacant" or an equivalent expression shall be shown. 2.  Single-tariff taximeter. Whenever a single-tariff taximeter is set so as to register charges, the indication "registering," "hired" or an equivalent expression shall be shown. 3.  Multiple-tariff taximeter. Whenever a multiple-tariff taximeter is set so as to register charges, the basis for the particular tariff for which it is set shall be shown. c.  Extra charges. Extra charges shall be indicated as a separate item and shall not be included in the fare indication. They shall be identified by the term "extras" or by an equivalent expression. Values shall be defined by suitable words or monetary signs. d.  Protection of indications. Indications of fare and extras shall be displayed through and entirely protected by glass or other suitable transparent material securely attached to the housing of the taximeter. e.  Basis of fare calculations. A taximeter shall calculate fares only upon the basis of distance traveled, time elapsed or a combination of distance traveled and time elapsed. f.  Design of operating control. g.  Means of control. A control lever-arm knob, handle or other convenient and effective means shall be provided to set the taximeter mechanism for the desired operating condition and to clear the taximeter. 1.  Positions of control. The several positions of the control lever shall be mechanically defined, and displacement from any of these positions shall be sufficiently obstructed that the accidental or inadvertent changing of the operating condition of the taximeter is improbable. Possible movement of this control to an operating position immediately following its movement to the cleared position shall automatically be delayed enough to permit the taximeter mechanism to come to complete rest in the cleared condition. h.  Provision for security seals. Adequate provision shall be made for affixing lead-and-wire seals to a taximeter and to other parts required for service operation of a complete installation on a vehicle so that no adjustments, alterations or replacements affecting in any way the accuracy or indications of the device or the assembly can be made without mutilating the seals. The sealing means shall be such that it is not necessary to disassemble or remove any part of the device or of the vehicle to apply or inspect the seals. i.  Distance test methods. To determine compliance with distance tolerances, a distance test of a taximeter shall be conducted utilizing one or more of the following test methods: j.  Road test. A road test consists of driving the vehicle over a precisely measured road course. 1.  Fifth wheel test. A fifth wheel test consists of driving the vehicle in a simulated road test; 150 pounds or 70 kilograms of test weights may be substituted in lieu of the second person. 2.  Tolerance values. 3.  Distance tests. Maintenance and acceptance tolerances for taximeters shall be as follows: i.  On overregistration, one percent of the interval under test. ii.  On under registration, four percent of the interval under test, with an added tolerance of 100 feet or 30 miles whenever the initial interval is included in the interval under test. 4.  Time tests on individual time intervals. Maintenance and acceptance tolerances on individual time intervals shall be as follows: i.  On overregistration, three seconds per minute (five percent). ii.  On underregistration, nine seconds per minute (15 percent) on the initial interval and six seconds per minute (ten percent) on subsequent intervals. k.  Time mechanism tests. The time mechanism shall be tested at least through the first five time intervals. l.  User requirements. 1.  Position and illumination of taximeter. When mounted upon a vehicle, a taximeter shall be so located that its face can be seen by a passenger from the rear compartment of the vehicle. Adequate lighting facilities shall be provided for so illuminating the face of the taximeter that the indications thereof may be conveniently read by the passenger, and the face of the taximeter shall be so illuminated whenever the taximeter is in operation and artificial illumination is necessary for the convenient reading of its indications. 2.  Statement of rates. The distance and time rates for which a taximeter is adjusted shall be given. (c)  Correction slip. If a vehicle for hire fails to pass the requirements of the department's inspection, a correction slip, issued to the company shall be given to the driver, listing the items that need correction and showing the status of the inspection. The vehicle shall not be operated as a vehicle for hire until it successfully passes inspection; provided that the police chief or the chief's designee, in the chief's discretion, for two periods not to exceed 15 days each, may allow the continued use of a vehicle for hire which substantially complies with the inspection requirements. The police chief shall forward to the company holder a copy of the correction slip. A re-inspection shall occur within one working day of a request by a holder of a correction slip. (d)  Responsibility for compliance. As a condition of their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits, taxicab companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be responsible for their and their drivers' compliance with this section, and may be cited in accordance with this division for any violations thereof. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-241. - Taxicab comfort. (a)  Criteria. All taxicabs shall comply with the following at all times, and all random inspections shall be conducted by the department at designated inspection stations and shall consist of the following: (b)  Interior. (1)  The air conditioning and heating systems shall be inspected to ascertain that each is functioning properly. (2)  The upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels and the trunk compartment shall be inspected to determine whether they are clean, free of tears and that the trunk has sufficient space for passengers' luggage. (3)  Carpet remnants cannot be used to cover holes. Dirty carpet must be cleaned; if cleaning does not remove spots, carpet must be replaced. No staples or thumb tacks will be allowed to repair and/or replace headliners. (4)  No tape is allowed on any interior part of vehicle to repair damages (i.e., seats, arm rests, dash board or headliners). Any holes in carpet will require carpet to be repaired or replaced. (5)  The interior of each vehicle shall be in a clean condition and free of foreign matter and offensive odors. (6)  There shall be no litter in the vehicle or trunk and the seats shall be kept clean and without holes or large wear spots. (c)  Exterior. (1)  Grills of all vehicles must be in place and complete. (2)  Paint must be well-blended with the natural configuration and color of the vehicle. (3)  Paint and body repairs should have a smooth surface. (d)  Miscellaneous. (1)  A taxicab must be of a size and have a seating and cargo capacity approved by the airport general manager. (2)  No taxicab may be equipped with shades, curtains or any other vision obstructing devices. (3)  No taxicab shall have less than three doors for loading passengers, and each taxicab must be a station wagon, a sedan, a minivan or a sports utility vehicle. (e)  Correction slip. If a vehicle for hire fails to pass the requirements of the department's inspection, a correction slip, issued to the company, shall be given to the driver, listing the items that need correction and showing the status of the inspection. The vehicle shall not be operated as a vehicle for hire until it successfully passes inspection; provided that the police chief or the chiefs designee, in the chiefs discretion, for two periods not to exceed 15 days each, may allow the continued use of a vehicle for hire which substantially complies with the inspection requirements. The police chief shall forward to the company holder a copy of the correction slip. (f)  Responsibility for compliance. As a condition of their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits, taxicab companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be responsible for their and their drivers' compliance with this section, and may be cited in accordance with this division for any violations thereof. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-242. - Taxicab minimum customer service requirements. (a)  Within 24 hours of the discovery of any personal property left by a passenger in a vehicle for hire, comply with a lost and found policy approved by the airport general manager. (b)  A driver shall take the most direct route to a passenger's destination unless otherwise authorized or directed by the passenger. The route taken must be visible to the passenger pursuant to a GPS based electronic route guidance system, which the passenger may follow in real-time. (c)  A taxicab driver must accept a credit card via an electronic payment method as a mode of payment in addition to cash; no credit card surcharges may be imposed. (d)  A taxicab driver shall not refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger has demonstrated that they may be dangerous. (e)  No taxicab driver shall refuse to accept a passenger solely on the basis of that passenger's or perception of that passenger's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. No taxicab driver shall refuse to accept a passenger on the basis of the passenger's possession of a service animal, to include comfort animals. (f)  No taxicab shall be permitted to carry nonpaying passengers while transporting a paying passenger except for the purpose of driver training. (g)  It shall be unlawful to operate the vehicle in a manner which threatens a passenger or anyone else or to threaten or otherwise abuse a passenger or for any passenger to abuse a driver, and it shall also be unlawful to discharge any passenger before reaching the passenger's destination unless the driver has a reasonable belief that the passenger is dangerous or unless street conditions do not permit a safe discharge. (h)  No television sets may be operated on the front seat on which the driver sits inside of a moving taxicab. (i)  Companies and CPNC holders shall be prohibited from refusing to display to department inspectors or law enforcement officers any information required by this Article, and shall be prohibited from failing to cooperate with department inspectors in performing their duties. (j)  It shall be unlawful to drive, or for taxi companies to allow to be driven, any vehicle for hire which does not have and display either a valid decal issued pursuant to this article or a correction slip; or any unsealed or improperly working taxi fare meter, as applicable. (k)  Completed electronically produced receipts must be offered to passengers showing the amount of fare paid, name of taxicab company and contact information, CPNC number, location of trip origination and location of trip termination, and duration of trip. The taxicab company must be able to electronically transmit the information contained in such receipts to the city upon request, and may not be hand written. Under no circumstances shall a customer's credit card number appear in full on any receipt. (l)  It shall be unlawful to carry a number of passengers that exceeds the seating capacity of the vehicle for hire according to the vehicle manufacturer's specifications. (m)  As a condition of their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits, taxicab companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be responsible for their and their drivers' compliance with this section, and may be cited in accordance with this division for any violations thereof. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-243. - Ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit requirements for taxicab companies; application. (a)  No ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit shall be granted to a company owning or leasing less than 20 CPNCs to be operated at the airport (the airport operational fleet) except for any company which was authorized to operate pursuant to Chapter 162 of the city Code of Ordinances as of January 1, 2015. (b)  In order to secure a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit under this division, the taxicab company applicant must provide information showing its qualifications on a form provided by the city. The applicant must be: (1)  At least 18 years of age. (2)  A citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or otherwise granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. (3)  A resident, for at least one year immediately preceding the date of application, of the state. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-244. - Criteria for maintaining permit.     In order to maintain a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit issued under this division, the taxicab company must: (1)  Maintain an office within Metropolitan Atlanta, which is defined as including Fulton, DeKalb, Cobb, Clayton, Gwinnett, Paulding, Henry, Cherokee, Douglas, Rockdale, Fayette, Coweta and Forsyth counties staffed by company agents or employees, including a dispatcher, 24 hours a day. Companies may agree to have other companies perform this function to satisfy this requirement by providing name of company to city. Such companies shall inform the city when they have another company perform this function. (2)  Submit to the city a copy of a current lease, if applicable, for the company premises or an affidavit as to ownership and occupancy. (3)  Maintain a publicly listed telephone number and email address and ensure both have been provided to the city. (4)  Maintain the name and home address of each driver affiliated with the company, along with the name of the CPNC holder who owns or leases the vehicle operated by the driver. (5)  Maintain a log listing the year, make, license plate number and CPNC number of each vehicle for hire operating in the airport operational fleet. (6)  Maintain sufficient employees or answering devices at the office to answer the telephone after hours of company operation. (7)  Taxicab companies must notify the city of the number of taxicabs to operate at the airport under their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit. (8)  Not provide the city with any false or misleading information. (9)  Either maintain vehicles capable of providing services to customers protected by all applicable federal, state, and local laws, including the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§. 12101 et seq., and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, or, alternatively, maintain a contractual agreement with another entity approved by the aviation general manager for the provision of services to such customers. Approval by the aviation general manager shall not be unreasonably withheld. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-245. - Report of changes, renewal, transferability. (a)  Under this subdivision any change of taxi company location must comply with section 22-244. The company shall provide notice in writing to the city, including the names of the persons involved, when applicable, within five working days of any of the following: (1)  Change in the chief executive officer, if a corporation. (2)  Change in the holder of 50 percent or more of the proprietary interest, if a partnership, corporation, firm or association. (3)  Change in company phone number and/or email address. (4)  Change of company name. (5)  Change of company location. (b)  After its initial issuance, a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit under this division shall be renewed no later than December 31 of the year the permit was issued, upon payment of all permit fees and the taxi company's providing proof that it continues to possess the requirements necessary to obtain and maintain such permit. (c)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits issued in accordance with this subdivision shall expire on December 31. (d)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits issued in accordance with this subdivision shall be non-transferable. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-246. - Administrative penalties. (a)  In accordance with section 22-203(b), administrative penalties for the violation of this division may be issued. (b)  In addition to the violation of provisions of this article, administrative penalties may be issued for offenses which include but shall not be limited to the following: (1)  The failure of the taxicab company to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of the permit. (2)  Obtaining a permit by providing false information. (3)  Conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of any shareholder, partner or member of any corporation, partnership, firm or association holding a 51 percent interest or more in the entity of any violation of this article. (4)  Conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of any shareholder, partner or member of any corporation, partnership, firm or association holding a 51 percent interest or more in the entity of any of the following: Criminal homicide, rape, aggravated battery, mayhem, burglary, aggravated assault, kidnapping, robbery, child molestation, criminal solicitation to commit any of such, criminal attempt to commit any of such or possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants if such violation is related to operation of the company or violation of any section of this Code or other ordinances of the city governing the conduct of holders of permits. (5)  Violation of any of the sections of this chapter or other ordinances regulating vehicles for hire or excessive violations of regulations governing vehicles for hire by drivers or CPNC holders affiliated with the taxicab company. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-247—22-250. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Local Airport Taxicabs 
Sec. 22-251. - Permit required.     It shall be unlawful for any person operating a local airport taxicab to pick up a passenger for hire upon the premises of the airport without first having obtained a permit authorizing such from the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-5042) 
Sec. 22-252. - Issuance of permit.     The aviation general manager is authorized to issue a local airport taxicab driver's permit upon the following conditions: (1)  Any person desiring a local airport taxicab permit shall make a written application to the aviation general manager upon the forms to be furnished by the aviation general manager. Such application shall give the age and home address of the applicant and shall contain a statement whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the violation of any city ordinance or state or federal criminal law. If the applicant has been so convicted, a complete and detailed statement of such convictions must be furnished. (2)  Fingerprints of all applicants shall be taken. An applicant for a local airport taxicab permit shall file with the aviation general manager two photographs, size 2½ inches. (3)  No local airport taxicab permit shall be granted unless the applicant is at least 18 years of age and has been granted the appropriate state driver's license. (4)  A fee of $25.00 shall be paid to the city by each applicant at the time the original application is filed, and a fee of $15.00 shall be paid at the time of each renewal of the permit. (5)  Duplicate local airport taxicab permits may be obtained by the payment of a fee of $5.00. (6)  All funds received under this section shall be paid into the airport revenue fund, to be used for airport purposes. (7)  Each local airport taxicab permit authorized by this subdivision shall be renewed on an annual basis during the month of September of each calendar year. (8)  Such permit shall not be issued to any applicant who has been convicted, within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, of any of the offenses enumerated in section chapter 162, article II, division 3 of this Code. (9)  The aviation general manager may, in the manager's discretion, revoke or suspend for a definite or an indefinite period any local airport taxicab permit granted under this subdivision whenever it shall be made to appear that the holder of such permit has violated this subdivision, has made any false statement upon any application for a permit under this subdivision, or shall have been convicted for the commission of any of the acts or offenses set forth in section 162-77(9). (10)  Prior to any suspension or revocation as set forth in subsection (9) of this section, it shall be the duty of the aviation general manager to notify in writing any person holding a local airport taxicab permit that there appear to be grounds for the revocation or suspension of such permit and further notifying such permit holder that the permit holder may, within a period of five days, appear to present a defense against the proposed revocation of such permit. Such notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the holder of such permit as the address appears from the files of the department of aviation. Such notice shall set forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation or suspension is predicated. (11)  All taxicab drivers operating under authority of the local airport taxicab permit shall be subject to the rules and regulations governing the conduct of such drivers contained in chapter 162 of this Code. (12)  All of sections 162-41 and 162-42 shall be applicable to taxicabs operated under authority of the local airport taxicab permit. (Code 1977, § 12-5043) 
Sec. 22-253. - Area of operation authorized by permit.     Notwithstanding any other section of this Code, a local airport taxicab permit shall authorize a taxicab driver only to respond to calls from passengers located on the premises of the airport by coming onto the premises to pick up such passengers and by carrying them to their respective destinations; provided, however, that such local airport taxicab permit shall not authorize any taxicab driver to pick up any passenger on the airport premises whose ultimate destination is located: (1)  Within the corporate limits of the city; or (2)  More than five miles from the airport terminal complex. (Code 1977, § 12-5044) 
Sec. 22-254. - Airport pickup location.     The aviation general manager shall provide at least one pickup point, to be located at a place to be determined in the aviation general manager's discretion at the airport terminal complex, which pickup point shall be used for picking up passengers by taxicab drivers operating under authority of the local airport taxicab permit. It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver holding a local airport taxicab permit to pick up passengers at any location at the airport terminal complex other than the pickup point designated for such purpose by the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-5045) 
Secs. 22-255—22-265. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Charter Services 
Sec. 22-266. - Permit required.     It shall be unlawful for any person operating vehicles available for charter to pick up a passenger or upon the premises of the airport without first obtaining a permit from the aviation general manager and without paying the fees established for such permit. (Code 1977, § 12-5051) 
Sec. 22-267. - Conditions for issuance of permits.     A permit may be issued by the aviation general manager to a firm operating vans, minibuses or buses for charter at the airport upon the following conditions: (1)  Any person desiring such charter service permit must file an application with the aviation general manager on forms furnished by the aviation general manager. Such application will require all pertinent information the aviation general manager reasonably needs in order to ascertain whether the applicant is capable of providing safe, efficient and reliable charter service. (2)  Charter service is to be permitted only for organized groups with an affinity of interest, and it shall be unlawful for a permit holder or the permit holder's representative to receive a fee directly from an individual passenger. (Code 1977, § 12-5052) 
Secs. 22-268—22-280. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Buses, Minibuses and Vans 
Sec. 22-281. - Metro area scheduled services. (a)  Contract or permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a scheduled service using buses, minibuses or vans to transport persons from the premises of the airport to any point within the metro area, as defined in this division, without entering into a contract with the city or obtaining a permit authorizing such operation from the aviation general manager and paying the fees established for the permit. (b)  Issuance of permit. The aviation general manager shall be authorized to issue a permit to the operator of scheduled bus, minibus or van services between the airport and points within or outside of the corporate limits of the city who meet the following minimum requirements: (1)  Furnish documentary evidence satisfactory to the aviation general manager that a demand for the service exists in a vehicle market in the locale to be served by the scheduled service. Such evidence shall include but shall not be limited to original records generated in the normal operations of an existing business, contracts with hotels or others for the service, letters from hotels or others requesting that the service be provided and published schedules. (2)  Own or control a sufficient number of buses, minibuses or vans which will make possible not less than hourly service from the airport to each locale served during 16 hours each day seven days per week. (3)  Own, control or otherwise provide for adequate vehicle maintenance in properly equipped facilities located no less than five miles from the airport or one of the locales to be served, which facilities are designed and staffed to properly maintain the operator's fleet of vehicles. (4)  Possess all certificates or permits required by the state, county or municipality having jurisdiction. (5)  Have demonstrated and continue to demonstrate fitness, willingness and ability to conduct the operations, including but not limited to compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. (6)  Obtain and keep in force, during the term of the permit, liability insurance coverage for the vehicles and company's operations under the permit in the minimum amounts of $500,000.00 per person, $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, and $100,000.00 property damage. (c)  Suspension or revocation of permit. The aviation general manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the permit of any permit holder who violates this section or section 22-204, provided that such suspension or revocation by the aviation general manager shall comply with section 22-203. (Code 1977, §§ 12-5061, 12-5062; Ord. No. 2017-27(17-O-1221), § 3, 5-15-17 ) 
Sec. 22-282. - Non-metro area scheduled service. (a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate vans, minibuses or buses for the purpose of transporting passengers between the premises of the airport and points outside the metro area, in such a way that any passenger pays a direct fee for the service so rendered, without first obtaining a permit from the aviation general manager and paying the fees established for the permit. (b)  Issuance of permit. Any person desiring a non-metro area scheduled service permit must make written application to the aviation general manager who may issue a permit to the person operating vans, minibuses or buses for providing ground transportation services between the premises of the airport and points outside the metro area. Application for such permit must be made on forms supplied by the aviation general manager, which application forms will provide for all pertinent information reasonably necessary for the aviation general manager to determine if the applicant is capable of providing safe, efficient and reliable non-metro area scheduled service. (c)  Suspension or revocation of permit. The aviation general manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the permit of any permit holder who violates this section or section 22-204, provided that such suspension or revocation by the aviation general manager shall comply with section 22-203. (Code 1977, §§ 12-5063, 12-5064) 
Sec. 22-283. - Airport shuttle service.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate vans, minibuses or buses in such a way as to transport a passenger to and from the premises of the airport to points within the corporate limits of the city and the metro area in such a way as to charge the passenger a direct fee for the service so rendered without first having a written contract or permit with the city. (Code 1977, § 12-5065; Ord. No. 2017-27(17-O-1221), § 4, 5-15-17 ) 
Sec. 22-284. - Metro area commercial van/minibus services. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commercial service includes operation as a common or contract carrier transporting passengers.     Commercial van service, commercial van/minibus service, metro area van/minibus service and commercial van/minibus operators include without limitation all common or contract carriers of passengers, other than charter service operators holding permits under section 22-267 and scheduled service operators holding permits under section 22-281(b), but shall not include any person providing service to and from points within the corporate limits of the city pursuant to a contract with the city. (b)  Permit or contract required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial service using vans or minibuses to transport persons from the premises of the airport to any point within the metro area without entering into a contract with the city or obtaining a permit authorizing such operation from the aviation general manager and paying the fees established for the permit. (c)  Conditions for issuance of permit. The aviation general manager shall be authorized to issue a permit to an operator of commercial van or minibus services who desires to pick up the operator's patrons from the airport, upon the following conditions: (1)  Any person desiring a metro area commercial van/minibus service permit shall file an application with the aviation general manager on forms to be furnished by the aviation general manager and provide all information reasonably required for the aviation general manager to determine whether the applicant is qualified to receive a permit; whether the applicant is fit, willing and able to conduct the operations, including but not limited to compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations; and whether the applicant is capable of providing safe and reliable service. (2)  Vehicles operated under a metro area van/minibus service permit shall not have an overall length greater than 20 feet and shall be clearly marked in permanent lettering as to the name of the firm holding the permit and operating the vehicles and the destinations served by such vehicles. (3)  The operator shall possess all certificates or permits required by the state, county or municipality having jurisdiction. (4)  The operator shall obtain and keep in force, during the term of the permit, liability insurance coverage for the vehicles and company's operations under the permit in the minimum amounts of $500,000.00 per person, $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, and $100,000.00 property damage. (Code 1977, §§ 12-5066, 12-5067) 
Sec. 22-285. - Operation procedures. (a)  When picking up patrons at the airport, commercial van/minibus operators shall park in the designated loading area or in a public parking facility and shall pay the applicable parking fee each time they depart from the parking facility. Commercial vans/minibuses shall be prohibited from using the area controlled by parking meters on the terminal curbsides. Failure to comply with this subsection shall subject the drivers to fines or other penalties established by law. (b)  It shall be unlawful for a commercial van/minibus operation to have more than the maximum number of vehicles or to remain longer than the maximum length of time allowable, in a designated loading area, stated in the permit and posted in the designated loading area. (c)  Metro area van/minibus service operators shall not engage in any form of solicitation at the airport. (d)  Failure by any operator to comply with this section and with the special conditions set forth in section 22-284(c) for issuance of permits may result in either the suspension or revocation of the permit by the aviation general manager. (Code 1977, § 12-5068; Ord. No. 2017-27(17-O-1221), § 5, 5-15-17 ) 
Secs. 22-286—22-300. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Limousine Service 
Sec. 22-301. - Permit. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial limousine service to transport persons from the premises of the airport without obtaining a ground transportation vehicle for hire company permit pursuant to this division. It shall be unlawful to drive, or for limousine companies to allow to be driven, any vehicle for hire which does not have and display a valid decal issued pursuant to this article. (b)  The aviation general manager may issue a ground transportation vehicle for hire company permit to an operator of commercial limousines, who desires to pick up patrons from the airport, upon the following conditions: (1)  Any person desiring an airport limousine permit shall file an application with the aviation general manager on forms to be furnished by the aviation general manager and provide all information reasonably required for the aviation general manager to determine whether the applicant is qualified to receive an airport limousine permit and is capable of providing safe and reliable limousine service. (2)  In addition to other conditions that might be imposed by the aviation general manager from time to time, limousine permits shall not be issued unless the applicant meets the following conditions, as a minimum: a.  The owner of the commercial limousine service and limousine drivers must comply with all requirements of the governmental jurisdiction where the limousine service is based and from which it is operated. b.  Public liability insurance coverage in the minimum amounts of $100,000.00 per person, $250,000.00 per occurrence, and $50,000.00 property damage shall be maintained in force and shall not be reduced, canceled or terminated for any reason without at least ten days' prior notice in writing by the insurer to the aviation general manager for each limousine to be operated under the permit. c.  All limousine service vehicles shall bear all valid inspection decals as required by state law and a permit decal issued by the aviation general manager pursuant to this division. (c)  After its initial issuance, a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit under this division shall be renewed no later than December 31 of the year the permit was issued, upon payment of all permit fees and the limousine company's providing proof that it continues to possess the requirements necessary to obtain and maintain such permit. (d)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits issued in accordance with this subdivision shall expire on December 31. (e)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits issued in accordance with this subdivision shall be non-transferable. (Code 1977, §§ 12-5071, 12-5072; Ord. No. 2010-48(10-O-1276), § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 7, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-302. - Operating conditions. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any limousine service ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holder to transport any passenger from the premises of the airport unless prior arrangements have been made for and in the name of such passenger for such service. The prior arrangements must be made not less than one hour prior to the time the service is rendered. Drivers or other limousine personnel shall keep a log or other documentation with them while they are on airport premises, showing the patron's name, local destination, arriving flight number, arrival time, date and time the arrangement for the service was made, and shall make the information available upon request by any department of aviation personnel. (b)  Representatives, including drivers, of limousine services shall be permitted to meet arriving patrons in the public areas of the airport terminal and shall be permitted to assist patrons through baggage claim. (c)  Representatives, including drivers, of limousine services shall be permitted to meet patrons arriving on international flights at the lower level exit area of the international arrivals facility only in a location designated in writing by the aviation general manager. It shall be unlawful for any airport limousine ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holder or representative, including a driver, to meet patrons arriving on international flights in any other location in the terminal complex. (d)  No owner or driver of a limousine or any person connected in any way with a limousine ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holder shall at any time, by words, gestures or otherwise, attempt to solicit, persuade or urge any person to use or hire a limousine. (e)  When picking up patrons at the airport, the limousine operator shall park in the designated limousine loading area or in a public parking facility, shall pay the applicable parking fee each time and may load patrons at the terminal curbsides only when patrons are physically present and ready to board the limousine at the time the limousine arrives at the curbside. When loading patrons on the terminal curbside, drivers shall obey the posted parking regulations. Commercial limousines shall be prohibited from using the area controlled by parking meters on the terminal curbsides. Failure to comply with this subsection shall subject limousine drivers to fines or other penalties established by law. (f)  Limos operated by limousine companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be subject to random inspection for compliance with this article while parked in the designated limousine loading area or in a public parking facility on airport property. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the inspection of a vehicle for hire based upon the reasonable suspicion of violations under this article by a code enforcement agent or police officer. There shall be no fees imposed for inspections pursuant to this article. (g)  It shall be unlawful for a limousine operator to have more than the maximum number of limousines, or to remain longer than the maximum length of time allowable, in a designated limousine loading area, stated in the limousine permit and posted in the designated loading area. (h)  This section also applies to sedan drivers and operators. (Code 1977, § 12-5073; Ord. No. 1995-38, § 9, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2010-48(10-O-1276), § 2, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 7, 9-28-16) 
Secs. 22-303—22-315. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VIII. - Courier Vehicles 
Sec. 22-316. - Operating conditions for vehicles with permits.     The aviation general manager is authorized to designate an area of the airport for the use of courier vehicles. Use of the area shall be subject to the following conditions: (1)  A company operating courier vehicles that desires to use such designated areas shall, for each such vehicle: a.  Obtain from the aviation general manager a written permit authorizing use of such designated area at the airport; and b.  Pay the fee required for the permit. (2)  Courier vehicles with permits shall be operated at the airport in accordance with procedures designated from time to time by the aviation general manager. (3)  Operators of courier vehicles with permits are prohibited from soliciting business in any manner at the airport. (Code 1977, § 12-5074) 
Sec. 22-317. - Operating procedures for vehicles without permits.     With respect to the operation of courier vehicles without permits issued in accordance with section 22-316, the following will apply: (1)  Courier vehicles without permits shall use either the reserved parking spaces provided by the various airlines at the airport for use by couriers and small package express customers or shall use the public parking facilities and, if public parking facilities are used, shall pay the parking meter or other fee established therefor. (2)  Operators of courier vehicles without permits are prohibited from soliciting business in any manner at the airport. (Code 1977, § 12-5075) 
Secs. 22-318—22-329. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IX. - Rideshare Services 
Sec. 22-330. - Conditions for use at airport.     All ground transportation vehicle for hire permit holders operating rideshare vehicles at the airport shall comply with the following, in addition to other applicable sections of this Code: (1)  Before being permitted to load passengers at the terminal complex, a rideshare service company must obtain a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit in accordance with this article, and shall pay to the department of aviation, in the manner prescribed by the aviation general manager, the fees required therefor. There shall be a distinctive decal issued for each vehicle approved for operation at the airport. There shall be no fee imposed for the issuance of this decal. (2)  Rideshare service operators shall conduct their business at the airport at places to be designated from time to time by the aviation general manager and in accordance with all laws and regulations applicable thereto. (3)  All rideshare vehicles shall be stopped or parked only in such manner and in such areas as may be designated by the aviation general manager. (4)  Operators of all rideshare service vehicles shall load passengers curbside in such manner and location as may be prescribed by the aviation general manager. (5)  While operating as a rideshare service driver, rideshare service drivers shall refrain from cruising in their vehicles at the airport and should pass through the rideshare assembly area before entering the designated loading zone. (6)  No vehicle operated pursuant to a rideshare ground transportation vehicle for hire company permit having a vehicle age greater than seven years may be operated. For purposes of this article, the term "vehicle age" shall be determined based on the vehicle's model year, and a "year" shall be measured through the last day of that respective calendar year (for example, a vehicle with a model year of 2016 shall have a vehicle age of one year as of January 1, 2017). ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-331. - Inspections, generally. (a)  Vehicles operated by rideshare service companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be subject to random inspections for compliance with this article while within the rideshare assembly area. (b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the inspection of a vehicle for hire based upon the reasonable suspicion of violations under this article by a code enforcement agent or police officer. (d)  There shall be no fees imposed for inspections performed under this article. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-332. - Rideshare minimum customer service requirements. (a)  Within 24 hours of the discovery of any personal property left by a passenger in a vehicle for hire, comply with a lost and found policy approved by the airport general manager. (b)  A driver shall take the most direct route to a passenger's destination unless otherwise authorized or directed by the passenger. The route taken must be visible to the passenger pursuant to a GPS based electronic route guidance system, which the passenger may follow in real-time. (c)  A rideshare driver must accept a credit card via an electronic payment method as a mode of payment, and may accept cash; no credit card surcharges may be imposed. (d)  A rideshare driver shall not refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger has demonstrated that they may be dangerous. (e)  No rideshare driver shall refuse to accept a passenger solely on the basis of that passenger's or perception of that passenger's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. No rideshare driver shall refuse to accept a passenger on the basis of the passenger's possession of a service animal, to include comfort animals. (f)  No rideshare vehicle shall be permitted to carry nonpaying passengers while transporting a paying passenger except for the purpose of driver training. (g)  It shall be unlawful to operate the vehicle in a manner which threatens a passenger or anyone else or to threaten or otherwise abuse a passenger or for any passenger to abuse a driver, and it shall also be unlawful to discharge any passenger before reaching the passenger's destination unless the driver has a reasonable belief that the passenger is dangerous or unless street conditions do not permit a safe discharge. (h)  No television sets may be operated on the front seat on which the driver sits inside of a moving rideshare vehicle. (i)  It shall be unlawful to drive, or for rideshare companies to allow to be driven, any vehicle for hire which does not have and display a valid decal issued pursuant to this article. (j)  Completed electronically produced receipts must be offered to passengers showing the amount of fare paid, name of rideshare company and contact information, location of trip origination and location of trip termination, and duration of trip. The rideshare company must be able to electronically transmit the information contained in such receipts to the city upon request, and may not be hand written. Under no circumstances shall a customer's credit card number appear in full on any receipt. (k)  It shall be unlawful to carry a number of passengers that exceeds the seating capacity of the vehicle for hire according to the vehicle manufacturer's specifications. (l)  A rideshare vehicle must be of a size and have a seating and cargo capacity approved by the airport general manager. (m)  As a condition of their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits, rideshare companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be responsible for their and their drivers' compliance with this division, and may be cited in accordance with this division for any violations thereof. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-333. - Ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit requirements for rideshare companies; application. (a)  No ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit shall be granted to a rideshare company requesting less than 20 vehicle decals. (b)  Insurance Required. The permit applicant shall provide proof of liability insurance coverage, in accordance with OCGA Section 33-1-24, in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per incident covering all permitted ride share network service or ride share driver activity and which shall include an endorsement whereby the city, its elected officials, officers, agents, and employees are covered as additional insured. The permit applicant shall also provide proof of any other insurance coverage that may be required by law. (c)  Technology required. All rideshare ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holders must possess the technological capability to connect its digital network or internet network to the airport's vehicle tracking software. Such connection shall enable the airport to track permit holder's ride share driver activity while on airport property and shall include technology solutions to prohibit rideshare drivers from appearing on a permit holder's digital network as available for hire while inside an airport perimeter to be designated by the aviation general manager, with the exception of the rideshare assembly area. The aviation general manager may establish a maximum number of ride share driver vehicles that may be within the airport perimeter designated by the aviation general manager at any given time. (d)  In order to secure a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit under this division, the rideshare company applicant must provide information showing its qualifications on a form provided by the city. The applicant must be: (1)  At least 18 years of age. (2)  A citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or otherwise granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. (3)  A resident, for at least one year immediately preceding the date of application, of the state. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-334. - Criteria for maintaining permit.     In order to maintain a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit issued under this division, the rideshare company must: (1)  Maintain the name and home address of each driver affiliated with the company. (2)  Maintain a log listing the year, make, and license plate number of each vehicle for hire operating at the airport. (3)  Rideshare companies must notify the city of the number of vehicles to operate at the airport under their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit. (4)  Not provide the city with any false or misleading information. (5)  Either maintain vehicles capable of providing services to customers protected by all applicable federal, state, and local laws, including the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§. 12101 et seq., and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, or, alternatively, maintain a contractual agreement with another entity approved by the aviation general manager for the provision of services to such customers. Approval by the aviation general manager shall not be unreasonably withheld. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-335. - Report of changes, renewal, transferability. (a)  The rideshare company shall provide notice in writing to the city, including the names of the persons involved, when applicable, within five working days of a change of company name. (b)  After its initial issuance, a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit under this division shall be renewed no later than December 31 of the year the permit was issued, upon payment of all permit fees and the rideshare company's providing proof that it continues to possess the requirements necessary to obtain and maintain such permit. (c)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits issued in accordance with this subdivision shall expire on December 31. (d)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits issued in accordance with this subdivision shall be non-transferable. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-336. - Administrative penalties. (a)  In accordance with section 22-203(b), administrative penalties for the violation of this division may be issued. (b)  In addition to the violation of provisions of this article, administrative penalties may be issued for offenses which include but shall not be limited to the following: (1)  The failure of the rideshare company to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of the permit. (2)  Obtaining a permit by providing false information. (3)  Violation of any of the sections of this Code or other ordinances regulating vehicles for hire or excessive violations of regulations governing vehicles for hire by drivers affiliated with the rideshare company. ( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Chapter 30 - BUSINESSES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Vending machines on city property and in city facilities, § 2-3; advertising, ch. 6; dealers and manufacturers of alcoholic beverages, § 10-31 et seq.; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; use of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport for commercial operations generally, § 22-63; distribution of literature and solicitation of funds at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, § 22-146 et seq.; cable communications, ch. 34; consumer protection, ch. 58; motor vehicle repairs, § 58-36 et seq.; close out and similar sales, § 58-61 et seq.; burglar or robbery alarm systems, § 70-26 et seq.; indoor air, § 86-31 et seq.; sale of goods, articles or services in parks, § 110-62; secondhand goods, ch. 122; obstructing sidewalks by display or sale of goods, § 138-45; taxation, ch. 146; urban enterprise zones, § 146-51 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 162. Land development code reference— Commercial, institutional and industrial building maintenance code, § 8-2079 et seq. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 30-1. - Identification of coin-operated vending machines or amusement devices. (a)  Each coin-operated vending machine or amusement device situated, operated, maintained or used within the city shall have conspicuously stamped upon it or affixed thereon for identification purposes the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the owner thereof. The identification shall be provided by the owner of the machine at the owner's expense. (b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner and operator of any public premises to permit any coin-operated vending machine or amusement device on the premises unless the coin-operated vending machine or amusement device shall have conspicuously stamped upon it or affixed thereon for identification purposes the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the owner thereof, as required in subsection (a) of this section. (Code 1977, § 14-5192) Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; vending on public property, § 30-1401 et seq.; newspaper vending devices, § 138-156 et seq. 
Sec. 30-2. - Endless chain business. (a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on in the city an endless chain retail merchandising store or business of any kind. (b)  Scope of section. Such a business is defined as: (1)  One where the dealer sells to a customer for a certain sum a contract with coupons or contracts attached, for a stated value, but authorizing the customer to sell these coupons or contracts at the stated value and giving each purchaser thereof, in turn, the right to apply to the dealer and buy a similar contract and pay a similar sum and receive similar coupons or contracts and, in turn, to conduct the sale of the contracts as an endless chain; provided, that when any customer has bought a contract and has sold the coupons or contracts to different individuals, as stated in this subsection, such customer is entitled to a receipt for the full amount of those coupons or contracts upon the merchandise handled by the dealer. (2)  As including a business where the purchaser makes an initial payment and is thereafter allowed commissions on a stated number of resulting sales subsequently made on leaflets instead of coupons, as described in this section, these leaflets being marked with a serial number and the commissions being calculated on orders obtained on these leaflets, or credited to the serial number, the plan being that where one has made an initial purchase and received one's serial number on one's order form such person is given a number of leaflets, with the same serial number thereon, and subsequent sales, following a stated number, are thereafter credited to this serial number, and such person is given a commission on orders obtained which are credited to this serial number, by which the purchaser is supposed to secure a credit in this series to other parties who continue to duplicate the plan, and thus carry it on in an endless chain. (Code 1977, § 17-3008) 
Secs. 30-3—30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE POWER LICENSES AND PERMITS GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-26. - License review board. (a)  There is created a license review board of the city to be composed of seven members who shall be residents of the city appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. One of the members of the board shall be an attorney-at-law. One of the members of the board shall be the president of the planning advisory board (APAB) or the president's designee. No employee or elected official of the city shall be appointed to the board nor shall any person be appointed who holds any interest in any license issued under the police powers of the city. The members of the board shall serve for two-year terms. (b)  The board shall hold a minimum of two meetings in any calendar month and the meetings shall be held in any municipal building and shall be open to the public. Each member of the board shall be paid $100.00 per meeting or $100.00 per day of any adjourned meeting. In addition to the regular compensation, the member who writes the board's findings and recommendations shall be paid $100.00. Administrative and legal services as may be required by the board shall be furnished by departments and agencies of the city. (c)  The functions of the board shall be to: (1)  Review all applications for permits, other than work permits and taxicab permits, issued under the police power of the city which are referred to the board by the mayor or the commissioner of public safety or a designated agent with a statement thereon indicating whether or not such application meets the legal requirements for the issuance of such permit. The board shall make a favorable or unfavorable recommendation thereon to the mayor in accordance with the applicable sections of this Code or other ordinances and state statutes regulating the issuance of such permits and licenses; (2)  Hear all appeals that may be filed from the denial, suspension or revocation of any work permits by the police chief or that may be filed under chapter 138, article VI, pertaining to outdoor festivals, from the denial or classification of any application for an outdoor festival permit by the commissioner of parks and recreation and make recommendations on those appeals to the mayor in accordance with the applicable sections of this Code or other ordinances and statutes of the state; and (3)  Unless otherwise provided, conduct hearings on any charges which may be brought against any licensee under the police powers of the city where those charges may be the basis for suspension or revocation of the license and to report its findings and recommendations to the mayor. (d)  During all hearings before the board, formal legal rules of evidence shall not be strictly applied. Evidence may be admitted if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. The board shall follow the Georgia rules of evidence regarding privileges. (e)  All votes of the board shall be announced in public. (f)  All recommendations of the board made in accordance with this section, shall be delivered to the mayor within three business days of the public announcement of the vote of the board on such recommendations. (g)  Final decisions of the mayor to deny an application for a new license or permit, to deny a transfer of location or transfer of ownership, or to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew a license or permit, or to impose a fine upon any license or permit under this chapter may be appealed via Certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. (Code 1977, § 14-6004; Ord. No. 2001-16, § 1, 2-24-01; Ord. No. 2008-80(08-O-1676), § 4, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 2012-43(12-O-1072), § 3, 9-26-12) Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 3-401. 
Sec. 30-27. - Subpoena; authority of license review board. (a)  Issuance, contents, service. Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the license review board to establish any fact in connection with any hearing or any investigation which may be lawfully conducted by the license review board, the mayor or the mayor's designee is authorized to issue a subpoena, directed to the witness, requiring the witness to personally be and appear at the time and place of the meeting of the board and to produce at that time and place any documentary evidence which, in the judgment of the board, may be required. Such witness shall remain in attendance upon the meeting until excused therefrom. The subpoena shall bear teste in the name of the city, shall be signed by the mayor or the mayor's designee and shall be served by any member of the department of police. Such service shall be had at least 24 hours before the time such witness is required to attend and to continue the attendance of the witness. (b)  Penalty for violation. If any person so summoned as set out in subsection (a) of this section as a witness shall fail, neglect or refuse to attend the hearing or shall fail, neglect or refuse to produce any relevant documentary evidence or shall fail or refuse to take and subscribe to the required oath or affirmation or shall fail to answer any question lawfully propounded or shall fail to continue in attendance until excused by the board, the person shall be cited to appear before the municipal court and, upon conviction by that court shall be subject to the general penalties provided in section 1-8, except the fine shall be limited to $50.00 and the sentence to work on the streets or public works of the city shall not exceed 25 days. (Code 1977, § 14-6006) 
Sec. 30-28. - Fees. (a)  Amount. Every person filing an initial application for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall pay at the time of the filing of the application a fee in accordance with schedule 1 of this section to be applied to the cost of processing the application. Every person filing an application for the renewal of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall pay at the time of the filing of the application a fee in accordance with schedule 2 of this section to be applied to the cost of processing the application. Every person filing an application for a license other than for the sale of alcoholic beverages which requires approval by the license review board shall pay at the time of filing of the application a fee in accordance with schedule 3 of this section. Every person filing for a permit not covered in these schedules shall be charged a minimum fee of $30.00. Schedule 1 Initial Application Fee for License for Sale of Alcoholic Beverages Description      Fee  Malt beverages/wine consumed ..... $300.00 Malt beverages/wine packaged ..... 300.00 Create a package store area ..... 300.00 Distilled spirits package ..... 300.00 Distilled spirits consumed ..... 300.00 Schedule 2 Application Fee for Renewal of License forSale of Alcoholic Beverages Description     Fee  Malt beverages/wine consumed ..... $150.00 Malt beverages/wine packaged ..... 150.00 Create a package store area ..... 150.00 Distilled spirits package ..... 150.00 Distilled spirits consumed ..... 150.00 Schedule 3 Application Fees for Licenses Other ThanSale of Alcoholic Beverages Description     Fee  Employees/independent contractors working at adult entertainment establishments which sell alcohol:  Application fee ..... $   50.00  Permit fee ..... 200.00 Aerobics/slimnastics ..... 500.00 Alarms commercial permits ..... 50.00 Alarms residential permits ..... 50.00 Billiard/pool room ..... 150.00 Bonding company ..... 500.00 Bondsperson ..... 250.00 Boxing promoter ..... 2,000.00 Burglar alarm company ..... 500.00 Burglar alarm installer ..... 75.00 Door-to-door sales (company) ..... 500.00 Door-to-door sales (employee) ..... 170.00 Escort service (company) ..... 2,000.00 Escort service (employee) ..... 300.00 Firearm application ..... 120.00 Fortuneteller or handwriting analysis annual fee ..... 500.00 Fund solicitation annual fee ..... 200.00 Game room ..... 150.00 Gym/health spa ..... 500.00 Hypnotherapy ..... 500.00 Lingerie modeling studios (company) ..... 3,000.00 Lingerie modeling studio (employees) ..... 300.00 Massage salon annual fee ..... 2,000.00 Massage technician annual fee ..... 200.00 Motel/hotel ..... 120.00 Moving ..... 60.00 Parking lots/garages - per lot ..... 250.00 Parking lots/garages - per space ..... 3.00 Pawnshop annual fee ..... 750.00 Precious metal dealer annual fee ..... 750.00 Roominghouse/lodge ..... 150.00 Scrap processor ..... 500.00 Sightseeing company ..... 200.00 Social/private club ..... 200.00 Tattoo parlor ..... 150.00 Teenage dancehall ..... 180.00 Telephone solicitations ..... 150.00 Theater annual fee ..... 500.00 Vendor assistant permit ..... 30.00 Vendor replacement permit ..... 30.00 Wrecker company (each truck) ..... 300.00 Wrecker company employees ..... 150.00 Wrestling promoter license fee ..... 2,000.00 Wrestling permit application fee ..... 100.00 Wrestling referees, judges, timekeepers, managers, trainers, and seconds ..... 100.00 (b)  Refunds; fee to accompany application. No refunds of fees so paid shall be made even though the application may be subsequently dismissed prior to investigation being made. Each application shall be accompanied by the fee, even though the applicant may have previously filed other applications. (Code 1977, § 19-14.022; Ord. No. 1998-95, § 1, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 1999-12, §§ 6, 7, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-14, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-35, §§ 6, 7, 3-9-99; Ord. No. 2000-7, § 6, 2-15-00; Ord. No. 2016-11(16-O-1150), § 2, 5-11-16 ) 
Sec. 30-29. - Issuance contingent upon applicant's criminal record. (a)  Rules for consideration of applications. In considering an initial application for a license or permit issued under the police power of the city, the following rules shall apply with respect to an applicant's criminal record: (1)  All applications for a license or permit issued under the police powers of the city shall be reviewed for criminal history. Only convictions, pleas of nolo contendere, or violations of law, including city ordinances, reasonably related to the application, shall ever be considered. A nolo contendere plea shall not be taken into consideration and shall not be cause for or used as justification for denial of the application, except as otherwise provided by law or city ordinance. (2)  Any conviction or plea of nolo contendere for which the applicant has received either a pardon or restoration of civil and political rights from the state board of pardons and paroles shall not be taken into consideration and shall not in any way be cause for or used as justification for denial of the application. (3)  A plea of nolo contendere or plea of guilty under O.C.G.A. tit. 42, ch. 8, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.), the First Offender's Act, shall not be taken into consideration and shall not be cause for the denial of the application for a license or permit, provided that the person has not more than one plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere under that act for the commission of any act or offense in violation of the laws of the United States, the state or the city at the time of filing the application. (4)  No conviction or plea of nolo contendere, the sentence for which shall have been successfully completed, including parole or probation, if any, more than five years preceding the filing of the application for the permit or license shall be taken into consideration or be cause for or a justification for denial of the application. (5)  Subject to subsections (a)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section, the person or body approving or denying an application for a license or permit under the police power of the city may take into consideration the criminal record of the applicant in determining whether to approve or deny the application; provided, however, that only those offenses that are reasonably related to the job duties involved in the job for which a permit or license is sought may be taken into consideration or used as cause to deny the application. For purposes of this section, an offense is reasonably related to the job duties involved in the job if the job involved offers a greater than normal opportunity to commit the same crime or a similar crime to that of which the person was previously convicted, provided further that the convictions shall never operate as an automatic disqualification, but shall be considered along with all other relevant information by the person or body approving or denying the application for a permit or license. Subject to subsections (a)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section, the only purpose of using an applicant's prior criminal history in determining whether to approve or deny an application for a license or permit shall be to determine the applicant's ability to perform the job for which the license or permit is sought in a safe and lawful manner. (b)  Renewals, suspensions and revocations. All renewal applications for a license or permit issued under the police powers of the city shall be reviewed for criminal history. In considering a person's criminal record or history for determining whether or not to renew, suspend or revoke a license or permit issued under the police powers of the city, the same standards shall be used as are set out in subsection (a) of this section relating to initial license or permit applications. (c)  Factors other than criminal history. Nothing in this section shall in any way be interpreted to affect the ability of the person or body charged with the responsibility to issue, renew, suspend or revoke a license or permit to apply any proper criterion or standard, other than prior criminal history, in determining whether to issue, renew, suspend or revoke the license or permit. (d)  Application of section. This section is intended to apply to every license to do business or permit to engage in a particular job or occupation which is regulated under the police power of the city. (Code 1977, § 14-6002; Ord. No. 2001-10, §§ 1, 2, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 30-30. - Effect of denial or revocation. (a)  When any application for a license or permit to transact any business within the control of the police powers of the city is denied for cause or revoked for cause by the mayor, it shall be unlawful for the department of police to accept or consider any application for a license to operate at that location the same type of business within 12 months from the time of denial or revocation by the mayor. For purposes of this subsection the 12-month period as stated in this subsection shall be tolled during any period of time that an appeal is pending of said denial or revocation, or any period of time that by operation of law the city cannot enforce said denial or revocation, or any period of time during which there is in place a valid, voluntary agreement between the city and the entity denied a license or permit or whose license or permit has been revoked to not enforce the mayor's decision pending the outcome of litigation in any way involving said denial or revocation. (b)  It shall be unlawful for the license review board to consider any application mentioned in subsection (a) of this section or a motion for rehearing of that application within 12 months without specific authority from the mayor. For purposes of this subsection the 12 month period as stated in this subsection shall be tolled during any period of time that an appeal is pending of the denial or revocation mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, or any period of time that by operation of law the city cannot enforce said denial or revocation, or any period of time during which there is in place a valid, voluntary agreement between the city and the entity denied a license or whose license or permit has been revoked as mentioned in subsection (a) of this section to not enforce the mayor's decision pending the outcome of litigation in any way involving said denial or revocation. (Code 1977, § 14-6001; Ord. No. 2003-106, § 1, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 30-31. - Notice to police of security measures and emergency contacts. (a)  All persons owning, operating or managing any business located in the city shall furnish to the department of police information necessary to indicate the security measures located at the business and the persons to be notified if an emergency occurs at the business. This information shall be kept current by the owner of the business. (b)  Every person applying for a new license to operate or manage a business shall be required, at the time of the application, to furnish the information required in subsection (a) of this section and to keep the information current. (c)  Every person owning, operating or managing a business shall be furnished by the department of police an emergency decal containing a coded number, and the owner, operator or manager of the business shall place the decal at least five feet above the ground level in the most conspicuous location as close as possible to the main entrance of the business. (d)  The department of police shall enforce compliance with this section. (Code 1977, § 14-6003) 
Sec. 30-32. - Material misrepresentations regarding ownership or use of business enterprises. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any material misrepresentation of the composition of the ownership or work force of a business entity doing or seeking to do business with the city. (b)  It shall be unlawful to make any knowing misrepresentation to the city of the use which a contractor intends to make of a minority, female or developing business enterprise, as a subcontractor or a joint venture partner in performing work under contract with the city. (c)  These offenses shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-8. (d)  These offenses are not intended, nor shall they be construed to supersede, supplant or nullify any ordinances pertaining to the authority of the city to debar or suspend a person from consideration for award of city contracts for the offenses enumerated in this section. (Code 1977, § 17-11012) 
Sec. 30-33. - Renewal contingent on compliance with Article III of this chapter.     At the time of the renewal of a license or permit issued under the police powers of the city, the licensee must show that the licensed business is compliant with the provisions contained in Article III of this chapter, including that they are registered with the business tax division and have been issued a certificate therefrom, where applicable. A finding of the failure by the licensee to maintain such compliance shall be due cause for refusal to renew the license or permit. (Ord. No. 2010-53(10-O-1536), § 1, 9-29-10) 
Secs. 30-34—30-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exhibit B), approved Oct. 20, 2004, amended ch. 30, art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-51. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. For those businesses required to register with the city, the payment of the administrative fee shall also satisfy any requirement to pay the registration fee     Business shall maintain its ordinary and customary usage according to context but also may be used to generally identify a person or entity carrying on a trade, occupation, profession, or other commercial or non-commercial enterprise. Business tax means the same as occupation tax.     Business tax division means that part of the department of finance made responsible for assisting the chief financial officer with the administration of the occupation tax and according to context may also mean the location where the operations of the business tax division are carried out.     Certificate means a document issued to the person after registration of a business and the full payment of any required occupation tax.     Chief financial officer includes the chief financial officer's designee.     Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, from which the greatest amount of income is derived.     Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not an I.R.S. 1009.     Gross receipts. (1)  Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without limitation, the following: a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. (2)  Gross receipts shall not include the following: a.  Sales, use or excise tax; b.  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2); d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. f.  Proceeds from sales of goods which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside of the state at the time of delivery or receipt.     Location or office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project.     Nonprofit organization shall mean a bona fide nonprofit civic, educational or charitable organization.     Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes.     Person means and includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits or any other form of business organization.     Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who is by state law required to obtain a state license pursuant to the law regulating such profession or occupation. Such term shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax.     Registration means the application form with information about a business or the act of completing the form. As a matter of administrative convenience, registration forms may also be used for the purpose of compiling such information as deemed necessary to confirm that the type of business to be operated is permitted by the zoning code at the location where the business is to be conducted and to sufficiently identify the location of the business for the purposes of enforcement of this division.     Regulatory fees mean payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees.     Return means all documents or forms filed with the payment of an occupation tax and/or those documents or forms, which are used to determine any underpayment or overpayment on taxes paid in any previous year.     Taxpayer means the person from whom the occupation tax, imposed under this article, is due or was collected.     Within the jurisdiction of the city shall mean and include any area within the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta as the same currently exist or as they may be changed from time to time, and any area within the boundaries of the William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport as the same currently exist or as they may be changed from time to time. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-52. - Levy.     As provided in this article and in accordance with state law, an occupation tax is hereby levied and assessed on each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation located within the jurisdiction of the city and on each person whose business, trade, profession or occupation, is carried on, operated or performed within the jurisdiction of city; except that no occupation tax, regulatory fee or administrative fee is levied on any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. In the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia, which exerts substantial efforts within the state and city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, an occupation tax shall be levied and assessed on such business, trade, profession or occupation. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-53. - Purpose and scope of tax.     The occupant tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations that are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-54. - Administration.     The chief financial officer shall administer and enforce this article for the levy, assessment and collection of license fees, occupation taxes, and any fees, interest and penalties imposed in this article except for those fines or court costs that are judicially imposed. 
Sec. 30-55. - Violations. (a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be cited and required to appear before the court with jurisdiction over violations of city ordinances. The imposition of any judicially imposed fines or court costs or other punishment shall not relieve the taxpayer from liability for the payment of all taxes, penalties and interest which are past due. This section shall not authorize the issuance of citations where another section of this article excuses compliance from a particular requirement. (b)  Any person required to pay a business tax or to register with the business tax division, and who fails to do so in the manner provided by this article, shall also be liable to have the tax or any fees, penalties and interest collected by the issuance of execution by the revenue collection administrator, ex officio marshal or deputy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. For the purpose of administering this section and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, a person who is an employee in apparent authority at the location where the business is registered or who is an agent acting in a capacity of apparent authority may be served with any notices and/or citations directed to the taxpayer. This section further authorizes collection of the tax and any fees, penalties and interest by the issuance of execution by the revenue collection administrator, ex officio marshal or deputy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26 against those delinquent taxpayers without any requirement that citations be issued. (c)  Any person who registers with the business tax division as a nonprofit organization, and is exempted from payment of business taxes, regulatory fees, and administrative fees pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13(5), and who is determined by the chief financial officer not to qualify for the exemption provided for nonprofit organizations by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13(5), may be cited for violation of this ordinance and shall be responsible for the payment of all taxes, penalties and interest which are past due. For the purpose of administering this section and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, a person who is an employee in apparent authority at the location where the business is registered or who is an agent acting in a capacity of apparent authority may be served with any notices and/or citations directed to the taxpayer. (d)  Compliance with this article shall not be a precondition to the practice of any profession licensed by the state. The sole purpose for the imposition of all fines, penalties and interest provided by this article is to support and enhance the collection of the taxes levied by this article. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-56. - Effect of article upon previous ordinance.     The outstanding liabilities under prior ordinances shall continue and remain in force until such tax, fee, assessment, penalty or interest shall be fully paid. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-57. - Duties of chief financial officer.     The chief financial officer shall, among other duties: (1)  Prepare and provide the necessary forms for the registration of a business, and for the submission of required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce this article; (2)  Issue to each person, for whom it is required, a registration certificate within a reasonable time after the payment of the business tax assessed and levied in this article; provided, however, where under other ordinances of the city, permits, certifications and compliance with the enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the chief financial officer shall not issue the business registration certificate until the applicant exhibits to the chief financial officer those obtained permits, certifications and compliances. In those cases where an applicant has applied for necessary permits, certifications and compliances with enumerated conditions, and such applicant is permitted to operate a business while the application is pending, the chief financial officer may consider that provisional approval has been granted and issue a registration certificate; provided, however, that at least sixty (60) days have elapsed since the applicant has made application for the required permits, certifications and compliances; (3)  Issue executions for the collection of all outstanding taxes and fees levied and assessed under the terms of this article, together with penalties and interest; the executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes and fees due the city; (4)  Determine if the accounting method used by a business for which a tax certificate if required under this article accurately reflects the taxable gross receipts of the business for the applicable calendar year, and to make whatever adjustments may be necessary to arrive at the accurate amount of taxable gross receipts for the period applicable; (5)  Audit periodically the books and records of the businesses subject to the provisions of this article, and to require the submission of such additional information as may be necessary to correctly determine the amount of the tax due and to ensure its collection; and (6)  Issue in any year without charge a certificate when an applicant exhibits to the chief financial officer such permits, certifications and compliances which, under the law of the state or the United States, would entitle the applicant to it. (7)  Determine if the person who has declared for an exemption from the business tax, administrative fee and registration fee is entitled to such an exemption. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-58. - Authority of chief financial officer to make rules and regulations.     The chief financial officer shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of the registration fees under this article. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-59. - Compliance investigators.     Compliance investigators are authorized, when so designated by the chief financial officer, to conduct investigations in the manner provided elsewhere in this article. Compliance investigators are eligible to apply for status as code enforcement agents under section 98-1. In order to enforce code provisions and issue citations, compliance investigators must apply for and receive status as a code enforcement agent. Compliance investigators may cite individuals or persons for violation of this article but are not empowered to arrest any individual for any violation of this article, and, notwithstanding any authority to the contrary elsewhere in the Atlanta City Code of Ordinances, shall not arrest any individual for any violation of this article. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2006-75, § 1, 10-11-06) 
Sec. 30-60. - Exceptions to article. (a)  Generally. The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article, but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: (1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. (2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). (3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. (4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. (5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. (6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. (7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355: Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meals, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal and hulls. (8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. (9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. (10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. (11)  Sales of alcoholic beverages. (b)  Exemption for state and local authorities and nonprofit organizations. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13(5), no occupation tax, regulatory fee or administrative fee is levied on any state or local authority or nonprofit organization as defined in this article. (c)  Performance. The fee per performance held in a theater, stadium, room, open space or any other place shall be as follows: Spectator Capacity Fee per Performance 0 to 500 $35.00 500 to 2,500 100.00 2,500 to 7,500 200.00 7,500 to 15,000 350.00 Over 15,000 500.00  (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-61. - Determination of amount.     The occupation tax amount shall be determined by the sum of three components: (1)  A nonrefundable annual administrative fee of $75.00. (2)  An appropriate tax amount determined by tax rates in classes that are associated with standard industrial classifications and profitability ratios. These tax rates are in section 30-62. The tax classes are in Appendix I to the ordinance from which this section is derived. The practitioners of professions listed in section 30-63 shall determine their tax as set forth in said section. (3)  A per employee component which shall be imposed and shall become effective as provided in section 30-62. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-62. - Administrative fee amounts; tax rate structure. (a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $75.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts except for the businesses of those persons who are not required to pay the business or occupation tax for the initial startup, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. The administrative fee can only approximate the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax, return or application. (b)  Gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. (c)  The tax rate for all parts of 1999 after the effective date of this ordinance, and or each year thereafter, for each business, trade, profession or occupation shall be as follows: Tax Class Flat Rate $0—$10,000.00 Tax Rate per $1,000.00 1 $50.00 plus $0.60 2 50.00 plus 0.75 3 50.00 plus 0.85 4 50.00 plus 1.10 5 50.00 plus 1.40 6 50.00 plus 1.65 7 50.00 plus 1.90 8 50.00 plus 2.15  (1)  The tax on gross receipts shall be calculated by the application of the flat rate to the first $10,000.00 of gross receipts and the application of the tax rate to all additional receipts above $10,000.00. (2)  No business is required to pay taxes on any gross receipts in excess of $200,000,000.00. (3)  Each business, not otherwise exempt from the payment of business or occupation taxes, and that has more than one employee shall pay an additional component as a part of its business or occupation tax in the amount of $25.00 for each and every additional employee in excess of one. The per employee component specified above for those employees who work less than a full year may be prorated under rules and regulations promulgated by the chief financial officer or his or her designee. (d)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. (e)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business's gross receipts. (f)  No occupation tax will be required on gross receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states when proof of payment is provided to the city. (g)  An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents or companies based upon gross receipts of real estate transactions on property located within the city, regardless of the location of their business office. (h)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner, on those affected businesses or practitioners except as described in this article. (i)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in O.C.G.A. § 14-13-7 which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-33(10-O-0875), § 1, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 30-63. - Professional occupation tax. (a)  Classification. Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c) are as follows: (1)  Lawyers; (2)  Physicians; (3)  Osteopaths; (4)  Chiropractors; (5)  Podiatrists; (6)  Dentists; (7)  Optometrists; (8)  Psychologists; (9)  Veterinarians; (10)  Landscape architects; (11)  Land surveyors; (12)  Practitioners of physiotherapy; (13)  Public accountants; (14)  Embalmers; (15)  Funeral directors; (16)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineers; (17)  Architects; (18)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers and professional counselors; (19)  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in paragraph (1) of O.C.G.A. 10-1-622; (20)  Owners or operators of bona fide coin operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. 48-17-1 and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-17-9; (21)  Merchants or dealers as defined in O.C.G.A. 48-5-354 as to their deliveries to businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and (22)  Any business, profession, or occupation, not specifically listed herein, for which state licensure or registration is required by state law shall not be charged a regulatory fee, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments but such businesses shall be required to pay the occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios and classes as set forth in section 30-62. (b)  Determination of rate or amount of payment: At the time of the payment of the tax, the professional practitioners listed in subsection (a) subpart (1) through (21) of this section shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: (1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios and classes as set forth in section 30-62. If the practitioner of the profession elects to calculate the occupation tax due based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios and classes as set forth in section 30-62, a fee of $75.00 is imposed to pay the cost to process the payment. (2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner. Practitioners paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. (c)  Compliance with this article shall not be a precondition to the practice of any profession, listed herein, or licensed by the state. The sole purpose for the imposition of all fines, penalties and interest provided in this article is to support and enhance the collection of the taxes levied by this article. No administrative fee shall be charged to the practitioner of any profession listed in this section in the event that the practitioner requests to file any documents with the city prior to the time of payment of the tax. It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to inform the business tax division of their claim of entitlement to be treated as a practitioner of a profession under state law where the interpretation of this article in such a manner would entitle such taxpayer to a different application of the business tax ordinance or any rules and regulations promulgated by the chief financial officer. (d)  Practitioners of professions may be asked to provide information as to the location where they may be served with notices or citations issued in support of the enforcement of this article and upon the failure or refusal to do so, the city shall direct the notices or citations to the address listed with the appropriate state licensing agency. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-01(07-O-2540), § 1(Exh. B), 1-15-08) 
Sec. 30-64. - Separate businesses.     Where a business is operated at more than one location or where the business includes more than one line, such business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-65. - Registration required; renewal; transacting business when registration delinquent. (a)  All businesses operating within the jurisdiction of the city shall be registered with the business tax division unless exempted by this article or by state law. Any business which anticipates commencing operation on or after January 1 of each year shall within 30 days of commencing such business and, if not exempt from the levy of a registration fee, shall pay said fee in accordance with a city-prescribed schedule. Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. Renewal application for a business registered in the previous year should be completed on or before February 15 of each year and payment of the occupation tax should be made by April 1 or by a city-prescribed schedule. (b)  Practitioners of professions or others who are required to obtain a state license or registration are not required to register with the city prior to beginning the practice of the profession for which they have been licensed or registered by the state. Practitioners of professions may be required to submit certain information in order to show compliance with zoning ordinances but such requirement shall only apply where a certificate of occupancy would otherwise be required of any other business and shall not prevent the practice of the profession at any other location already having a valid certificate of occupancy. Practitioners of professions are requested to provide certain information at the time of the initial payment of the tax for the purpose of the orderly administration of the business tax ordinance and the collection of the taxes levied by this article. Where the practitioner of the profession fails or refuses to provide information as to the location where they may be served with notices or citations issued in support of the enforcement of this article, or fails or refuses to keep such information current, the city shall direct the notices or citations to the address listed with the appropriate state licensing agency. (c)  As set forth in section 30-69, there is (imposed a penalty upon each person or other entity which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all required taxes and fees as provided in this article. Any person or other entity transacting or offering to transact business within the jurisdiction of the city without first having obtained such registration within the time required shall be subject to the payment of those fines, interest and penalties provided in section 30-69 in addition to the payment of all taxes, penalties and interest. This section shall not apply to the practitioners of professions listed in section 30-63 or in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 as it may be from time to time amended. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-66. - Duration of registration. (a)  The registration referred to in this article shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year of its issuance. (b)  Renewal applications for all business required to register shall be completed on or before February 15 of each year. The failure to renew registration by the date required shall be a violation of this article, but such violation shall not prevent any business from being allowed to continue its operation. (c)  Practitioners of professions shall not be required to comply with this section. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-67. - Fee for registration of business.     The fee for the registration of each business on which a registration fee is levied, as required under section 30-65, shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00), to be paid at the time of registering the business. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-68. - Dominant line of business.     The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts, and subordinate lines when appropriate. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-69. - Penalties for failure to register, failure to make timely payment; interest upon unpaid taxes. (a)  Any person failing to renew their registration on or before April 1, in any year, or in the case of a new business at the time of commencing operations, may be cited for violation of this article and upon conviction by the municipal court shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the estimated business tax or portion thereof then due or $100.00, whichever is greater, for failure to so register. (b)  Any business registered with the business tax division in a previous year and which fails to register by the date specified in this article shall pay a late fee of $500.00 in addition to the tax due. (c)  Any occupation tax not paid by the due date shall be considered delinquent and bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month. Any person who fails to pay the occupation tax for 90 days from the due date shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax due in addition to the tax due and the accrued interest. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 2, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 30-70. - Reserved. 
Sec. 30-71. - Payment of tax; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. (a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. (b)  Any business that commences operations in the city is required to pay the occupation tax within thirty (30) days of commencing operations and if such tax is not paid within ninety (90) days of commencing operations, the business will be subject to penalties for delinquency on the unpaid tax as prescribed in this article. Thereafter, the occupation tax shall be due and payable January 1 of each year following and shall, if not paid by April 1 of that year, the business will be subject to penalties for delinquency on the unpaid tax as prescribed in this article. (c)  Any person transacting or offering to transact business in the city shall be liable for the payment of the occupation tax, and for all penalties and interest as provided in section 30-69. (d)  For the purpose of administering this section and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, a person who is an employee or in apparent authority at the location where the business is registered or who is an agent acting in a capacity of apparent authority may be served with any notices and/or citations directed to the taxpayer. (e)  Practitioners of professions are requested to provide certain information at the time of the initial payment of the tax for the purpose of the orderly administration of the business tax ordinance and the collection of the taxes levied by this article. Where the practitioner of the profession fails or refuses to provide information as to the location where they may be served with notices or citations issued in support of the enforcement of this article, or fails or refuses to keep such information current, the city shall direct the notices or citations to the address listed with the appropriate state licensing agency and shall consider the refusal of the practitioner to be consent to this method of service. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-72. - Casual and isolated activity.     Nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted as to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions involving personal assets and not the principal occupation of the individual to obtain a business tax registration and pay a tax therefor. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-73. - Refunds. (a)  If a business ceases operation within a year for which an occupation tax has been paid or credited, the tax shall be refundable, upon request, if, after a final return is filed and after the actual tax liability is calculated, the business tax credited exceeds that liability. (b)  Taxes are also refundable upon written request after a valid amendment is accepted and the business tax credited exceeds the tax liability. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-74. - Change of address.     Any person required to register with the business tax division and who changes the place of operation shall notify the chief financial officer of the new address in writing on a form provided by the chief financial officer no later than the day of moving. The same business certificate will be valid at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-75. - Returns confidential.     Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax levied in this article, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of the return pertaining to the determination of the amount of business tax shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using such returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, the inspection of the records or returns and items thereof or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States and other local governments. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-76. - Certificate to be available for inspection.     The certificate issued for any business location shall be available for inspection at the address listed on the certificate and shall be displayed to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. This requirement may also be satisfied by posting the certificate in some conspicuous place at the address listed on the certificate. This section does not apply to practitioners of professions listed in section 30-63. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-77. - Paying tax of business with no location in state.     Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city, and the business or practitioner: (1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or (2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-78. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in city.     Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the business tax. When a practitioner of a profession operates a business at a separate location which is different than the practice of one of the professions listed in Section 30-63, such business shall be considered a separate business. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-79. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government.     Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state or instrumentalities thereof shall not be required to pay an occupation tax for that practice. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-80. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. (a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the business tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: (1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and (2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. (b)  Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied in accordance with a criteria other than gross receipts by the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the location within the city. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-81. - Tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law.     An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-82. - Taxes levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year. (a)  For convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, each business subject to the occupation tax levied in section 30-52 shall, on or before the dates set forth in this section, file with the business tax division the return specifically provided in this section for the calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a renewal or return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth in this section. The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer of the business subject to such occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, or before February 15 of the current calendar year, file with the business tax division of the city, on a form furnished by such officer, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return, with its depicted gross receipts, will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and to estimate the gross receipts, and therefore the occupation tax, for the current year. (b)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in such return. Such figure shall be appropriately prorated and used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-83. - Overpayment or underpayment of tax. (a)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of such tax provided for in this article is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by such business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 30-82, the difference in such amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on April 1 or a city-prescribed date of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before such date. (b)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of such tax provided for in this article exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by such business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 30-82, the difference in such amount shall be refundable, upon written request, by the city to the taxpayer; or, if such business continues to be conducted in the city during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by such business for the calendar year. This election is to be taken by the city. (c)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of such tax provided for in this article exceeds the amount of occupation tax paid by such business as a part of the estimated tax paid in accordance with section 30-82 in an amount which exceeds $300,000.00 and the taxpayer has discontinued operations in the city such that the city cannot elect to credit the overpayment for a future tax liability, the city may elect to refund any amount in excess of $300,000.00 in the next fiscal year after the request for refund of the overpayment has been made. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-33(10-O-0875), § 2, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 30-84. - Public hearing before tax increase.     After January 1, 1996, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-85. - Copy of latest state tax return or other appropriate documentation of gross receipts required for tax certificate; locations and records open to inspection; record retention requirements. (a)  Each business, trade, profession, or occupation required to pay a tax based upon gross receipts shall be required to provide the business tax division with a copy of the entity's latest state tax return, or other appropriate documentation of statewide gross receipts that is acceptable to the chief financial officer, upon the renewal, adjustment or final application for a tax certificate. (b)  Upon demand by the chief financial officer or his or her designee, it shall be the duty of any person who is required to obtain a business license from the city to open all portions of any location, where business is conducted inside the city, for the purpose of enabling the chief financial officer or his or her designee to ascertain and gain information necessary for the determination of the proper classification of any business for business or occupation tax purposes. (c)  Upon demand by the chief financial officer or his or her designee, it shall be the duty of any person, who is required to obtain a business license from the city, to produce, furnish or make available, during regular business hours at a location inside the city, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information, from which the determination of the proper classification of any business for the previous three calendar years may be determined for business or occupation tax purposes or from which the amount of business or occupation tax for the previous three calendar years may be determined or verified, regardless of whether such records are maintained outside of the city. Such records may include but are not limited to bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sales tax reports made to the state of Georgia, and copies of state and federal income tax returns. (d)  Any person who is required to obtain a business license from the city and who is required to produce, furnish or make available, during regular business hours at a location inside the city, any documents or records described in this article shall keep and preserve all such documents or records for a period which includes the three previous calendar years. (e)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to fail or refuse to perform any duty herein imposed or to obstruct or interfere with the chief financial officer or his or her designee in the performance of their duties or to refuse to produce, furnish or make available any documents or records described in this article. Any person violating this section may be cited by the compliance investigators and upon conviction by the municipal court shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the estimated business tax or portion thereof then due or $500.00, whichever is greater. For the purpose of administering this section and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, a person who is an employee or agent acting in a capacity of apparent authority shall be joint and severally liable for the payment of all fines, taxes, penalties and interest which are past due. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 3, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 30-86. - Appeal of decisions of the chief financial officer; claims for refunds. (a)  Any decision of the chief financial officer under this article, including without limitation, such decisions as to entitlement to exemptions, profitability classifications, methods of accounting, the imposition of penalties and interest, and the amount of tax due, may be appealed, in writing by any taxpayer Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the business tax division and no special form is required except that the taxpayer set forth sufficient information for the determination of the appeal. The taxpayer shall be responsible to set forth the information, which the taxpayer considers pertinent to the appeal and the chief financial officer may consider the appeal based only on the information submitted by the taxpayer. The chief financial officer shall act on such appeals only when submitted by the taxpayer, an attorney acting directly on the behalf of a taxpayer or from a person who presents a signed and notarized power of attorney that they are authorized to represent the taxpayer. (i)  The filing of an appeal with the city, the Superior Court of Fulton County or any appellate court, as to the amount of tax due under Chapter 30, Article III of the Atlanta City Code of Ordinances shall not prevent the accrual of penalties and interest during the time that the amount is under appeal. If the appeal is granted in favor of the appellant, any such penalties or interest on the appealed tax amount shall be waived. However, if the appeal is denied by the city, or, the Superior Court of Fulton County or any appellate court with jurisdiction, any penalties and interest that have accrued during the time of the appeal shall become due. To avoid the possibility of paying additional interest and fees, the taxpayer may pay the amount in dispute and then file a claim for a refund if the appeal is successful. The filing of an appeal is a separate procedure from a claim for refund and taxpayers are hereby put on notice that the filing of an appeal of the determination of the amount of tax due is not a claim for refund and does not preserve any rights of the taxpayer with respect to the time limit for claiming a refund under state law. During the pendency of any appeal taken in accordance with this Section, the city shall not issue a citation pursuant to section 30-55 in connection with the dispute. The chief financial officer shall make a written determination on all appeals, except for claims for refunds, within six months of its filing. Other than a refund claim, any appeal, not acted on within six months is deemed denied. (ii)  An appeal of a decision of the chief financial officer as to decisions made under this section shall be to the Superior Court of Fulton County by writ of certiorari wherein the errors complained of are plainly and distinctly set forth. (iii)  Any appeal concerning the issuance of executions shall be governed in the manner set forth by state law. (b)  Any claim for refund of any tax provided for in this article shall be subject to the provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380 as it exists now or as it may be amended. (i)  Any claim for refund of any tax provided for in this article shall be in writing and shall be addressed, by the taxpayer, to the chief financial officer, who is herein designated by the city council to accept claims for refunds. The claim shall identify the taxpayer, specify the business location, the tax years for which refunds are claimed and the dates of payment for which the refund is claimed. The claim shall also include a summary statement of the grounds on which the taxpayer relies and shall specify the tax years and dates of payments to which such grounds apply. In the event that the taxpayer desires a conference or hearing before the chief financial officer in connection with any claim for refund, the taxpayer shall so specify in writing at the time of filing the claim. The chief financial officer shall grant a conference at a time of his/her convenience except in those cases where the city council must hear the claim. (ii)  The date of filing shall be the date that the claim for refund is received by the chief financial officer. In any case where the chief financial officer does not make a refund for any or all of the amount claimed, or cause the refund claim to appear on the agenda of the committee with purview over the department of finance, within one year of the date that the claim is received, the taxpayer may consider that the claim is denied. No claim shall be deemed approved by the failure of the chief financial officer to make a decision on the claim or to failure of the claim to appear on the agenda of the committee with purview over the department of finance. The chief financial officer and the taxpayer may agree in writing to extend the one year period for processing of the claim and such action shall stay the presumption of denial until the written agreement expires. (iii)  In cases where there is an obvious clerical error, or the amount to be refunded is $5,000.00 or less the chief financial officer is authorized to approve any refund and may pay the refund without further authorization of the city council. (iv)  In cases where there is no obvious clerical error or the amount to be refunded exceeds $5,000.00, the governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim through a resolution which shall also be considered at least once at a meeting of the committee with purview over the department of finance, prior to a final vote. In such cases where the taxpayer has requested a hearing before the governing authority, such hearing shall take place at said committee meeting. (c)  Further proceedings concerning the denial of refund claims shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380 as it may be from time to time amended. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2018-45(18-O-1458), § 1, 10-10-18 ) 
Secs. 30-87—30-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 1A. - ATTORNEYS 
Sec. 30-90. - Effective date; repeal of prior levy; levy; (a)  For all years including and after the calendar year 2004, Division 1A shall apply to the occupation tax imposed on attorneys engaged in the practice of law in the jurisdiction of the city. Where any part of this article is in conflict with the language of this division, the more specific language of this division shall control. (b)  The occupation tax levied by section 30-52 is hereby repealed only as it is applied to the professional classification set forth in section 30-63(a)(1) ("Lawyers") and replaced by the occupation tax imposed under this Division 1A. The repeal set forth in this sub-section shall not act to repeal the general levy of section 30-52, on any other occupations, businesses, trades and professions and the general levy authorized therein, except as it is applied to the professional classification set forth in section 30-63(a)(1) ("Lawyers"), is specifically preserved and not repealed. (c)  As of the effective date of this ordinance, an occupation tax is imposed on the professional classification set forth in section 30-63(a)(1) ("Lawyers") for income earned within the jurisdiction of the city. (d)  Any attorney who paid an occupation tax for any previous year under the levy imposed by section 30-52, and who is legally entitled to a refund under the terms of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380, may at his or her option instruct the business tax division to apply that refund to the tax imposed by this Division 1A. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2005-17, § 2, 3-15-05) 
[Sec. 30-91. - Reserved.] 
Sec. 30-92. - Attorneys not required to register. (a)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, an attorney shall not be required to register with the business tax division. Information reported with any occupation tax payment may be retained by the business tax division and used for those purposes allowed by applicable law. (b)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, an attorney shall not be required to obtain, display or maintain any city issued certificate showing that any payment or information has been submitted to the business tax division. (c)  For the purposes of enforcement of the zoning ordinance, attorneys may be asked by to submit notarized affidavits or other written information concerning the business or profession carried on at a location and the dates of operation when applying for a certificate of occupancy for new construction or renovation. Such affidavits or documents shall be used for the purposes of determining compliance with the zoning ordinance and shall not prevent the practice of the profession of law at any other location which has a valid certificate of occupancy. (d)  A refusal to submit a notarized affidavit or other written information stating whether a person engages in the practice of law at a particular location or stating the dates of operation at a location shall not be a violation of this article and shall not prevent an attorney from practicing law in the city. The chief financial officer shall document this refusal for use in any later proceeding. Where an attorney fails or refuses to provide information as to the location where they may be served with notices or citations issued in support of the enforcement of this article, the city shall direct the notices or citations to the address listed with the State Bar of Georgia and shall consider the failure or refusal of the attorney to provide current address information to be consent to this method of service. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-93. - Calculation of amount of tax.     An attorney who practices law in the jurisdiction of the city shall at their option have their tax rate determined, but not the time of payment, in the manner set forth in subsection 30-63(b)(1) and subsection 30-63(b)(2). (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-94. - Date when taxes are due; date when taxes become delinquent; amount of interest and penalties. (a)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, an attorney shall not be required to pay the occupation tax on the income generated from the practice of law in any calendar year beginning with and including the year 2004 year until April 1 of the year following. The tax may be paid in person at the business tax division or by mailing the tax to the business tax division. Any tax payment made by mail shall include the name and address of the person or law firm paying the tax and the name of each attorney whose tax is being paid, so that the business tax division may process the payment. An attorney who pays the occupation tax on their own behalf shall include the name of the law firm with which they practice, if any. Any tax paid pursuant to the option of subsection 30-63(b)(1) shall include a written submission containing sufficient information to enable the chief financial officer to determine the accuracy of the taxpayer's calculation. (b)  Taxes due from attorneys shall not be considered delinquent until June 1. An attorney who does not pay the tax prior to June 1 shall incur a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. Any taxes not paid by the due date shall accrue interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-95. - Option of the chief financial officer to send bills. (a)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, the chief financial officer may choose to send bills to attorneys who list their address with the State Bar of Georgia as being located in the City of Atlanta, including those attorneys who list only post office boxes as their addresses. (b)  An attorney who prepares and signs a notarized affidavit that they did not practice law within the jurisdiction of the city during some part of the tax year for which the tax bill was generated may have their bill adjusted for the time period stated in the affidavit when such attorney did not maintain an office within the jurisdiction of the city and/or states such other reasons why the occupation tax should be adjusted. Such adjustment shall not be made for those attorneys who elect to pay the $400.00 per practitioner fee as set forth in subsection 30-63(b)(2) unless the affidavit states that the attorney did not practice law in the jurisdiction of the city at any time during the year for which the tax bill was generated. The chief financial officer is authorized to inquire whether such affidavit matches the information maintained by the State Bar of Georgia in connection with the directives of State Bar Rule 1-207 and/or to take such other steps as deemed necessary to determine the accuracy of the affidavit. The submission of an affidavit requesting adjustment shall not act to prevent the imposition of penalties and interest should the chief financial officer deny the request for adjustment. (c)  The option of the chief financial officer to send bills shall not relieve attorneys from the obligation to pay any tax due for any calendar year including 2004 by April 1 of the following year. (d)  The chief financial officer may include in any bills, the unpaid tax balance from other years, including all fees and penalties and the amount of interest, which has accrued on any unpaid tax liability. The failure of the chief financial officer to list any unpaid balance on any bill shall not operate to relieve the taxpayer from liability for any balance due. (e)  It shall be a violation of this section for any attorney to willfully and intentionally misrepresent a material fact in an affidavit to avoid the payment of the occupation tax imposed by this division, or the occupation tax imposed by section 30-52, and the sole enforcement action to be taken is set forth as follows: (i)  When the chief financial officer has reason to believe that an attorney has willfully and intentionally misrepresented a material fact in any affidavit submitted to business tax division for the purposes of avoiding full payment of the occupation tax, he or she shall consult with the city attorney to determine whether such conduct should be referred to the State Bar of Georgia for investigation as to whether a violation of the Georgia Rules of Professional Conduct has occurred. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-96. - Tax execution imposed for failure to pay the occupation tax     An attorney required to pay the occupation tax and who fails to do so in the manner provided by this article, shall be liable to have the tax and any penalties and interest collected by the issuance of execution by the revenue collection administrator, ex officio marshal or deputy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. Further proceedings concerning the execution procedure employed in the enforcement of this section shall be as provided by state law. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary in other sections of this article, the use of tax executions and the reporting of any alleged mis-representations as set forth in section 30-95 shall be the sole mechanism for enforcement of the occupation tax levy against attorneys. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-97. - Payment of city funds to attorneys or law firms employing attorneys not in compliance with the requirements of this division is not authorized; occupation tax payments to be considered in employment of attorneys by the city. (a)  No individual attorney, or law firm employing such attorney, who is delinquent in the payment of the occupation tax authorized by this article, shall be paid for any legal work in which they have represented the city in any capacity, until any outstanding occupation tax liability, including all penalties and interest, has been paid in full. If the chief financial officer believes that an individual attorney, or any attorneys employed by a law firm, seeking compensation for legal services performed for the city, is/are not in full compliance with this division, he or she shall notify the individual attorney, or law firm and present a bill for the amount due. After payment of any outstanding occupation tax liability, the individual attorney, or law firm may be paid for the legal work in which they have represented the city. (b)  The chief financial officer and/or the city attorney are authorized to verify that any individual attorney, or the attorneys employed by any law firm, seeking to represent the city, including without limitation, acting as bond counsel, is/are current in their occupation tax payments prior to their employment. Because of the legal and/or fiduciary relationships, which such representation of the city may create, the chief financial officer and/or the city attorney are authorized to consider compliance with the occupation tax ordinance by the individual attorneys and/or the attorneys employed by the law firm, prior to any employment by the city. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-98. - Appeals and refund claims.     Appeals of decisions of the chief financial officer and/or refund claims under this division shall be as provided in section 30-86. (Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Secs. 30-99, 30-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETAIL INCENTIVE TAX-EXEMPT ZONES 
Sec. 30-101. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section 30-51, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or where defined herein:     Dedicated pedestrian entrance means a pedestrian entrance to a retail business location which opens on a city street and which provides access to only that business location.     Interior retail means a retail business whose primary retail sales operation is not accessed through a dedicated pedestrian entrance.     Mixed-use including retail means any development which includes as a principal use on the same parcel both multi-family residential uses and retail uses.     Mixed-use residential and commercial urban enterprise zone means a zone of the city created pursuant to section 146-51(g)(4) of this Code.     Multi-level retail means a retail business whose primary retail sales operation is on the same level as a city street and which is directly accessed by a dedicated pedestrian entrance from that street which gives customers immediate access to retail shopping but which may contain one or more levels.     Retail business means a business which sells tangible personal property taxable as defined under the Georgia Retail Tax and Sales Use Statute (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-2(6)) but for the purpose of this article including: eating and drinking establishments, grocery stores, catering establishments, delicatessens and bakeries with products sold at retail on the premises. A retail business may be a part of a development identified as "mixed-use including retail."     Street level retail business means a retail business whose primary retail sales operation is on the same level as a city street and which is directly accessed by a dedicated pedestrian entrance from that street which gives customers immediate access to retail shopping. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-102. - Purpose and scope of exemption.     It has been found by the bureau of planning that available commercial space in certain areas within the city is currently not utilized to their full potential. The lack of significant levels of retail activity in these areas contributes to overall economic decline in the city. While many of the commercial enterprise zone programs have stimulated some commercial development, this type of incentive is not usually passed along to the retail tenant. Many retailers who are presently located in high cost commercial space in the downtown area are often unable to afford the additional staff to expand the hours of the business and thus contribute to the development of a 24-hour street life in the downtown area. Many retailers who desire to locate in the downtown area are often unable to afford the available space. While economic development growth trends suggest strong markets in the surrounding suburbs, the urban and tourism market trends also suggest that the downtown area and other areas in the city will support clean, safe and attractive retail centers. The need for such retail centers must be ensured through public incentives which will assist this growth.     The redevelopment or growth of certain areas of the city will be increased or sustained by the promotion of retail or mixed-use including retail and the availability of increased retail shopping opportunities will provide additional amenities to encourage and support intown or downtown residential housing. The state recognizes that municipalities desire to encourage or support such goals and in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(f) provides specific authority allowing local governments to provide an exemption from business or occupation taxes for the purpose of developing, attracting, encouraging or maintaining selected types of businesses. In order to encourage persons providing retail shopping opportunities to locate in those areas of the city presently underserved by retail uses or mixed-use including retail, an exemption from the city business or occupation tax is herein provided as permitted by state law.     The following exemption from the business tax levied in this article, division 1 is for the purpose of promoting development of retail or mixed-use including retail in certain areas of the city and is not for regulatory purposes. The exemption only applies to those businesses and occupations that are taxed pursuant to sections 30-51—30-85 by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance and no other effect on any other code section is intended. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-103. - Effect of division upon outstanding occupation taxes.     The outstanding liabilities under prior application of any ordinances shall continue and remain in force until such tax, fee, or assessment, including any penalties and interest, shall be fully paid. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-104. - Administration.     The chief financial officer and the department of planning shall administer and enforce this division for the purpose of determining the applicability of the exemption provided herein and for the enforcement of penalties herein imposed. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-105. - Exemption provided.     In accordance with state law, an exemption is hereby provided from the business tax levied by section 30-51—30-85 for those retail locations eligible under the terms set forth in this division. Said exemptions to apply only to a retail location qualified for an exemption under this division and no exemption is provided for any other location operated by the same person, unless said location separately qualifies under the terms of this division. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-106. - Creation of retail incentive tax-exempt zones. (a)  The criteria for the designation of an area of the city as a retail incentive tax-exempt zone is as follows: (1)  The area is presently a functional commercial district where more than 50 percent of the area has served the retail market for more than ten years; (2)  The retail infrastructure is already in place (also known as "second generation retail"); (3)  A strong crime reduction program or strategy is in place; (4)  The area has strong retail market potential combining easy accessibility, high traffic count and favorable demographics; (5)  Designation as a retail incentive tax-exempt zone will reinforce and upgrade retail activity within the designated area; (6)  The area meets the requirements for locations which are presently eligible for other economic development programs made available through the city (including but not limited to: the facade improvement program; the business improvement loan fund program; enterprise zone; empowerment zone). (b)  Based on the criteria set forth in subsection (a), the following areas are declared retail incentive tax-exempt zones for the tax years 1998—2003. (1)  Fairlie-Poplar/Macy's area; (2)  Auburn Avenue/Edgewood; (3)  COPA; (4)  Empowerment Zone; (5)  MLK/Ashby/James P. Brawley/Fair St./Mason Turner; (6)  Metropolitan Parkway Redevelopment Corridor; (7)  Underground Atlanta; (8)  All mixed-use residential and commercial urban enterprise zones; (9)  Bankhead MARTA station; (10)  DeFoor's Ferry/Marietta Blvd.; (11)  Marietta Rd./Bankhead Highway; (12)  Chapel Rd./Bankhead Hwy./Simpson Rd. (13)  Anderson Avenue to Martin Luther King Jr. Drive, to Fulton Industrial Blvd. (14)  East Atlanta; (15)  Kirkwood; (16)  Edgewood; (17)  East Lake. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97; Ord. No. 1998-70, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 30-107. - Duration of existence of retail incentive tax-exempt zones.     The status of an area as a retail incentive tax exempt zone shall expire at the end of the sixth year after such area is declared to be a retail incentive tax exempt zone, unless such status is extended by ordinance. A location which qualifies for any exemption provided in this division for any of the tax years in which an area is a retail incentive tax exempt zone shall be entitled to the full term of tax exempt or tax reduced years provided for that location elsewhere in this division. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-108. - Requirements for eligibility.     To qualify under this division for an exemption from the business tax, a location must: (1)  Be a retail business location within a retail incentive tax-exempt zone; (2)  Be a type of retail business eligible for the retail incentive exemption; (3)  Be operated by a person who has filed or submitted all business tax returns or other documents required by the business tax division; (4)  Pay the administrative fee as required by this article; (5)  Apply for an exemption as required by this division; (6)  Comply with the City of Atlanta First Source Jobs Policy. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-109. - Types of retail businesses ineligible. (a)  The following types of businesses are not eligible for the retail tax incentive exemption: (1)  Adult businesses as defined in City Code section 16-29.001(3) or as amended; (2)  Any establishment which has a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits in package form as described in City Code section 10-60(3)(d) or as amended; (3)  Any establishment which has a license for the sale of malt beverages for off-the-premises consumption as defined in City Code section 10-60(a)(2)d, and/or a license for the sale of wine for off-the-premises consumption as defined in City Code section 10-60(a)(1)d; and which for the purpose of compliance with the state excise taxes imposed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 and O.C.G.A. § 3-6-50 reports amounts of sales of malt beverages and wine which in total are more than 30 percent of its gross retail sales. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-110. - Exemption rate structure. (a)  Any street level retail business or multi-level retail business location which qualifies for an exemption from business taxes under this division and which is created during the existence of a retail incentive tax-exempt zone as the result of new construction for retail use or conversion of an existing structure to a retail use, shall be exempt from: 100 percent of the business tax for the first five tax years in which the business tax would otherwise be due; 80 percent of the business tax for the sixth year in which the business tax would otherwise be due; 60 percent for the seventh and eighth years; 40 percent for the ninth year; and 20 percent for the tenth year. (i)  Any street level retail business or multi-level retail business location which qualifies for an exemption from business taxes under this division as the result of new construction for retail use or conversion of an existing structure to a retail use prior to the declaration of a retail incentive tax-exempt zone but which obtains a business license in the same calendar year as the declaration of the area in which the business is located as a retail incentive tax-exempt zone shall qualify for the full exemption as provided in subsection (a). (b)  During the existence of a retail incentive tax-exempt zone, any street level retail business located in said zone which qualifies for an exemption from business taxes under this division and which applies for an exemption for a location for which a business license has already been issued or who operates any interior retail business which qualifies for an exemption from business taxes under this division, shall be exempt from: 80 percent of the business tax which would otherwise be due tax for the first year after application for exemption; 60 percent for the second and third years; 40 percent for the fourth year; and 20 percent for the fifth year. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-111. - Application and approval required. (a)  Each person desiring to qualify a particular location for an exemption pursuant to this division must receive written confirmation from the city officials responsible for zoning enforcement that the location of the business is within an area designated as a retail incentive tax-exempt zone and must make application to and receive approval from the business tax division. The application for exemption must accompany the business registration for that location for that tax year. Each person who operates a qualifying location in full compliance with this article and who properly registers shall receive approval and be certified as having an exemption from business taxes for that location for that tax year. (b)  Each person operating a business in the city, required by any other applicable section of the City Code to file a business tax return, shall file a business tax return as a part of the application for the exemption available pursuant to this division. Failure to file a business tax return when required to do so by any other applicable section of the City Code shall be grounds for denial of the exemption provided in this division. (c)  Any person, who applies for an exemption for a location which fails to qualify under the term of this division, shall be responsible for the full payment of all business taxes for that location in addition to any penalties and interest as provided elsewhere in this article. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-112. - Duration of registration for exemption.     The qualification for a location for exemption pursuant to this division shall automatically expire on December 31 of each year. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-113. - Lapse in registration for exemption. (a)  A person receiving an exemption for a location pursuant to this division in a previous year and who has allowed the registration for exemption for said location to lapse may apply for reinstatement of the exemption for that location. The amount of the exemption allowed upon reinstatement shall be the same amount which would be charged based upon the number of years which have elapsed since that location was first granted an exemption. In no case shall this section be interpreted to allow for greater rate of exemption or longer term of expiration than if a location's registration had never lapsed. (b)  Any person who has allowed the registration for any exemption issued pursuant to this division to lapse and who has failed to reapply prior to the expiration of retail incentive tax zone status in the area where the business is located shall not be eligible to regain exempt status after expiration of retail incentive tax-exempt status for that area. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-114. - Separate business locations.     Where a business is operated at more than one location, only a location in a retail incentive tax zone shall be eligible for exemption. Said business shall pay business taxes in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate at each location. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-115. - Dominant line of business. (a)  The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business conducted at each location, and subordinate lines when appropriate. (b)  Where a location includes more than one line or type of operation, such business shall pay its business tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-116. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations.     For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the business tax assessed to a particular location for the purpose of this division shall be those receipts attributed to each city location as set forth in section 30-80 or elsewhere in this article. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-117. - Change of location.     Any person moving from one location in a retail incentive tax-exempt zone to another location shall notify the chief financial officer of the move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the chief financial officer no later than the day of moving. The same extension registration will be valid at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city and the location qualifies for an exemption under this division. In no case, shall any change in location allow for a greater rate of exemption or extend the length of the term of the retail incentive tax exemption for any business. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-118. - Record of exemption to be maintained.     All locations shall maintain documentation relating to any grant of exemption at the address for which the exemption was issued. Said documentation shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-119. - Violations. (a)  Any person who registers with the business tax division for an exemption for a location pursuant to this division and who intentionally provides any false information on the registration documents shall be liable for a penalty of ten percent of the taxes due under the occupation tax ordinance or $100 whichever is greater. This penalty shall apply independently of any penalties or interest which may be imposed elsewhere in this article. (b)  Where it is determined by the chief financial officer that any person reallocates or attempts to reallocate any gross receipts from any non-exempt location to any location exempted from payment of business taxes, pursuant to this division, said person shall be liable for a penalty of ten percent of the taxes due under the occupation tax ordinance or $100.00 whichever is greater. This penalty shall apply independently of any penalties or interest which may be imposed elsewhere in this article. (c)  Any person, not entitled to an exemption for a location, and who intentionally uses or attempts to use the provisions of this division for the purpose of evading business taxes which would otherwise be due and payable for that location or any other location operated by that person shall be liable for a penalty of ten percent of the taxes due under the occupation tax ordinance or $100 whichever is greater. This penalty shall apply independently of any penalties or interest which may be imposed elsewhere in this article. (d)  For the purpose of administering this division and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section any administrative or enforcement powers provided elsewhere in this article shall apply to this division. (Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Secs. 30-120—30-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTION AVAILABLE FOR RESTAURANTS WHERE SMOKING IS ENTIRELY PROHIBITED ON A VOLUNTARY BASIS 
Sec. 30-200. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section 30-51, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or where defined herein:     Licensed premises means, for the purposes of this article, the entire enclosed or unenclosed physical premises where a restaurant operates under its business license including service areas or offices which are not accessible to customers.     Restaurant means for the purposes of this article, as defined in chapter 10 of the Code. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-201. - Purpose and scope of exemption.     It has been found by the city council that the availability of smoke-free restaurants within the city should be encouraged. There is large body of scientific research which documents the deleterious effects on the health of non-smokers who are in close proximity to smoke from cigarettes and other tobacco products. The council believes that measures which increase the number of smoke-free restaurants will offer health benefits to its citizens and visitors and not cause any appreciable amount of negative economic consequences to the city or its businesses. The council wishes to encourage restaurants to make smoke-free dining available to citizens and is therefore offering an exemption from a portion of the business and occupation tax to those restaurants which meet the criteria of this division for the purpose of demonstrating the economic viability of smoke-free restaurants.     The State of Georgia recognizes that municipalities desire to encourage or support such goals and in section 48-13-10(f) of the Official Code of Georgia provides specific authority allowing local governments to provide an exemption from business or occupation taxes for the purpose of developing, attracting, encouraging or maintaining selected types of businesses. In order to encourage restaurants to provide smoke free dining opportunities in those areas of the city where such opportunities are not presently available or are underserved by smoke-free restaurants, an exemption from the city business or occupation tax is herein provided as permitted by state law.     The following exemption from the business tax levied in this article III, division 1 is for the purpose of promoting development of smoke-free restaurants and is not for regulatory purposes. The exemption only applies to those businesses and occupations that are taxed pursuant to section 30-51 through 30-85 by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance and no other effect on any other code section is intended. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-202. - Effect of division upon outstanding occupation taxes.     The outstanding liabilities under prior application of any ordinances shall continue and remain in force until such tax, fee, or assessment, including any penalties and interest, shall be fully paid. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-203. - Administration.     The chief financial officer and the director of the bureau of buildings shall administer and enforce this division for the purpose of determining the applicability of the exemption provided herein and for the enforcement of penalties herein imposed. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-204. - Exemption provided.     In accordance with state law, an exemption is hereby provided from the business tax levied by section 30-51 through 30-85 for those restaurants eligible under the terms set forth in this division. Said exemption is to apply only to specific restaurant locations qualified for an exemption under this division and no exemption is provided for any other business location operated by the same person, unless said location separately qualifies under the terms of this division. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-205. - Criteria for eligibility. (a)  In order to be designated a smoke-free restaurant, a restaurant must meet all of the following criteria: (1)  A restaurant must choose to impose a ban on smoking on the licensed premises. (2)  Signs shall be posted in a conspicuous place such that all customers and employees are put on notice of the restaurant's choice to ban smoking. a.  The minimum signage shall be 4″ × 4″ sign of the international symbol for no smoking (a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). b.  In addition, all such restaurants shall have a sign not less than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches which is conspicuously posted such that all customers and employees are put on notice. The sign shall contain the following language "THIS RESTAURANT HAS VOLUNTARILY AGREED TO BAN SMOKING UNDER SECTION 30-200 et. seq. OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF ATLANTA. SMOKING BY ANY PERSON IS PROHIBITED. ALL PERSONS ARE NOTIFIED THAT SMOKING IN THIS RESTAURANT IS A VIOLATION OF THE CITY OF ATLANTA NON-SMOKING DESIGNATION ORDINANCE AND THE FULTON COUNTY CLEAN INDOOR AIR ORDINANCE. PERSONS WHO BELIEVE THAT THIS FACILITY IS IN VIOLATION MAY REPORT THE VIOLATION TO THE CITY OF ATLANTA BUREAU OF BUILDINGS." By administrative rule, the bureau of buildings may at its discretion add other language to promote enforcement efforts and may specify the size and arrangement of the text on this or any other required sign. c.  A 4″ × 4″ sign of the international symbol for no smoking or a sign at least one and one half inches × six inches which shall state "NO SMOKING" shall be posted in each restroom. d.  Other signs concerning the restaurants' no smoking policy may be posted at the discretion of management. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-206. - Application and approval required. (a)  Any restaurant desiring an exemption under this division must make application to the business tax division on a form provided by the department of finance. The exemption must be approved in writing before any restaurant seeking an exemption under this division may apply the exemption to its present year tax liability. Any person who operates a qualifying restaurant in full compliance with this article and who properly registers and is approved and certified as qualifying for exemption from business taxes for that restaurant for the current tax year prior to the due date for business taxes may apply the exemption to their tax liability for the current tax year. All persons operating any restaurant location that has applied for but has not received approval for exemption prior to the due date for business taxes for the current tax year may not apply an exemption to their tax liability. The exemption shall be prorated from the date of application in the first year of qualification. (b)  Any person desiring to qualify a particular restaurant location, which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, for an exemption pursuant to this division must receive written confirmation from the city police department that the location is designated as a restaurant as defined herein and must make application to and receive approval from the business tax division. (c)  Any person desiring to qualify a particular restaurant location for the exemption made available by this division and who is required by any other applicable section of the City Code to file any business tax return, must timely file such other business tax returns in order to qualify for the exemption available pursuant to this division. Failure to file a business tax return when required to do so by any other applicable section of the City Code shall be grounds for denial of the exemption provided in this division. (d)  Any person, who applies for an exemption for a location which fails to qualify under the term of this division, shall be responsible for the full payment of all business taxes for that location in addition to any penalties and interest as provided elsewhere in this article. (e)  Each person who receives an exemption shall be provided with a list of the specific signage requirements which may be set forth by the administrative rules of the bureau of buildings. Upon making any change to the signage requirements, the bureau of buildings shall notify the holders of exemptions of the required signage. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-207. - Exemption rate structure. (a)  Any restaurant certified as qualifying as smoke-free restaurant classification shall be exempt from 20 percent of the business tax which would otherwise be due. In the year when the first application for the exemption is made, the exemption shall be prorated from the date of application. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-208. - Duration of registration for exemption.     Once qualification for exemption pursuant to this division is approved, such qualification shall automatically expire unless renewed as a part of the current year registration. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-209. - Types of restaurants ineligible. (a)  the following types of businesses are not eligible for the smoke-free restaurant exemption: (1)  Adult businesses as defined in City Code section 16-29.001(3) or as amended; (2)  Any establishment which has a license for the sale of distilled spirits and which is not qualified as a restaurant by the end of its first 12 months of operation. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-210. - Notice of non-compliance sent to owner for failure to enforce designated non-smoking areas.     Because the granting of an exemption under this section is a privilege which is subject to abuse solely for economic gain, the city recognizes that there must be a mechanism to monitor compliance by those restaurants that have chosen to apply for tax exemptions under the terms of this division. The city believes that those who receive the exemption have a duty to request compliance from its patrons, and for the failure of restaurants granted exemption to comply with the non smoking designations required by this division will result in a notice of non-compliance letter being issued to the owner by the bureau of buildings and being kept on file by the bureau of treasury, licensing and employee benefits. The notice of violation is an administrative notice and is not an ordinance violation. The receipt of a notice of non-compliance letter shall not require appearance in municipal court. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-211. - Loss of eligibility.     Any restaurant which has qualified under this division for an exemption from the business tax shall lose its eligibility upon the happening of any of the following events: (1)  The loss of restaurant status as determined by its license status; (2)  Allowing smoking in violation of this division as evidenced by three notice of non-compliance letters in any 12-month period for failure to enforce the smoking ban on its premises; (3)  A conviction for any violation related to the use of the provisions of this division for the purpose of evading business taxes which would otherwise be due and payable at the location for which the exemption was issued; (4)  A conviction for any violation related to the non-payment of business taxes which would otherwise be due and payable at the location for which the exemption was issued. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-212. - Duration of existence of restaurant smoking ban exemptions. (a)  The business tax exemption for smoke free restaurants shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on December 31, 2003. After this date no restaurant shall be entitled to claim any business tax exemption because of a smoke-free designation. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-213. - Lapse in registration for exemption. (a)  A person receiving an exemption for a location pursuant to this division in a previous year and who has allowed the registration for exemption for said location to lapse may apply for reinstatement of the exemption for that location. Upon approval of the reinstatement, the amount of the exemption shall be prorated to the date of re-application. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-214. - Separate restaurants locations.     Where a restaurant is operated at more than one location, each location must apply for exemption. The person operating such restaurants shall pay business taxes in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate at each location. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-215. - Dominant line of business. (a)  No exemption under this division is available except for the restaurant portion of any business which operates more than one type of business registration at any business location in the city. Where other type of sales and services are available, the business tax division shall identify the dominant line of business conducted at each location based on percentage of sales, and the exemption provided in this division shall apply only to the sales in the restaurant portion of any location. (b)  Where a location includes more than one line or type of operation, such business shall pay its business tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-216. - Record of exemption to be maintained.     All locations shall maintain documentation relating to any grant of exemption at the address for which the exemption was issued. Said documentation shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-217. - Violations. (a)  Any person who registers with the business tax division for an exemption for a location pursuant to this division and who intentionally provides any false information on the registration documents shall be liable for a penalty of ten percent of the taxes due under the occupation tax ordinance or $100.00 whichever is greater. This penalty shall apply independently of any penalties or interest which may be imposed elsewhere in this article. (b)  Any person, not entitled to an exemption for a location, and who intentionally uses or attempts to use the provisions of this division for the purpose of evading business taxes which would otherwise be due and payable for that location or any other location operated by that person shall be liable for a penalty of ten percent of the taxes due under the occupation tax ordinance or $100.00 whichever is greater. This penalty shall apply independently of any penalties or interest which may be imposed elsewhere in this article. (c)  For the purpose of administering this division and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section any administrative or enforcement powers or any appeal provisions provided elsewhere in this article shall apply to this division. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-218. - Severability.     If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this division is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof and shall not affect the validity of the taxes, penalty or interest imposed elsewhere in this article. (Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Secs. 30-219—30-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROGRAM FOR TAX EXEMPTIONS FOR NEW AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY BUSINESSES 
Sec. 30-300. - Purpose of the program. (a)  The purpose of the City of Atlanta's Program for Tax Exemptions for New and Emerging Technology Businesses (the "program") is to encourage new businesses that operate in certain fields related to high technology, life sciences, and intellectual property by providing exemption from administrative fees and a portion of taxes imposed by the City of Atlanta Occupation Tax Ordinance. (b)  The program is designed to encourage the creation of new businesses in emerging markets and technologies whether developed at public or private business incubator facilities or by the efforts of individual entrepreneurs. The development of technology into a commercial product by going through the process of business planning, product development, securing funding, and other steps necessary to get the technology to the marketplace can be made easier by tax exemption and reduced cost of regulatory compliance. The city wishes to reduce the start-up costs to new businesses by providing specific regulatory and taxation relief until such business ventures become ready to compete in the marketplace. (c)  Three public benefits characterize the purpose of the program: (1)  Tax exemptions and reduced cost of regulatory compliance creates a lower cost environment for new and emerging technology businesses and encourages the selected types of businesses to locate their operations and develop their business within the city; (2)  Tax exemptions and reduced cost of regulatory compliance tends to have a positive impact on the city's economic health by encouraging and maximizing the success of new and emerging businesses in targeted fields that tend to provide higher paying jobs and encourage growth in related sectors; (3)  The program encourages registration of new and emerging businesses in targeted fields by allowing such businesses to be able to openly solicit capital investment and business advice before actively earning revenues or receiving gross receipts. (d)  This program is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(f) and any part of this division which is not authorized by said section or the general law is a specific limitation of this division without regard to whether it is set forth herein and such general law may be relied upon for enforcement of this division or this article. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-301. - Definitions.     Business entity means any sole proprietorship; corporation and foreign corporation; nonprofit corporation and foreign nonprofit corporation; profit and nonprofit unincorporated association; business trust, estate, general partnership, limited partnership, trust, two or more persons having a joint or common economic interest; limited liability company and foreign limited liability company; limited liability partnership and foreign limited liability partnership.     Initial registration year means the first tax year that the exemption provided by this division is made available or the tax year in which a qualifying business is organized.     Qualifying business means a business entity (i) not previously doing business in the jurisdiction of the city in any other form; (ii) that applies for a business license in a type of business classification that has been designated as consistent with the intent of this division through reference to a classification in the North American Industry Classification System ("NAICS") or an equivalent Standard Industrial Classification that can reasonably be cross-referenced to the NAICS that is from time to time approved for an exemption by the governing authority; and (iii) the application for business license or renewal is made in an operating year that qualifies for an exemption.     Revenue means the same as gross receipts which are defined elsewhere in this article.     Start-up means a business entity whose business form is in the initial registration year.     Start-up exemption means an exemption provided to a start-up business whose operations are conducted primarily at a certified business incubator location and whose operating characteristics meet the requirements of this division.     Tax year means any year in which taxes imposed under Chapter 30 should have been paid without regard to whether the taxpayer was registered with the office of revenue.     Year of operations means a calendar year in which a qualifying business conducts business in the jurisdiction of the City of Atlanta including those years when such business was not registered with the office of revenue. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-302. - NAICS classifications approved for exemptions.     The governing authority has adopted by ordinance and may from time to time add or delete those NAICS classifications considered to support the intent of this division. The director shall maintain a record of the NAICS classifications which are approved to provide start-up exemptions for qualifying businesses. The removal of an NACIS classification from the list of businesses for which an exemption can be granted shall not cause a business which received an exemption to lose such exemption until after its third year of operations. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-303. - Registration and renewal required. (a)  Pursuant to section 30-65 of this article, registration and renewal of the business license is required even for a business which is included in the NAICS classifications which are approved to provide start-up exemptions for qualifying businesses and it shall remain a violation of this article for any business, even when entitled to an exemption under this division, to fail to comply with the requirements of this article. (1)  Determination of whether a business is a qualifying business is solely reserved to the chief financial officer or his designee and it shall be a violation of this article for a business which would be a qualified business if properly registered to operate without a business license. (2)  It shall not be a defense to a citation for failure to register for a business which would be a qualified business if properly registered to operate without a business license and such business may still be cited for violation of section 30-65 even if it is granted a start-up exemption. The chief financial officer may, but is not required to, dismiss a citation upon a determination that no tax would be due after the initial registration provided that the business is in its first year of operations. (b)  Notwithstanding the determination that business is determined to be a qualifying business upon its initial registration, the timely renewal of the registration in compliance with section 30-69 is required. (1)  Renewal is required in order to determine if gross receipts of the qualifying business exceed the level to which the exemption applied such that some tax is due; (2)  Renewal is required to determine if the qualifying business has exhausted its right to exemptions which is limited in all case to three tax years (c)  A business which is organized solely to make investments which might be exempt from some or all taxes imposed by this article by virtue of the exemptions granted by this division shall nevertheless be required to register and renew its business license. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-304. - Administrative fees exempted.     No qualifying business shall be charged an administrative fee in connection with its registration or renewal in those operating year when exemptions available. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-305. - Amount of tax exempted.     No qualifying business shall be taxed on the first $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts for the first three years of operations, specifically including the year of registration. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-306. - Per employee tax exempted.     No qualifying business shall be taxed on the number of employees for the first three years of operations, specifically including the year of registration, except where the business has more than $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts in which case, the per employee exemption shall only apply to five employees. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-307. - Operating years when exemptions available. (a)  A qualifying business that is newly formed is eligible for an exemption in the year of its formation and for the following two years of operations. (b)  A qualifying business that would have been eligible for the exemption had such exemption had been available in the first three years of its operations is eligible for an exemption in first and/or second year after this division is effective; provided however that no exemption is available in the fourth year of operation of any qualifying business. (c)  A qualifying business that was in operation but was not registered with the office of revenue shall have the years of operation prior to registration counted as a part of the operating years used to calculate if exemptions could be available. (d)  Under no circumstance shall any business entity be entitled to an exemption in more than three tax years. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-308. - Change of business form or name.     A change of business form or name by a business entity in business for three previous years shall not be sufficient for a business entity to be classified as a qualifying business even if such business operates in a field that has been designated as consistent with the aim of this division through reference to a classification in the North American Industry Classification System ("NAICS"). The chief financial officer is authorized to make a determination as to whether a business entity which has applied for an exemption is in fact operating as a start-up business or has operated under a different business form or business name. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-309. - Transfer of revenues to or from other entities.     It is the intent of this division that an exemption from taxes be provided only for those qualifying businesses on gross receipts of up to $1,000,000.00 received in connection with their operations in an operating year when such exemptions would be available. The transfer of gross receipts or revenue to other business entities to avoid the payment of tax shall result in the     Transfers of revenues earned by other business entities to a qualifying business in an operating year when exemptions are available shall not eligible for an exemption. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-310. - Gains from investments in qualified businesses. (a)  In recognition of the fact that investment is a crucial component of encouraging the creation of new businesses in emerging markets and technologies, it is the intent of this division that an exemption from taxes also be provided for gains from the sale of stocks, bonds, partnership shares or instruments of indebtedness that are given in exchange for funding the creation of a qualifying business. (b)  A business entity receiving stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness that are given in exchange for a cash investment in a qualifying businesses, shall be exempt from taxes on the first $1,000,000.00 received above the amount of the initial cash investment where such gain is in connection with the sale of such stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness, provided that cash is received as payment for the sale thereof within three years of the date of the cash investment or the date of registration of the qualifying business, whichever is earlier. (1)  For the purpose of this division, gain from an investment in a qualifying business that is no longer included in the list of NAICS classifications approved to provide start-up exemptions when the stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness received in exchange for the initial cash investment are sold, shall still receive the exemption provided by this section so long as the cash that is received as payment for the sale of such investment is received within the time provided in this section. (c)  No exemption is allowed for gains resulting from investment in any type of business entity other than in a qualified business in its initial registration year and that was registered with the office of revenue within 30 days of the date that such investment was made or the date of initial registration whichever is later. (d)  In order to encourage reinvestment in new qualifying businesses, gain resulting from the exchange of stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness given in exchange for a cash investment in a qualifying businesses for stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness, the amount of gain recognized shall not be exempt from taxes imposed under this article. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-311. - Refunds for fees or taxes paid for prior operations.     Under no circumstance shall any part of this division or this article be construed to authorize refunds for a business entity which has paid any tax or fee prior to the enactment of this division. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-312. - Penalties for filing false applications or renewals. (a)  It shall be a violation of the occupation tax ordinance to file false documents in order to be determined to be a qualifying business or to receive any type of exemption. (1)  The chief financial officer shall have all powers delegated under section 30-57 to make a determination that this section has been violated and to impose any penalty provided by this division. (2)  The penalty for violation of this section shall be the immediate revocation of the exemption in addition to any taxes, penalties and interest which are determined to be due. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-313. - Requesting additional data authorized.     The chief financial officer is authorized to issue a business license to a start-up business that grants permission for operation in the City of Atlanta in the same manner an any other business license; provided however that gathering of such additional information as deemed necessary by the office of revenue for efficient management of the exemptions may be made a part of the application process. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-314. - Penalties for filing false applications or renewals for start-up business exemption or filing false returns. (a)  It shall be a violation of this division and the occupation tax ordinance to file false documents in connection with a start-up business exemption. (1)  Any business which has been granted an exemption as a start-up business and which claims such exemption through filing a false application or renewal shall be in violation of this division and the occupation tax ordinance. (2)  The chief financial officer shall have all powers delegated under section 30-57 to make a determination that this section has been violated. (3)  The penalty for violation of this division shall be the immediate revocation of the exemption. The revocation of the start-up business exemption shall cause any tax and administrative fee due in the year of revocation to be fully payable as if the business was not qualified for an exemption. (4)  The penalty for filing a false application for exemption and/or the underpayment of taxes shall be the same as that set forth in Division 1 of this article. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-315. - Enforcement provisions.     Any provision of this division may be administered or enforced through the use of any and all other regulations set forth elsewhere in this article or in the general law. It is the specifically intended that any method of enforcement which could be used to determine if an occupation tax was correctly paid can be used to determine whether an exemption will be or was correctly granted or whether the amount of the exemption taken by a taxpayer was proper in amount. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-316. - Appeals.     An appeal of a decision of the chief financial officer or his designee as to whether an exemption will be or was correctly granted or whether the amount of the exemption taken by a tax payer was proper in amount is an administrative decision which shall be appealed in the same manner as decisions and in the method that is set forth elsewhere in this article. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-317. - Compliance with other laws.     The approval of a start-up business exemption by the office of revenue shall not excuse any business from any type of filing or certification required by state law or this Code. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-318. - Severability.     In the event that any part of this division is declared invalid for any reason such that the exemption provided in division cannot be granted, this division is intended to be fully severable from the levy of the occupation tax and all parts of this article which support collection. ( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Secs. 30-319—30-485. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), § 1, approved March 11, 2008, repealed art. IV, §§ 30-486, 30-487, 30-501—30-506, in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to astrology as enacted by Code 1977; as subsequently amended. The user's attention is directed to art. X of this chapter for similar provisions. 
Secs. 30-486—30-525. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AUTOMOBILE OR MOTORCYCLE RACES[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; traffic and vehicles, ch. 150. State Law reference— State regulation of racetracks, O.C.G.A. § 43-25-1 et seq. 
Sec. 30-526. - Permit required.     Every person desiring to conduct or promote an automobile or a motorcycle race within the corporate limits of the city or upon any property over which the city has police jurisdiction, shall, before engaging in the business, undertaking or enterprise, obtain a permit therefor from the mayor in the manner set forth in this article. (Code 1977, § 14-6451(a)) Charter reference— Extraterritorial jurisdiction along sewer lines, water lines, etc., § 1-102(c)(47). 
Sec. 30-527. - Application for permit.     Any person desiring a permit to conduct or promote an automobile or a motorcycle race shall, before engaging in that business, file an application with the department of police upon such forms as may be supplied by the department. The applicant shall furnish to the department a sworn statement, setting forth any and all facts requested by the department, and the applicant shall truthfully answer all questions contained in the application. (Code 1977, § 14-6451(b)) 
Sec. 30-528. - Issuance or rejection of permit.     The police chief shall make a recommendation as to the granting or refusal of the permit to conduct or promote an automobile or a motorcycle race to the license review board. The license review board shall conduct a hearing at a regularly scheduled meeting, and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (Code 1977, § 14-6451(c); Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 9, 11-6-08) 
Secs. 30-529—30-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BONDING AGENTS (BONDSPERSON)[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Cross reference— Courts, ch. 62; law enforcement, ch. 98. State Law reference— Professional bondsmen, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-551. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Professional bondsperson means any person who shall for compensation sign any bond for the appearance of any accused person in the municipal court or any court of the city or of Fulton County or who shall procure bond for that person or who shall deposit collateral for that person in lieu of bond. (Code 1977, § 14-6032) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-552. - Violations and penalties. (a)  Violations by bondsperson. Any professional bondsperson violating this article shall, on conviction in the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-8. In addition thereto, any bondsperson convicted of any violation of this article shall automatically be barred from signing bonds in the city. (b)  Violations by police. Any police officer who shall directly or indirectly aid any professional bondsperson in the evasion of this article or who shall carry or otherwise furnish information to a professional bondsperson or who shall cause it to be done, by means of which the bondsperson may be enabled to evade this article or escape its penalties or who shall directly or indirectly furnish any professional bondsperson with the name or other designation of any prisoner, except as specifically provided in this article, or who shall in any manner directly or indirectly cooperate with or aid any professional bondsperson in the pursuit of the bondsperson's business or aid the bondsperson to secure a client or who, knowing of any evasion or violation of this article or any part thereof by any person fails to report it immediately to the police chief shall be guilty of conduct unbecoming an officer and, on conviction thereof by the council, shall be discharged from the service of the city. (c)  Violations by others. Any person other than a police officer who shall directly or indirectly aid any professional bondsperson in the evasion of this article or who shall carry or otherwise furnish information to a professional bondsperson or who shall cause it to be done, by means of which the bondsperson may be enabled to evade this article or escape its penalties, or who shall directly or indirectly furnish any professional bondsperson with the name or other designation of any prisoner for the purpose of aiding the bondsperson to secure clients or who shall in any manner cooperate with or aid any professional bondsperson in the preparation of any false schedule or list of property or bonds required to be rendered under this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense. (Code 1977, § 14-6044) 
Sec. 30-553. - Exemptions.     Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as affecting the right of a citizen to sign a bond not for compensation or the right of surety companies that have complied with the laws of the state regulating those companies to carry on their regular business. (Code 1977, § 14-6031) 
Sec. 30-554. - State license required; underwriter.     In addition to any other requirements contained in this article, no professional bondsperson or agent or subagent of a bondsperson shall be permitted to sign bonds for any person imprisoned unless the professional bondsperson, agent or subagent shall have previously procured the following: (1)  A limited surety agent's license issued by the insurance commissioner of the State of Georgia. (2)  A certified power-of-attorney agreement from an underwriter, whether the underwriter is a company, corporation, firm, partnership, association or individual, which agreement makes, constitutes and appoints the professional bondsperson, agent or subagent as the underwriter's true and lawful agent and attorney in fact with express authority to make, execute, seal and deliver, as surety, bail bonds and recognizances, such that the execution of the bail bonds and recognizances by the professional bondsperson, agent or subagent is binding upon the underwriter for the full amount of each and every bail bond or recognizance written in favor of the city. (Code 1977, § 14-6045) 
Sec. 30-555. - Presence in police station; speaking to prisoners; identification. (a)  No professional bondsperson shall be allowed to loiter in the police station or grounds or to enter those places except when attending court or on business in connection with a case wherein the bondsperson is surety on a bond nor shall the bondsperson be allowed to speak to any prisoner at the police station unless authorized to do so by the station captain on duty. The station captain shall not grant this authority until the station captain has received from the prisoner a written request, naming the bondsperson the prisoner wishes to see. If no bondsperson is named by the prisoner, the station captain shall call them in rotation until a bondsperson is secured. (b)  Every professional bondsperson and the bondsperson's agents and subagents shall wear an identification badge or card, including photograph, designed by the mayor or the mayor's designee, whenever the professional bondsperson is acting as such in any city building or other city property. (Code 1977, § 14-6042) 
Sec. 30-556. - Reports; records. (a)  A copy of every report by a professional bondsperson to the department of police shall be submitted by the bondsperson to the bond clerk. (b)  If a discrepancy of three percent or more occurs between these reports and the records of the bond clerk, the bond clerk may inspect the bookkeeping records of the professional bondsperson. (c)  The permit of a professional bondsperson whose records are found to be falsified shall be suspended for 60 days. For a second violation of this section, the permit shall be suspended for 12 months. These penalties shall be in addition to any sentences imposed by any court as a result of the falsification of records. (Code 1977, § 14-6043) 
Secs. 30-557—30-565. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND BUSINESS LICENSES 
Sec. 30-566. - Permit required; prerequisite to issuance of license. (a)  No person shall carry on or be engaged in the business of professional bondsperson until authorized to do so by a permit granted by the mayor upon recommendation of the license review board. The license review board shall conduct the hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant the application for a new permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. No business license shall be issued to a professional bondsperson until this permit has been granted. Fees for applications and annual permits are set forth in City Code section 30-28(a). (b)  No application for any permit under this section shall be granted where the application or the evidence on a hearing before the license review board shows that the applicant or any agent or subagent thereof: (1)  Has a past record of failure to meet payments on defaulted bonds as a bondsperson or the agent or subagent thereof in any jurisdiction; (2)  Is unable to read and write the English language to a sufficient degree to fill out applicable bond forms; (3)  Has been convicted of any felony in the courts of this state or of any other state or of the United States; or (4)  Is not financially solvent. (Code 1977, § 14-6033; Ord. No. 1999-17, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 10, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-567. - Permit required for visiting prisoner, signing bond.     No professional bondsperson or agent thereof may visit prisoners or sign bonds for any person imprisoned unless the bondsperson or agent shall have procured a permit from the mayor. (Code 1977, § 14-6038) 
Sec. 30-568. - Petition for permit. (a)  Every person engaged in the business of professional bondsperson shall, on or before January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 in each year, file with the department of police a petition for a permit to engage in the business. The petition shall contain the following: (1)  A description of all real property in the five-county metropolitan Atlanta area owned in fee simple by the person and the clear market value of each item of real property so scheduled shall be set forth; (2)  A description of mortgages, liens or other encumbrances affecting that real property, showing the maturity date and amount thereof; (3)  A statement of the total amount of all bonds upon which the petitioner may, at that time, appear as surety; and (4)  A subschedule of all bonds upon which the petitioner may, at that time, appear as surety which have been forfeited and not paid. (b)  The department of police may require the petitioner to file, in addition, a schedule showing separately the date and penal sum of all of the bonds upon which the petitioner then appears as surety. (c)  All schedules and subschedules required by this division shall be made under oath by the petitioner; if the petitioner is a firm, each member of the firm shall sign and, if a corporation, two principal officers thereof authorized by the corporation's bylaws shall sign and the corporate seal shall be affixed. (Code 1977, § 14-6035) 
Sec. 30-569. - Criminal record of applicant for permit.     The police chief shall require every applicant for a permit for a professional bondsperson to show a complete record of any conviction in any court for the violation of any offense or any crime and to present to the police chief such other information as will enable the police chief to determine the character of the professional bondsperson or agent. (Code 1977, § 14-6039) 
Sec. 30-570. - Deposit of negotiable securities required. (a)  No permit or business license shall be issued to any person to carry on or engage in the business of professional bondsperson until the person has deposited with the chief financial officer cash or negotiable securities in the sum of $25,000.00, to be held by the city and subject to levy and execution by the city to the extent of any individual bond forfeitures not paid to the city, provided that this sum of $25,000.00 shall not limit the amount of liability of a professional bondsperson to the city and the bondsperson shall remain liable to the city for the total amount for which the bondsperson is responsible. (b)  If any payment is made from the fund deposited by any bondsperson, the bondsperson shall deposit additional cash or negotiable securities in order to maintain the fund at the amount of $25,000.00. (c)  The chief financial officer may deliver to the sheriff or other officers authorized to make levy and execution under writs of fi. fa. issued pursuant to law, sufficient collateral as set forth in this section to satisfy the fi. fa. issued in connection with and for the collection of a judgment as brought about by way of bond forfeiture. (d)  The value of any security or other property approved for use in the signing of bonds or the financial backing of bonds shall be determined from the market value of that security or other property on the date of the deposit or the signing of the bond. On any subsequent date on which this value is again in question, the market value on that subsequent date shall control. (e)  The deposit of a professional bondsperson with the chief financial officer shall be increased as necessary so that it shall always equal not less than ten percent of the bondsperson's outstanding bonds, provided that the minimum deposit shall be $25,000.00. (Code 1977, § 14-6034) 
Sec. 30-571. - Investigation of petition for permit.     The license review board shall investigate thoroughly every petition for a permit for engaging in the business of professional bondsperson and shall verify all schedules required in section 30-568. The board shall not recommend the issuance of a permit to a professional bondsperson unless the petition and accompanying schedules shall clearly show that the petitioner is the owner of real property in Fulton County of a fair market value, in excess of encumbrances, equal to the total of all bonds upon which the petitioner may at that time appear as surety, plus the amount allowed as exemption under the homestead laws of the state. If the petitioner is not surety on any bonds at the time of application, the petition shall clearly show that the petitioner is financially responsible. (Code 1977, § 14-6036) 
Sec. 30-572. - Authority to require additional schedules of property, bonds; authority to bar insolvents.     The department of police may at all times require a professional bondsperson to submit schedules of property and of bonds upon which the bondsperson appears as surety. If the schedules disclose the insolvency or inability of a bondsperson to sign bonds because of an excess of liability over assets, the department of police may bar the bondsperson from signing further bonds in city cases for so long as the insolvency or inability exists. Any professional bondsperson who shall fail to furnish these schedules within five days after demand or who shall furnish a false schedule shall thereafter be barred from signing bonds in connection with cases in the courts of the city. (Code 1977, § 14-6037) 
Sec. 30-573. - Fingerprinting required.     As a condition to granting a permit under this division, the police chief shall cause the bondsperson or agent to be fingerprinted. (Code 1977, § 14-6040) 
Sec. 30-574. - Suspension or revocation of permit. (a)  The police chief, upon the recommendation of the bond clerk, shall suspend the permit of any professional bondsperson or agent or subagent thereof for any one or more of the following reasons: (1)  Misconduct in the business of professional bondsperson by the bondsperson or the bondsperson's agent or employee; (2)  Failure to respond to judgments by the bondsperson or the bondsperson's surety; (3)  Violation of any law specifically affecting professional bondspersons or criminal bonds or violation of this article; (4)  The refusal for cause by Fulton County or DeKalb County to permit the bondsperson to operate in either of those jurisdictions; (5)  Receiving assistance by a police officer or another who is violating section 30-552(b) or (c); (6)  Having bonds outstanding in an amount totaling more than $200,000.00; (7)  Having outstanding forfeited bonds in an amount totaling more than $50,000.00; or (8)  Having outstanding forfeited bonds that number more than 25 percent of the total number of outstanding bonds. (b)  The police chief shall notify the bond clerk of every suspension or revocation of a professional bondsperson's permit, and it shall be unlawful for any person to accept a bond signed by a bondsperson whose permit has been suspended or revoked. (c)  The person or agent thereof whose permit is suspended shall be notified by the police chief of the reason for the suspension and shall be given the right within 30 days from the effective date of the suspension to appear before the license review board and to show cause why the suspension should not be made permanent by the mayor. Failure to appear within the specified time or any extension thereof shall require revocation by the mayor. (d)  If a permit is revoked, the holder of the permit shall not be permitted to again receive a permit for five years from the date of the revocation. (Code 1977, § 14-6041) 
Secs. 30-575—30-595. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DOOR TO DOOR SALES[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Charter reference— Authority to regulate peddlers and itinerant trades, § 1-102(c)(18). Cross reference— Telephone sales campaigns, § 30-1381 et seq.; charitable solicitations, ch. 42. State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; buyer's right to cancel home solicited sales, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-6. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-596. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Consumer goods and services means goods or services purchased, leased or rented primarily for personal, family or household purposes, including courses of instruction or training regardless of the purpose for which they are taken.     Door to door sale means a sale, lease or rental of consumer goods and services in which the seller or the seller's representative personally solicits the sale, except those in response to or following an invitation by the buyer, and the buyer's agreement or offer to purchase is made at a place other than the place of business of the seller. The term door to door does not include a transaction: (1)  Conducted and consummated entirely by mail or telephone and without any other contact between the buyer and the seller or the seller's representative prior to delivery of the goods or performance of the services; (2)  Pertaining to the sale or rental of real property, to the sale of insurance or to the sale of securities or commodities by a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission; or (3)  Conducted in the home of the seller or in the home of a person authorized by the seller to offer such merchandise for sale.     Person means any person, partnership, corporation or association engaged in the door to door sales of consumer goods and services. (Code 1977, § 14-5202) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-597. - Hours of solicitation.     It shall be unlawful for any person, while conducting the activities of solicitation pursuant to chapter 30, article VII, whether licensed or unlicensed, to enter upon any private property, knock on doors or otherwise disturb persons in their residences between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day. (Ord. No. 1997-13, § 3, 3-10-97) 
Secs. 30-598—30-610. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
Sec. 30-611. - Required. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in door to door sales of consumer goods or services in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city. Prior to any solicitation provided for in this article, the person making the solicitation shall, before making any other statement, state the following: (1)  The identity of the person making the solicitation; (2)  The name and address of the person represented by such person; and (3)  The identity or kinds of goods or services being offered for sale. (b)  In addition to meeting the requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the person making the solicitation shall show and display identification which states the information required by statement. Such identification shall be on a form approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee. (Code 1977, § 14-5201) 
Sec. 30-612. - Exemptions. (a)  The following, upon presenting evidence to the mayor or the mayor's designee sufficient to show entitlement to the following classifications, shall be exempted from the requirements that they obtain permits and pay fees prior to any solicitation under this article: (1)  Persons certified as exempt from federal taxation as nonprofit entities by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service. (2)  Persons who operate or engage route salespeople who operate along regularly established routes, where periodic deliveries are made to established customers and prospective customers are called upon from time to time within the regular service area for orders for future periodic deliveries and which persons do not demand, accept or receive payments or deposits of money in advance of final delivery of goods or services. (b)  Any person defined by subsection (a) of this section as exempt shall be required to register annually with the mayor or the mayor's designee upon forms to be prepared and approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee. Such registration form shall state the name and address of such person, the nature and character of the door to door sales to be carried on, if a partnership the names of the partners, if a corporation the officers and such other information as may be required by the mayor or the mayor's designee and shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. Such person shall be required to register annually on or before the anniversary date of the original registration in the calendar year in which the person proposes to operate. (c)  Any person defined by subsection (a) of this section as exempt shall be required to display and state their identification prior to any solicitation. Such identification shall be on a form approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee. (Code 1977, § 14-5203; Ord. No. 1997-13, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-97) 
Sec. 30-613. - Application. (a)  Every person desiring to obtain a permit required under this division shall make written application to the mayor or the mayor's designee upon forms to be prepared and approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the area of the city where the proposed door to door sales are to be conducted; the nature and character of the door to door sales to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers; and such other information as may be required by the mayor and shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. However, if a business employs or otherwise engages 30 or more persons to solicit sales on behalf of the business, the business is authorized to make application on behalf of such persons, and any person is thereby relieved of the responsibility to apply for a permit on an individual basis. (b)  Every applicant shall furnish all data, information and records requested by the mayor or the mayor's designee, and the failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall be cause for the denial of the application. Every applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the mayor or the mayor's designee or the city attorney and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such permit. The failure to produce such person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall be cause for the denial of the application. (c)  Each application for a permit made pursuant to this division shall be investigated by the mayor or the mayor's designee who shall make a determination with regard to the issuance of the permit within ten days of the application. If such application shall be denied, it shall be brought before the next regularly scheduled meeting of the license review board immediately following the denial. The license review board shall investigate the denial and after a public hearing, make its recommendation to the mayor for final action. (d)  The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant the application for a new permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (Code 1977, § 14-5204; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 11, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-614. - False information contained in application.     Any material omission, untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for a permit under this division shall be cause for the denial thereof, and if any permit has previously been granted under these circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of the permit. (Code 1977, § 14-5205) 
Sec. 30-615. - Fees. (a)  The application fee for a company or individual applying for a permit to solicit door-to-door sales in the city shall be $100.00. The application fee for an individual employee, agent, independent contractor, or anyone working for a company applying for a permit to solicit door-to-door sales shall be $50.00. (b)  The annual permit fee for a company or individual obtaining a permit to solicit door-to-door sales in the city shall be $500.00. The annual permit fee for an individual employee, agent, independent contractor, or anyone working for a company applying for a permit to solicit door-to-door sales shall be $170.00. (Code 1977, §§ 14-5029, 19-14.021; Ord. No. 1999-18, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 30-616. - Renewal.     A permit required under this division shall be renewed on or before the anniversary date of the issuance of the original permit in the calendar year in which the permittee proposed to operate. (Code 1977, § 14-5206) 
Sec. 30-617. - Suspension or revocation. (a)  No permit issued under this division shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, and after a hearing and upon a proper five-day written notice to the holder of such permit of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. (b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such permit shall consist of the violation of any laws or sections of this Code or other ordinances regulating such persons or for the violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such persons or for the violation of any state or federal law or for the violation of any sections of this Code or other city ordinances other than the traffic ordinances. (c)  The license review board is delegated the authority to conduct the hearings and report its findings and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor may suspend any such permit. The suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next regular meeting of the license review board. (Code 1977, § 14-5207) 
Sec. 30-618. - Entry upon signed premises unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for any person, while conducting the activities of solicitation pursuant to chapter 30, article VII, whether licensed or unlicensed, to enter upon any residential premises in the city where the owner, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or at the entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," or words of similar import. (Ord. No. 1997-13, § 4, 3-10-97) 
Sec. 30-619. - Violations and penalty. (a)  Violation of any of the provisions of chapter 30, article VII of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances shall be treated as an infraction, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided by law. (b)  Any person who enters upon the premises of another after receiving notice that such entry is forbidden or who remains upon the premises of another after receiving notice to depart said premises is subject to immediate arrest for criminal trespass pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. (Ord. No. 1997-13, § 5, 3-10-97) 
Secs. 30-620—30-640. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ESCORT SERVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-641. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Escort means a person who is held out to the public to be available for hire and who, for monetary consideration in the form of a fee, commission or salary, consorts with, or accompanies or who offers, for monetary consideration, to consort or accompany another or others to social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement or within any place of public resort or within any private quarters. (1)  Service-oriented escort is an escort which: a.  Operates from an open office; b.  Does not employ or use an escort runner; c.  Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided to the patron or work for an escort bureau which so advertises; and d.  Does not offer or provide sexual conduct. (2)  Sexually-oriented escort is an escort which: a.  Employs as an employee, agent or independent contractor an escort bureau runner; b.  Works for, as an agent, employee, contractor, or is referred to a patron by a sexually-oriented escort bureau; c.  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or works for, as an employee, agent or independent contractor or is referred to a patron by an escort bureau which so advertises; d.  Solicits, offers to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron, or accepts an offer or solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct for a fee in addition to the fee charged by the escort bureau; e.  Works as an escort without having a current employee permit issued for the referring escort bureau in such escort's possession at all times while working as an escort; or f.  Accepts a fee from a patron who has not first been delivered a contract.     Escort bureau means a person who, for a fee, commission, profit, payment or other monetary consideration, furnishes, refers to, offers to furnish or refer escorts, or provides or offers to introduce patrons to escorts. (1)  Service-oriented escort bureau is an escort bureau which: a.  Maintains an office at an established place of business; b.  Employs or provides only escorts who possess employee permits; c.  Does not use an escort bureau runner; and d.  Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided to a patron. (2)  Sexually-oriented escort bureau is an escort bureau which: a.  Does not maintain an open office; b.  Employs as an employee, agent or independent contractor, an escort bureau runner; c.  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or that escorts which provide such sexual conduct will be provided, referred or introduced to a patron; d.  Solicits, offers to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron; e.  Employs, contracts with or provides or refers escorts who do not possess employee permits as required in section 30-668; f.  Does not deliver contracts to every patron or customer; or g.  Employs, contracts with a sexually oriented escort or refers or provides to a patron a sexually oriented escort.     Escort bureau runner means an employee, agent or independent contractor of the bureau who, after the bureau receives a call from a prospective customer, goes to the customer's location to collect the escort fee and to make other necessary arrangements.     Offer to provide acts of sexual conduct means to offer, propose or to solicit to provide sexual conduct to a patron. Such definition includes all conversations, advertisements and acts which would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that such acts were to be provided.     Sexual conduct means the engaging in or the commission of an act of sexual intercourse, sodomy or the touching of the sexual organs, pubic region, buttock or female breast of a person for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of another person. (Code 1977, § 14-6122) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 30-642—30-650. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
Sec. 30-651. - Compliance required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an escort service without having first complied with this article, including obtaining of a permit for the operation of an escort service. (Code 1977, § 14-6111) 
Sec. 30-652. - Application; investigation. (a)  Every person desiring to obtain a permit to operate an escort service shall make written application to the department of police upon forms to be prepared and approved by the mayor. Each applicant shall submit the following: (1)  The name and address of the applicant. (2)  The location of the proposed escort service. (3)  The nature and character of the business. (4)  If a partnership, the name of the partnership and the names and addresses of the partners. (5)  If a corporation, the name of the corporation and the names and addresses of the officers and members of the board of directors and stockholders. (6)  Any bank accounts listed in the name of the applicant or maintained by the applicant, whether an individual, partnership or corporation. (7)  Whether the applicant or any partners or any corporation officers or board members or any principal shareholders have, within the preceding five years, a record for any conviction for the violation of any statute of the several states or the United States or of any ordinance of any city in the United States. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond. (8)  A listing of all real property which the applicant is presently leasing and the names and addresses of all lessees and lessors of the property. (9)  A certified copy of the applicant's financial statement for the 12-month period ending one week before the filing of the application for a permit and the state of incorporation of such corporation, as well as the names and addresses of the agents and employees of such corporation for a period of two years immediately prior to the filing of such application. (10)  Documentation of oral agreements, copies of all written agreements among any persons or stockholders of corporations or partners of partnerships applying for a permit to engage in an escort service, which agreements reflect or control ownership or division of profits, sharing of revenues or payment of rents or which agreements reflect any other arrangements in connection with ownership, rents, profit sharing or income application of use. (b)  All applicants shall be investigated by the department of police and the department's findings shall be presented to the license review board at a public hearing on the application and the license review board shall recommend its findings to the mayor. (c)  The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant the application for a new permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (Code 1977, § 14-6112; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 12, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-653. - Grounds for denial. (a)  No permit or renewal permit for the operation of an escort service shall be issued to any person where any individual, having an interest either as owner, partner, officer or principal shareholder, directly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance involving a crime of moral turpitude or relating to sexual offenses and related matters, to alcohol or drug offenses and related matters or to gambling offenses and related matters. (b)  No permit shall be issued if the application contains a material omission, untrue or misleading information or if the application fails to indicate the true ownership of the proposed establishment. (c)  No permit shall be issued if the proposed premises do not comply with the zoning ordinance, the fire code or the building code of the city. (d)  No permit shall be issued where the person applying has had a permit to conduct a similar type business denied or revoked within a period of five years. The license review board may waive this prohibition if a period of two years has passed since the prior denial or revocation. (Code 1977, § 14-6113) 
Sec. 30-654. - Investigation fee.     Every applicant for a permit required by this division shall be investigated by the department of police and a recommendation shall be made to the license review board within 25 days of the filing of the application. An investigation fee of $25.00 for each application for a permit shall be paid to the department of police at the time of filing the application. (Code 1977, §§ 14-6114, 19-14.024) 
Sec. 30-655. - Renewal.     A permit to operate an escort service establishment shall be renewed annually as of the date of the original issuance of the permit. All applicants for renewal permits shall furnish all data, information and records requested by the license review board or the department of police. There shall be an initial and annual registration charge of $3.00 for the original issuance and renewal of each permit issued pursuant to this division. The police chief shall have the authority to renew the permit, and the decision may be appealed to the license review board for a hearing and recommendation to the mayor for final action. (Code 1977, §§ 14-6115, 19-14.025) 
Sec. 30-656. - Revocation.     Any permit issued under this division shall be subject to revocation for the violation of this article or any section of this Code or other ordinance related to the operation of the business or for any occurrence which would have barred issuance of the original permit. The permittee shall be notified of the recommendation to revoke and a hearing held before the license review board. The notification to the permittee shall contain a specification of the violation and shall be held at least five days and not more than 21 days after service of the notice, at a time and place to be ascertained by the license review board. After receiving the recommendation of the license review board, the mayor may revoke the license. (Code 1977, § 14-6116) 
Secs. 30-657—30-665. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEES 
Sec. 30-666. - Minimum age.     No person holding an escort service permit shall employ any person unless such person is 18 years of age or older. (Code 1977, § 14-6117(a)) 
Sec. 30-667. - Effect of conviction for certain crimes.     No person holding an escort service permit shall employ in an escort service any person in any capacity whatsoever, including but not limited to performers, entertainers and musicians, who has, within five years of the date of employment, been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or of any municipal ordinance, which conviction relates to sex offenses and related matters and alcohol or drug offenses and related matters. (Code 1977, § 14-6117(b)) 
Sec. 30-668. - Permits. (a)  Required. Any individual working in an escort service as an independent contractor or as an employee shall first obtain a permit from the chief of police prior to beginning such work. (b)  Application. Application for a permit as required in this section shall be addressed to the police chief. The applicant shall furnish the following information: (1)  Name and address of the applicant. (2)  Name and address of any person having previously employed the applicant for a space of six weeks or longer. (3)  A record of any conviction for the violation of a federal or state law or municipal ordinance. (c)  Fee. Escort service companies shall pay a $100.00 fee for a certificate of eligibility (application fee). Each individual working as an employee or independent contractor of an escort service, shall pay a $50.00 application fee. Application fees are to accompany the application for a permit. The annual/renewal fee of the permit itself is $2,000.00 for escort companies and $300.00 for each person working as an employee or independent contractor of such escort service company. (d)  Fingerprinting. No person shall be granted an employee permit until such person has been fingerprinted by the department of police. (e)  Grounds for nonissuance or revocation. No person shall be issued any employee permit who has, within five years of the date of proposed employment, been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving sex-related, alcohol-related or drug-related offenses. The police chief shall have the authority to revoke an employee permit for violation of this subsection. The permit holder shall have the right to appeal the revocation to the license review board within ten days after the notice of revocation. After receiving the recommendation of the license review board, the mayor may revoke the permit. (Code 1977, §§ 14-6118, 14-6119, 19-14.026; Ord. No. 1999-23, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2000-7, §§ 4, 5, 2-15-00) 
Secs. 30-669—30-690. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 86. 
Sec. 30-691. - License; health department approval required.     Any person desiring to open a restaurant or any establishment for the sale of food, sandwiches, cold drinks and other items of food for human consumption shall file an application for a license with the chief financial officer setting out the location selected and showing the general nature of the operation to be carried on. If the establishment to be licensed is located in Fulton County, the chief financial officer shall promptly notify the Fulton County health department of the application. If the establishment is located in DeKalb County, the chief financial officer shall notify the DeKalb County health department of the application. Upon receipt of information in writing from the appropriate health department that the premises where the proposed operation is to be carried on complies with the health and sanitation requirements of the law and rules applicable thereto, the chief financial officer shall forthwith issue to the applicant a license to operate the establishment upon receipt of the proper license fee for that operation. (Code 1977, § 14-6141) 
Sec. 30-692. - Permit required for private clubs, fraternal orders, similar organizations.     Any group, association, fraternal order, club or other organization, whether incorporated or not, which has a regular place of assembly in which food or beverages are served or sold and which place of assembly is locked or not open to the general public or is not open to inspection by the police, whether dues are assessed or membership rosters maintained, must before maintaining or operating the place of assembly obtain a permit from the mayor through application to the department of police and license review board. Application fees are $100.00 and are payable at the time of application. Annual/renewal fees for permits are set at $200.00. (Code 1977, § 14-6142; Ord. No. 1999-20, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 30-693. - Drive-in lighting standards. (a)  Minimum standards. Every person conducting a business of dispensing or selling at retail food and beverages prepared for consumption and served to customers in parked automobiles or at other places other than within a building shall install, maintain and operate between sundown and the time of closing a sufficient number of luminaries to provide a level of illumination of one footcandle in the entire parking area and upon all places where automobiles are parked by patrons of the establishment or where food or beverages may be served. (b)  Approval of installation required. Before any installation of wiring or lighting equipment as required by this section shall be installed, the owner or operator of the business shall submit detailed plans and specifications covering all wiring and installations contemplated to the chief electrical inspector for such inspector's approval or disapproval, and no such installation shall be made until the plans and specifications therefor have been so approved and a permit issued. (c)  Enforcement. The department of police shall enforce this section. (d)  Effect of violation. Any person failing to comply with this section shall be served with a notice in writing to appear before the license review board at a time stated to show cause why the permit to engage in any of the businesses referred to in this section should not be revoked. (e)  Penalties. Any person engaged in any business referred to in this section who shall fail to comply with this section shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of the permit. (Code 1977, § 14-6143) 
Secs. 30-694—30-715. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HANDWRITING ANALYSIS, FORTUNETELLING, AND ASTROLOGY[8] Footnotes: --- (8) --- Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), approved March 11, 2008, provided for repeal of art. X. Section 4 of Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332) enacted a new art. X to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter and was entitled handwriting analysis and fortunetelling. Charter reference— Authority relative to fortunetelling, § 1-102(c)(19). 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-716. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Astrology means the interpretation of human experience based upon an examination and correlation to celestial activity for fee, gift or donation.     Fortunetelling means the prediction of the future for a fee, gift or donation.     Handwriting analysis means the interpretation of human experience based upon an examination of handwriting or other inscription done by hand for fee, gift or donation. (Code 1977, § 14-6490; Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), § 4, 3-11-08) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 30-717—30-725. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
Sec. 30-726. - Required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to practice handwriting analysis, fortunetelling or astrology unless that person holds a valid unexpired and unrevoked license to engage in the practice of handwriting analysis, fortunetelling or astrology issued by the city. (Code 1977, § 14-6490; Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), § 4, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 30-727. - Application and license fees. (a)  Any person desiring to practice handwriting analysis, fortunetelling, or astrology shall make application for a license to the department of police on forms to be prepared and approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee. The applicant, prior to being licensed to practice handwriting analysis, fortunetelling or astrology shall: (1)  Be 18 years of age or more; (2)  Not have been convicted of a crime of any grade or ordinance violation involving the following categories of criminal conduct: larceny, embezzlement, fraudulent conveyancing, perjury or false swearing or subrogation of either, gambling, deceitful means, artful practices, lottery, felonies or other group I crimes, as defined in the Uniform Crime Reporting Manual, Federal Bureau of Investigation, U.S. Department of Justice, which are reasonably related to the activities regulated in this article, within three years of the date of the application; (3)  Allow fingerprints to be made by the department of police at the time of application; and (4)  Furnish the department of police two photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size 2½ inches by 2¾ inches. (5)  Provide a $100.00 application fee at the time of application. (b)  Annual/renewal fees for handwriting analysis, fortunetelling or astrology licenses shall be $500.00. (c)  After investigation by the department of police, the department's findings shall be presented to the license review board at a public hearing on the application. The license review board shall recommend to the mayor that the application for a license shall be granted or denied. (d)  The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (Code 1977, § 14-6491; Ord. No. 1999-25, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), § 4, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 13, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-728. - Grounds for denial. (a)  No license shall be issued if the application contains a material omission, untrue or misleading information. (b)  No license shall be issued where the person applying has had a license to conduct a similar type business denied or revoked within a period of five years. The license review board may waive this prohibition if a period of two years has passed since the prior denial or revocation. (Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), § 4, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 30-729. - Revocation, suspension.     Any person failing to comply with any section of this article or such other laws and regulations as may be passed by the council for the conduct of the business of handwriting analysis, fortunetelling, or astrology shall be subject to having the license to conduct the business revoked or suspended upon appropriate notice of hearing. (Code 1977, § 14-6492; Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), § 4, 3-11-08) 
Secs. 30-730—30-750. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - HOTELS, LODGINGHOUSES AND ROOMINGHOUSES[9] Footnotes: --- (9) --- Cross reference— Hotel or motel occupancy tax, § 146-76 et seq. Land development code references— Housing code, § 8-2181; housing code requirements for roominghouses, boardinghouses, residence hotels, single room occupancy residences and buildings with special uses, app. F, § 26. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-751. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Roominghouse means a house or building in which sleeping or eating facilities or both are provided for the accommodation of five or more persons who are charged for boarding or rooms or both, by the day, week, month or for each meal. This definition of a roominghouse shall not include an apartment house, which means a building wherein living facilities, such as a living room, bedroom, kitchen and bath, are provided for a person or family and where the building is capable of accommodating two or more families who would have separate living facilities. Any house or residence called an apartment shall be considered a roominghouse under this definition if the house or apartment is used to room or board five or more persons who are charged for board or rooms and who do not have separate living facilities, such as living room, bedroom, kitchen and bath. (Code 1977, § 14-6171) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-752. - Permit for bellhops and house detectives in hotels. (a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any employee of a hotel performing the duty of a bellhop or house detective to continue or begin this employment without first obtaining a permit before entering or continuing upon this employment. (b)  Application. Each employee and prospective employee as a bellhop or house detective shall file a statement with the department of police to the effect that such person is or expects to be employed in one of the employments named, stating such person's correct name and giving such person's address, together with such person's age and former employment, and any other information required by the police chief. The application shall be in writing and shall be filed with the police chief. The statement or application shall have endorsed thereon a statement or shall be accompanied by a letter signed by three reputable citizens, not related by blood or marriage to the applicant, who are residents of the city, none of whom have any interest in the hotel where the employee is to work or serve, attesting to the good character of the applicant. (c)  Investigation; issuance or denial. Upon the filing of an application for a permit under subsection (b) of this section, the police chief shall fingerprint each applicant and cause an investigation to be made as to the good character of the applicant and shall issue a permit or deny the application for cause. If the police chief denies the application for a permit, the action shall be appealable to the license review board within ten days after notice of the denial. Upon the receipt of notice of appeal, the board shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. At the public hearing testimony shall be heard for or against the granting of the permit. After the hearing, the board shall make its favorable or unfavorable report to the mayor at its next regular meeting, and the mayor shall either adopt or reject the report of the board. However, the mayor, license review board or police chief shall have no authority to issue a permit to any applicant who has been convicted of any of the following enumerated offenses, federal or state: murder, voluntary manslaughter, mayhem, rape, indecent molestation of children, assault and battery, kidnapping, stabbing and shooting, blackmail, sending or delivering threatening letters, peeping Tom, eavesdropping, drugs, prostitution, procuring for prostitution, unlawful alcoholic beverages sales, white slavery, burglary, robbery, theft, sex perversion or any section of this Code or other city ordinance dealing with prostitution or procuring for prostitution committed not more than five years prior to the date of application for a permit or five years from the termination of any penal servitude by the applicant for a conviction of any of such crimes, whichever shall have last occurred. (d)  Issuance. If an application is approved by either the police chief, license review board or mayor, the police chief shall issue a permit to the applicant. (e)  Employing person without permit. The manager and person in charge of the hotel are prohibited from employing any person who is denied a permit under this section, and any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction the license to operate the hotel where the person is employed shall be subject to revocation by the mayor. (f)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any bellboy or house detective to continue in or enter upon the employment provided in subsection (a) of this section in violation of this section. It shall further be unlawful and shall be grounds for the revocation of or refusal to issue the permit if, in filing the statement, a fictitious name or address or any false information is given by the applicant. It shall be unlawful for the manager or person in charge of any hotel to fail to keep a book or list showing the correct name and address of employees or to refuse to exhibit it to any member of the department of police under penalty of subjecting the license to operate the hotel wherein the offense occurred to revocation by the mayor. (g)  Revocation. Any bellhop or house detective issued a permit under this section who shall subsequently be convicted of any of the offenses set forth in subsection (c) of this section shall be subject to revocation of the permit after notice and hearing. For the purposes of this subsection notice and hearing shall consist of a written notice of a hearing for revocation setting forth the grounds for the revocation, mailed to the last known address of the licensee ten days prior to a hearing upon the revocation before the license review board. Upon proof of the charges before the license review board, the board shall revoke the permit. (Code 1977, § 14-6175) 
Sec. 30-753. - Locking doors to upper floors during certain hours.     It shall be unlawful for any person operating a public roominghouse or hotel located on the second floor or other upper floors of a building with stairways leading thereto to keep the doors located in the stairways or in the halls to which the stairways lead locked between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. During those hours the doors shall remain unlocked so that members of the department of police shall have free and unrestricted access thereto when necessary to suppress disorder or detect crime. (Code 1977, § 14-6176) 
Secs. 30-754—30-765. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
Sec. 30-766. - Required.     Any person desiring to open or operate a hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse or similar place shall, before opening or operating this house or place, obtain a license according to the procedures established in this division. (Code 1977, § 14-6172) 
Sec. 30-767. - Application. (a)  Application for a license required under this division to open or operate any such business shall be in writing and shall be filed with the department of police. The application shall state the location of the desired business and the name, residence and occupation of the applicant and shall be signed by three citizens of the city certifying to the character of the applicant. The application when so filed shall be referred to the license review board, which shall cause an investigation to be made. When the investigation has been completed, the license review board shall hold a public hearing on the application at a regularly scheduled license review board meeting and shall recommend to the mayor that the application for a license be granted or denied. (b)  The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (Code 1977, § 14-6173; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 14, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-768. - Revocation. (a)  Any license granted under this division shall be subject to revocation for cause. If any officer or employee of a hotel, lodginghouse or other place having a register containing the names of guests shall fail or refuse to permit a police officer to check the register, it shall be deemed a sufficient cause for revocation of a license. The failure of the applicant, license holder, the property owner or any person acting as an agent for or on behalf of such person to pay property taxes, hotel/motel occupancy taxes or any other taxes required by law to be paid in association with the operation of the business or licensed premises shall constitute grounds for the denial of an application for an original or renewal license and the revocation of a current license to operate the hotel, motel, lodging house, or rooming house. (b)  Whenever in the opinion of the license review board there is cause to revoke a license, a written notice of intention to revoke shall be furnished the holder of the license three days before a regular or called meeting of the license review board, at which time the holder of the license may make such showing as the holder of the license may deem proper. After a hearing, the license review board shall report its recommendation to the mayor, who may revoke the license if in the mayor's discretion it is to the best interest of the peace and good order of the city. (Code 1977, § 14-6174; Ord. No. 1999-71, § 1, 9-29-99) 
Secs. 30-769—30-790. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - RESERVED[10] Footnotes: --- (10) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-15(08-O-0334), § 1, approved March 11, 2008, repealed art. XII, §§ 30-791—30-796, in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to hypnosis as enacted by Code 1977; as subsequently amended. 
Secs. 30-791—30-815. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - INSURANCE COMPANIES 
Sec. 30-816. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1). (Code 1977, §§ 14-5181(a), 19-14.020(a)) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-817. - Insurer's license fees.     There is levied an annual license fee in the amount of $150.00 upon each insurer doing business within the city. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 30-818, which is operating on behalf of such insurer within the city, there is levied a license fee in the amount of $150.00. (Code 1977, §§ 14-5181(a), 19-14.020(a)) State Law reference— License fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
Sec. 30-818. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.     For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article that is operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, the insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $52.50 per location for each year. (Code 1977, §§ 14-5181(b), 19-14.020(b)) 
Sec. 30-819. - License fees for independent insurance agencies, brokers not otherwise licensed.     There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 30-817 in the amount of $150.00 for each such location within the city. (Code 1977, §§ 14-5181(c), 19-14.020(c)) State Law reference— Additional fee for separate locations authorized, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
Sec. 30-820. - Due date for license fees.     License fees imposed under this article shall be due and payable on or before January 25. The fees shall be collected by the city as provided by law. (Code 1977, § 14-5181(f)) 
Secs. 30-821—30-840. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - GYMNASIUMS, HEALTH CLUBS AND WEIGHT REDUCING OR BODY BUILDING INSTITUTIONS 
Sec. 30-841. - Business license required     Every gymnasium, health club, aerobics club or slimnastics club owner/operator must first obtain a license before transacting new business or continuing to transact ongoing business.     Upon completion of the application, the licenses & permits unit shall assign a hearing date before the license review board. At the hearing, the applicant and the licenses and permits unit shall present all evidence regarding the application to the license review board. The license review board shall conduct the hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor.     Annual/renewal fees for a license under this subsection are $500.00. In no event shall an owner/operator of a gymnasium, health club, aerobics club or slimnastics club be required to pay for more than one license under this subsection. In the event that a single owner/operator has more than one type of activity within a single business, that owner/operator shall obtain the more inclusive license of either a gymnasium or health club. (Code 1977, § 14-5191(a); Ord. No. 1999-15, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 15, 11-6-08) 
Secs. 30-842—30-850. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - LABOR POOLS[11] Footnotes: --- (11) --- State Law reference— Labor pools, O.C.G.A. § 34-10-1 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-851. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Labor pool means and includes any business whose principal function is to maintain and employ a pool of unskilled manual laborers for the purpose of contracting with others to make such manpower available to them on a short-term assignment basis.     Short-term assignment of casual labor means a work assignment for a term of 40 hours or less involving work for which neither entity nor person contracting or arranging for temporary employees requires any of the following from such employees: (1)  A professional or occupational license which requires for its issuance a demonstration of knowledge or proficiency and which is issued by the state or a political subdivision of the state; (2)  A high school diploma or its equivalent; (3)  Education beyond high school; (4)  Vocational education; or (5)  Demonstrated proficiency with a specified type of machinery.     Temporary help. This article does not apply to temporary help, which, for purposes of this article, means services that deal with supplying secretarial employees, clerical employees, skilled laborers, specialized assistants, or other positions requiring specialized or executive skills. (Code 1977, § 14-6511) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-852. - Compliance with article provisions.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a labor pool without having first complied with the provisions of this article, including obtaining a license for the operation of a labor pool. (Code 1977, § 14-6518) 
Sec. 30-853. - Compliance with all applicable laws.     The labor pool must comply with all applicable provisions of state and federal law, which shall include but not be limited to the following provisions: Social Security Act, the Fair Labor Standards Act, Internal Revenue Code and state department of revenue laws, Occupational Safety and Health Act, Worker's Compensation, Unemployment Insurance, and the state law relating to labor pool regulation (O.C.G.A. § 34-10-1 et seq.). The law department shall verify compliance with the above laws. (Code 1977, § 14-6519) 
Sec. 30-854. - Records. (a)  All labor pools shall be required to keep daily records. These records shall consist of the names of every person who was assigned a job for that particular day, the type of job assigned, the name and location of the contractor and the number of hours worked on that particular job. At the completion of that day's work, the worker will sign the worker's name next to the information listed in this subsection. (b)  Any person engaged in the business of a labor pool who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section or who shall make false entries, or who shall fail to refuse to comply with an inspection and examination by any police officer shall be guilty of an offense. (Code 1977, § 14-6516) 
Sec. 30-855. - Pay stubs.     If a labor pool chooses to pay workers in cash, it must issue a duplicate receipt to such worker. If a labor pool chooses to pay workers by check, the labor pool must issue a pay stub to the worker. The receipt or pay stub must state the number of hours worked and the amount of pay per hour. Each receipt or pay stub issued to a worker must also specify any deductions from the worker's gross pay. (Code 1977, § 14-6517) 
Sec. 30-856. - Improper deductions from pay stub.     If the labor pool makes improper deductions from pay, the license review board can condition the continuing grant of the license upon the labor pool's making restitution to the affected workers within a time period so specified by the license review board. (Code 1977, § 14-6522) 
Sec. 30-857. - Deductions for equipment used by workers.     Any labor pool licensed under this article shall not charge workers any rental fee or any type of fee for supplying any type of equipment to be used by the worker in performing any work assignment. (Code 1977, § 14-6520) 
Sec. 30-858. - Deductions for transportation of workers to and from work site.     Any labor pool licensed under this article shall not charge workers any expense, fee or cost for transporting such workers to and from job sites. (Code 1977, § 14-6521) 
Sec. 30-859. - Display of state law.     Every labor pool must give notice of the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 34, ch. 10 (O.C.G.A. § 34-10-1 et seq.) and this article to all workers. The provisions of the state law must be posted in a conspicuous place. (Code 1977, § 14-6528) 
Secs. 30-860—30-870. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
Sec. 30-871. - Required.     It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to operate a labor pool, as defined in section 30-851, without having obtained a license in compliance with the requirements as set forth in this article. (Code 1977, § 14-6512) 
Sec. 30-872. - Application.     All persons desiring to obtain a license to operate a labor pool service within the city shall make written application to the police department of the city for an appropriate investigation. The application shall be addressed to the mayor and city council and shall set forth the following information: (1)  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names currently or heretofore used by the applicant. (2)  The business and residence addresses of the applicant for the two years preceding the date of the application, including current address. (3)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of application. (4)  A statement revealing whether the applicant has previously operated a labor pool, and if so, the name, address and current business status of such labor pool. (5)  A statement whether the applicant is affiliated with any other labor pool in the city; for purposes of this subsection, "affiliated" shall mean having the status of a sole proprietor, employee, agent, partner, general or limited shareholder, director or officer. (6)  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair. (7)  Two current photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size. (8)  All business license history of the applicant, which shall include information as to any revocation or suspension and reason for such action. (9)  All convictions for violations of any law, and the grounds thereof, within the preceding five years, of the applicant, or any partners, agents, corporate officers, board members or any principal shareholders of the labor pool; the term "conviction" in this subsection shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond. (10)  The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the city, and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as exhibits to the application. (11)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the information set out in subsections (1)—(10) of this section and exhibits with regard to each employee, agent, partners, general or limited. (12)  If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall, in addition to the information set out in subsections (1)—(10) of this section, submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations. (13)  A copy of the applicant's financial statement for the most recently ended fiscal year, and state of incorporation, as well as the names and addresses of the agents and employees of such employees of such corporation for a period of two years immediately prior to the filing of such application. (Code 1977, § 14-6513) 
Sec. 30-873. - Fees. (a)  The initial fee for all applicants seeking a labor pool license shall be $300.00. This fee shall be submitted with the application to the police department. (b)  Upon approval of the application, the labor pool will pay a license fee of $1,500.00 per year to the police department. This fee shall be used to offset the regulatory cost to administer this article. (Code 1977, § 14-6514) 
Sec. 30-874. - Inspection; issuance, denial; term.     As soon as the application is submitted in proper form to the police department with the requested information and accompanied by the correct investigation fee, an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the police and law department. If all requirements of all departments concerned as well as those qualifications set forth in this article are satisfied, the license shall be issued by the police department. If such application is denied, the application shall be submitted to the license review board, which shall conduct a hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of one year. (Code 1977, § 14-6515; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 16, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-875. - Expiration; cancellation.     Any license issued under this article shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless canceled by the police department for cause before expiration. Cancellation for cause shall consist of the conviction of the original applicant, any partners, corporate officers or board members of the labor pool for a felony or misdemeanor of any state or the United States or any municipal ordinance relative to alcohol or drug offenses and related matters. (Code 1977, § 14-6523) 
Sec. 30-876. - Revocation; hearing.     A violation of any of the provisions of this article by any person holding a license under the provisions of this article shall constitute grounds for revocation of the license issued pursuant thereto. A hearing shall be scheduled, and notice of such hearing must be sent to the holder of the license specifying the reasons for the possibility of revocation of the licenses. After the hearing, the disposition of the license shall be determined within the sole discretion of the mayor. (Code 1977, § 14-6524) 
Sec. 30-877. - Renewal.     Any license issued under this article must be renewed for each year succeeding the initial issuance. A renewal application shall be accompanied by a renewal fee of $1,500.00. A renewal license shall be issued by the police department if the applicant continues to meet all prerequisites for obtaining an initial license and no action to deny, suspend or revoke the existing license is pending against the applicant. The labor pool must rectify any noncompliance with the provisions of this section, if any, before the labor pool license is renewed. (Code 1977, § 14-6525) 
Sec. 30-878. - License not in lieu of business license.     The license issued under this article shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any business license issued by the city. (Code 1977, § 14-6527) 
Secs. 30-879—30-900. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-901. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Massage means any manner of manipulation, including but not limited to the rubbing, touching, stroking, kneading or vibrating of the superficial parts of the body, by direct or indirect physical contact with any portion of the body of a massage technician or by any form of contact with a massage apparatus.     Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power which is utilized by a massage technician for the purpose of administering a massage.     Massage establishment means any business established for profit which employs one or more massage technicians or any business that owns and operates or maintains for profit one or more massage apparatus, including but not limited to bathhouse equipment, and which, for a good or valuable consideration, offers facilities and personnel to the public for the administration of massages.     Massage technician means any person, whether male or female or whether or not a masseur or masseuse by profession, who by direct or indirect physical contact with the body of another or by use and operation of a massage apparatus and for any good or valuable consideration administers a massage. (Code 1977, § 14-6232) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-902. - Records of licensee.     It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at the establishment, the type of treatment administered and the name of the person of the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by any member of the department of police. (Code 1977, § 14-6239) 
Sec. 30-903. - Names of employees filed with police chief.     It shall be the duty of every person holding a license under this article to file with the police chief the names of all employees, their home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees with the names of new employees must be filed with the police chief within three days from the date of any such change. (Code 1977, § 14-6240) 
Sec. 30-904. - Patronage of massage establishment by underage person. (a)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any massage establishment unless such person carries, at the time of such patronage, a written order directing the treatment to be given and signed by a regularly licensed physician or such person's parent or guardian. If consent is given by a parent or guardian, such consent must be signed in the presence of the massage technician or the massage establishment operator. (b)  Duty of operator. It shall be the duty of the operator of such massage establishment to determine the age of the persons patronizing such massage establishment, and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such massage establishment. It shall be conclusively presumed that the operator of such massage establishment knows the correct age of all persons patronizing the establishment. (Code 1977, § 14-6241) 
Secs. 30-905—30-950. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[12] Footnotes: --- (12) --- State Law reference— Restrictions on levy of license, occupation or professional tax on massage, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 30-951. - Required. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment without having obtained a license therefor or for any person to allow a massage technician to administer massages without first having obtained the license required by this division. (b)  [ Reserved. ] (Code 1977, § 14-6231; Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), § 1, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 30-952. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), § 2, adopted May 29, 2007, repealed § 30-952, which pertained to qualifications of massage technician. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 30-953. - Qualifications of massage establishment. (a)  A corporate applicant for a massage establishment license must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state. The applicant shall be the owner or legal agent of the massage establishment. Applications shall be submitted to the department of police on forms provided by the department. A massage technician who is a sole proprietor shall not be required to obtain a massage establishment license. (b)  No massage establishment license shall be issued unless the application required in section 30-954 and all the attached documentation and exhibits so required shall have been filed by the applicant, and no license shall be issued if it appears that the application has been materially falsified or if the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify any information contained therein. (c)  No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection discloses that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: (1)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided also that all such signs shall otherwise comply with the general sign requirements of this Code; (2)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the city's building code and, additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth; (3)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the city's building code; (4)  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing any instruments used for massage shall be provided; (5)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided; (6)  Closed cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen; (7)  Adequate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for customers; (8)  All walls, ceilings, floors, steam or vapor rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; (9)  Clean and sanitary towels and linen shall be provided for customers receiving massage services; no common use of towels or linen shall be permitted; and (10)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of any license, must be in complete compliance with the city fire code, the city electrical code, the city plumbing code, and with all other requirements of federal, state, county and municipal law designed to protect the health, welfare and safety of the persons who come into contact with the establishment. (d)  All massage technicians shall be completely clothed during all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and means having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and such pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. The holder of the license shall have the license subject to revocation for violation of this subsection. (e)  The storing, serving, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within a massage establishment is expressly prohibited unless such establishment has been issued an alcoholic beverage license in accordance with chapter 10. (Code 1977, § 14-6234; Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), § 3, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 30-954. - Application.     Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage establishment shall make application to the department of police for an appropriate investigation. Such application shall be in writing, addressed to the mayor and city council, and shall set forth the following: (1)  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names used by the applicant; (2)  The current and all previous business and residence addresses of the applicant within the two years immediately preceding the date of application; (3)  Sworn affidavits of at least three bona fide residents of Fulton County that the applicant is a person of good moral character; (4)  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 21 years; (5)  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair; (6)  Two current photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size; (7)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of application; (8)  Any massage or similar business license history of the applicant, including whether such person, in any previous operation in any jurisdiction, has had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefore and any business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation; (9)  All convictions of violations of any laws and the grounds therefore; (10)  The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the city, and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as an exhibit to the application; (11), (12)  [ Reserved. ] (13)  If the applicant is a corporation, in addition to the information required in this section, submit a complete list of the stockholders of the corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations. (Ord. No. 2006-88, § 2, 12-4-06; Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), §§ 4, 5, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 30-955. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), § 6, adopted May 29, 2007, repealed § 30-955, which pertained to reciprocity. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 30-956. - Fees. (a)  Each new and renewal application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall include a nonrefundable investigative fee of $100.00. A license fee of $2,000.00 shall be paid by the establishment applicant prior to issuance of an annual license. (b)  Renewal fees shall be the same as the original license fee. (c)  The regulatory fees in this section are in addition to all other license fees as prescribed in this chapter. (Code 1977, §§ 14-6236, 19-14.028; Ord. No. 1999-10, §§ 1, 2, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), § 7, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 30-957. - Inspection and investigation; issuance procedures; term. (a)  If such application for a license required under this division is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required, and accompanied by the correct investigative fee, an inspection and investigation shall be conducted. If all requirements of all departments concerned, as well as those qualifications specified in this division are met, the license shall be issued by the department of police services. If the department of police recommends denial of the license, the application shall be submitted to the license review board. The license review board shall conduct a hearing at a regularly scheduled meeting and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant the application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (b)  All licenses issued pursuant to this division shall be valid for a period of one year. (Code 1977, § 14-6237; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 17, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-958. - Transferability; change of location; display; inspection of establishment. (a)  Transferability. All licenses issued under this division are nontransferable; however, a change of location of a massage establishment may be permitted pursuant to this division. (b)  Change of location. A change of location of the massage premises shall be approved by the department of police, provided all sections of this Code are complied with and the change of location fee of $50.00 is first paid. (c)  Display. Every person to whom a license shall have been granted under this division shall display the license in a conspicuous place. (d)  Inspections. At least four times each year, an inspection of each massage establishment shall be made for the purpose of determining that the sections of this article are met. Notice may or may not be given of such inspection, and no warrant shall be required. (Code 1977, § 14-6238) 
Sec. 30-959. - Revocation. (a)  The license of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: (1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the license. (2)  The holder is guilty of employing any person who is not a licensed massage technician and allowing or permitting such person to administer massage in the establishment. (3)  The premises in which the massage establishment is located are in violation of any of the federal, state, county or municipal laws designed for the health, protection and safety of the occupants. (4)  The premises are in violation of the city's building code or of this subsection. (5)  The original application or renewal thereof contains materially false information or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein. (6)  The holder or any of the holder's employees or agents has been convicted or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or to any charge of incest, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire or the distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law and in connection with the operation of the massage establishment. (7)  The holder or the holder's employees have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any section of this article. (8)  Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the general public and the customers. (b)  No license issued under this division shall be revoked until after due notice and a hearing shall have been held before the license review board to determine just cause for such revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaints against the holder of such license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be held. (c)  The notice shall be served upon the license holder by delivering the notice personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the license holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the license holder cannot be found and the service of notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner provided in this section, a copy of such notice shall be mailed registered postage, fully prepaid, addressed to the license holder at the license holder's place of business or residence at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. (d)  Any massage establishment operator having the license revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license for 12 months immediately following the revocation. (Code 1977, §§ 14-6242, 14-6243; Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), §§ 8, 9, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 30-960. - Disposal of inventory after revocation or suspension.     If the license of an operator under this division is suspended or revoked for some violation of this article, the mayor shall provide a period of time not to exceed 15 days for the holder of such license to dispose of the inventory. (Code 1977, § 14-6244) 
Secs. 30-961—30-1065. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - PARKING LOTS AND PARKING GARAGES[13] Footnotes: --- (13) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, adopted July 29, 2003, repealed art. XVII, §§ 30-1066, 30-1081—30-1075, 30-1196—30-1207, in their entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Code 1977; as amended. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking generally, § 150-86 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-1066. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Park for-hire means any facility for the parking of motorized vehicles, for which service or facility the operator thereof charges a fee.     Operator means the person who is the owner of and is responsible for the operation of each park-for-hire facility, whether such operator is in fact the title owner of the premises itself.     Shared-use park-for-hire refers to the operation of a park-for-hire facility by an operator on property of which a portion is otherwise required of an establishment for the purpose of parking vehicles during that establishment's business hours.     Primary establishment(s) refers to the business entity or entities whose parking is being shared, during non-business hours, with a commercial parking operator for the purpose of shared-use park-for-hire operations.     Attendant/cashier means a person on duty at any park-for-hire facility employed by or an agent of the operator thereof.     Corporate boundaries of the city means that area enclosed by the city limits as defined in a certain document entitled "Corporate Boundaries of the City of Atlanta," dated January 1, 1973, on file in the office of the municipal clerk.     Environmental barriers means such barricades, chains, walls, gates, wheel stops or other like structures around the perimeter of any park-for-hire facility as may be required to reasonably regulate and control the ingress and egress to and from the facility and to eliminate the encroachment of any vehicles parked on the facility onto or over adjacent properties, including sidewalks, streets, alleys, etc.     Special events includes but is not limited to sporting events, athletic contests, concerts or any other event that generates a large volume of vehicles near the park-for-hire facility at times other than normal business hours.     Ticket/stub means a distinctive piece of paper, plastic or other similar substance, which shall have printed thereon a ticket number and the full name and address of the park-for-hire facility.     Parking facility reservoir means an area located immediately inside the facility entrance and is to be used for the temporary storage of entering vehicles when the arrival rate exceeds the storage rate. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1067. - Scope.     This article shall apply to all park-for-hire facilities operated in the corporate boundaries of the city. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1068. - Compliance required.     Compliance with this article shall be a precondition to any permit issued by the city for the facilities regulated by this article. The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the department of public [works]. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 1, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1069—30-1080. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS; ADMINISTRATIVE RULES 
Sec. 30-1081. - Violations.     It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the operation of a park-for-hire facility, without having first complied with this chapter. Violations of this chapter are punishable with a fine of $1,000.00. Each and every day of a violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable with an additional fine of $50.00 per day. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 2, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1082. - Required; application. (a)  From 1993 to present, before any lot or building may be used for new off-street public parking facilities, before any off-street public parking facility may be expanded, or following a change of the ownership thereof, the owner of the lot or building or the operator of the facility must first obtain from the commissioner of the department of public works a permit for that use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner of a lot following a change of the ownership thereof may apply for a conditional permit, good for one year, to allow such owner to bring the facility into compliance with the requirements herein. (b)  The application form for the permit shall be filed with traffic and transportation and shall contain the following information: (1)  The address and location of the lot or building involved; (2)  The capacity of the proposed facility; (3)  If the proposed parking facility is to be single- or shared-use park-for hire; and (4)  If shared-use park-for-hire is desired, the name, square footage, and business hours of the primary establishment(s); (5)  Certification from the office of buildings that property upon which the proposed park-for-hire facility is to be located is zoned for park-for-hire use, or that it enjoys legal non-conforming status for park-for-hire use. (c)  In addition, two site plans will be attached to the application form filed with traffic and transportation. The site plans will be drawn to an engineer's scale such that the following are easily identified: (1)  The proposed location of entrances and exits to the facility; (2)  The widths of access streets; (3)  The capacity and location of the reservoir space to be used for the receiving and temporary storage of incoming vehicles; (4)  The internal traffic plan; (5)  The proposed parking plan showing the size and location of the parking stalls and the aisles to serve them; (6)  The location, width and general design of ramps or elevators to be used inside of structures; (7)  If applying for a shared-use park-for-hire permit, the location of the stalls to be used during the primary establishment's business hours; and (8)  Any other information required to enable the commissioner of the department of public works to make a fair and complete appraisal of the operation of the proposed parking facility. (9)  Plans for multi-level facilities must also show: (a)  The ramp or elevator design for each level; (b)  The internal traffic plan for each level; and (c)  The parking stall layout for each level; (d)  Copies of either the warranty deed (if the applicant is the title holder) or lease agreement or management contract for the property upon which the proposed park-for-hire facility is to be located, which should contain the current names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, leaseholder and/or property manager (as appropriate) of said property. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 3, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1083. - Fee; required. (a)  The applicant for a permit required by this division shall pay to the city an application fee before such application is submitted to the commissioner of the department of public works. Such application fee shall consist of a fixed charge of $100.00. (b)  There shall be no refund of such application fee if the permit application is rejected by the commissioner of the department of public works or due to circumstances that are not under the control of the city. However, the applicant may resubmit the application within 90 days of rejection by the commissioner of the department of public works without paying an additional application fee. (c)  There shall be a base fee of $100.00 for annual renewal of off-street public parking facility permits on January 1. Applications received after January 1 will be prorated until January 1 of the following calendar year, in addition to: (1)  For parking facilities of up to 100 spaces, a fee of $3.00 per parking spaces or a maximum fee of $300.00. (2)  For parking facilities of between 101 spaces and 200 spaces, a fee of $300.00 plus a fee of $1.50 for all parking spaces that exceed 100 parking spaces, or a maximum fee of $450.00. (3)  For parking facilities of 201 spaces or more, a fee of $550.00. (d)  A park-for-hire permit is valid for one year from the date of issuance. No earlier than 45 days prior to and no later than 30 days past the expiration date, the parking facility operator must contact transportation to request renewal certification of the park-for-hire permit. The office of transportation shall then verify that the operations of the park-for-hire facility have not changed since the issuance of the permit (or since the last renewal). Once this has been determined, the renewal certification is approved. (e)  Failure to contact the office of transportation within said window as set out in subsection (d) immediately above for renewal certification will result in a penalty of $50.00 per day which is added to the renewal fee as calculated in accordance with this section. Any park-for-hire permit not renewed for more than three months past the expiration date shall be considered void, requiring that operations at said park-for-hire facility cease. Operations may not begin again until a new application for a park-for-hire permit is submitted to the office of transportation, and approval is received from the commissioner of public works. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2008-47(08-O-0882), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 4, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1084. - Reapplication after ceasing operation.     Any park-for-hire facility which ceases operation for more than six months shall not subsequently be operated as a park-for-hire facility, except by making a new application for and receiving from the commissioner of the department of public works a permit as required by this division. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 5, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1085. - Time limit on validity of permit.     Any permit for an off-street park-for-hire facility granted by the mayor and council shall become void if the facility has not been placed in operation within 12 months after the approval of a parking lot or within 18 months after the approval of a parking garage. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1086. - Investigation, report on application.     Upon receipt of an application pursuant to section 30-1081, traffic and transportation shall make a thorough and complete investigation and shall report thereon to the next meeting of the committee on transportation on such factors as: (a)  The size of the proposed facility and especially in relation to the vehicular capacity of streets of ingress and egress; (b)  The physical arrangements for ingress and egress; (c)  The reservoir space for incoming and outgoing vehicles; (d)  The effect of any plan for traffic improvement, such as the expressway program or major street plan on the flow or the pattern of traffic adjacent to the affected streets; (e)  If a shared-use park-for-hire permit is desired, the minimum number of parking stalls required of the primary establishment during business hours; and (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Secs. 30-1087—30-1195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATIONAL RULES 
Sec. 30-1196. - Violations.     Any operator violating this division shall be served with a citation, at such person's principal mailing address, of the violation. The person shall have ten days from the date of such notice to remedy the violation described. If the violation has not been corrected on or before the 10th day after the date of issuance of the violation notice, the person shall be deemed guilty of an offense. A conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 6, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1197. - Barriers; tickets/stubs.     All park-for-hire facilities within the corporate boundaries of the city shall provide and maintain the following: (a)  Automobile barriers; and (b)  A ticket/stub to be issued upon the parking of any vehicle in a facility if the attendant/cashier parks the vehicle and retains the key. This section shall not preclude the issuance of a monthly permit in lieu of a ticket. (c)  Parking lot operators will be required to digitally time date and stamp pictures of the vehicle in the parking space and the non-payment in the meter box, before booting or towing a vehicle which is said to be in violation on any off street parking meter. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2005-93, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 30-1198. - Attendant/cashier.     This division shall not require that a park-for-hire facility employ an attendant/cashier; however, at any facility where such is provided, the sections of this division pertaining thereto shall apply. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1199. - Uniforms of attendants/cashiers.     All attendants/cashiers at park-for-hire facilities which provide attendants/cashiers must be dressed if a uniform designated by the operator which readily identifies such attendants/cashiers as employees of the park-for-hire facility. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1200. - Lighting.     Reasonable lighting shall be required for each park-for-hire facility during the hours that the facility is open for business. Subsection (2) of this section shall only be required at new facilities. Where applicable, public street lighting may be utilized to either partially or totally fulfill the following requirements; however, where such street lighting is removed it shall be the responsibility of the parking facility to independently provide these required levels of illumination. (a)  Open parking facilities. For open-area park-for-hire facilities, three levels of activity shall be established as high, medium and low. The levels shall reflect both traffic density and intensity and shall include but are not limited to the following: (1)  High activity. (a)  Major league athletic events. (b)  Major cultural or civic events. (c)  Major regional shopping centers. (2)  Medium activity. (a)  Fast food facilities. (b)  Area shopping centers. (c)  Hospital parking areas. (d)  Transportation parking (airports and other similar parking areas). (e)  Cultural, civic or recreational events. (f)  Residential complex parking. (3)  Low activity. (a)  Local merchant parking. (b)  Industrial employee parking. (c)  Educational facility parking. The minimum safety illuminance value for areas used by the public in open park-for-hire facilities for such levels of activity shall be as follows: Level of Activity Lux Footcandles Low Activity 2 0.2 Medium Activity 6 0.6 High Activity 10 0.9  (b)  Open and covered parking facilities with more than one level. Minimum Illumination Area Intensity (in Footcandles) Stairways and exits 10 Interior driving aisles center line 5 Interior parking areas at barrier railings 0.5 Roof parking areas 0.5  (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1201. - Park-for-hire notice signs; required. (a)  Upon the issuance of a park-for-hire permit, the applicant shall be required to post a notice sign at the facility, setting forth the following: (1)  The telephone number of the principal office of the operator of the facility; (2)  The business hours of operation for the facility (i.e., time of opening and closing); (3)  Park-for-hire parking lot permit number: (4)  Business license number; (5)  The name of the operator; (6)  The physical street address of the lot; and (7)  The number of parking spaces permitted. (b)  Notice signs for shared-use park-for-hire facilities will display both the number of stalls available both during the primary establishment's business hours and during its off-hours.     The notice sign shall be posted at the main entrance to the lot in such a manner so that it is easily viewable from the driver's seat of an entering vehicle. The cost to produce and post such notice sign shall be borne by the operator of the facility. (c)  Changes to information contained on the notice sign (e.g. phone number or hours of operation) will necessitate the fabrication of a new notice sign that reflects these changes. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 7, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1202. - Posting of fee structure; required.     A sign setting forth the rates for any and all fees which shall be required of any parking patron for the use of the park-for-hire facility. This sign shall be posted at the main entrance to the lot in such a manner so that it is easily viewable from the driver's seat of an entering vehicle. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1203. - Responsibilities during business hours.     A park-for-hire facility shall be operated and fees chargeable only during business hours as posted on its notices required under section 30-1202 or during the hours of operation for special events. At facilities where an attendant/cashier is provided, the operator shall have no responsibility to provide an attendant/cashier during non-business hours. 
Sec. 30-1204. - Monthly parking facilities.     In park-for-hire facilities that provide only monthly parking, the sections of this division pertaining to issuance of a ticket/stub shall not be required. However, all other sections of this division shall be required. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1205. - Parking facility reservoirs; required. (a)  In facilities where attendants, ticket dispensers or other devices are used to regulate or control entering vehicles, the reservoir shall be located between the street right-of-way and the point of control. Each vehicle space in the reservoir shall be 22 feet long and ten feet wide and, in addition, sufficient space shall be provided for turning and maneuvering. (b)  All new off-street parking facilities, with the exception of residential and apartment parking facilities of less than 50 parking spaces, shall provide, as a minimum, the number of vehicle spaces in the inbound reservoir as required by this section. (c)  In parking facilities of the attendant-parking type, the number of vehicle spaces in the inbound reservoir shall be one percent of the total parking capacity of the facility or at least two spaces, whichever is greater. Where multiple inbound lanes are used, each lane shall provide two or more vehicle spaces in the reservoir. (d)  In parking facilities of the self-parking type, the number of inbound reservoir spaces shall be determined in the following manner: (1)  Facilities with capacities of 300 parking spaces or less shall provide two inbound reservoir spaces. (2)  Facilities with capacities exceeding 300 parking spaces shall provide two parking spaces plus one additional inbound reservoir space for each additional 100 parking spaces or fraction thereof. (3)  Where multiple inbound lanes are used, each lane shall provide two or more vehicle spaces in the reservoir. (Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1206—30-1230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICES AND PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS[14] Footnotes: --- (14) --- Cross reference— Street patrols, § 30-1341 et seq.; burglar or robbery alarm systems, § 70-26 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 98. State Law reference— Private detectives and security agencies, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-1 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-1231. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Private detective business means engaging in the business of or accepting employment to obtain or furnish information with reference to: (1)  Crime or wrongs done or threatened against the United States or any state or territory thereof; (2)  The identity, habits, conduct, business, occupation, honesty, integrity, credibility, knowledge, trustworthiness, efficiency, loyalty, activity, movement, whereabouts, affiliations, associations, transactions, acts, reputation or character of any person; (3)  The location, disposition or recovery of lost or stolen property; (4)  The cause of or responsibility for fines, libels, losses, accidents, damage or injury to persons or property; or (5)  The securing of evidence to be used before any court, board, office or investigating committee. The term "private detective business" includes persons employed exclusively and regularly by only one employer in connection with the affairs of such employer only and where there exists an employer-employee relationship, unless the employer is in the detective business.     Private security business means engaging in the business or accepting employment as a private patrol, watchperson or guard service for consideration on a private contractual basis and not as an employee. The term "private security business" includes persons employed exclusively and regularly by only one employer in connection with the affairs of such employer only and where there exists an employer-employee relationship, unless the employer is in the private security business. (Code 1977, § 14-6494) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-1232. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to provide maximum requirements for private security business and employees working as private security agents in the city. (Code 1977, § 14-6493) 
Sec. 30-1233. - Carrying weapons.     This article does not authorize the carrying of weapons by the persons having a permit under this article. (Code 1977, § 14-6497) 
Sec. 30-1234. - Uniform; vehicles.     It shall be unlawful for any person having a permit under this article to wear uniforms and to use vehicular markings which are confusingly similar to the uniform and vehicular markings of the department of police. (Code 1977, § 14-6499) 
Secs. 30-1235—30-1245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
Sec. 30-1246. - Registration; issuance. (a)  Any person licensed by the state in the private detective business or private security business and any person licensed by the state who is employed by a person to do private security work on the premises and in connection with the affairs of such employer only shall be entitled to register with the city and shall be issued a private security permit or private detective permit, which shall be effective until June 30, 1981, or until the state resumes regulatory authority. (b)  Registration information shall be submitted on forms provided by the department of police. There is a registration fee of $25.00 for any company and a fee of $5.00 for each employee. (Code 1977, § 14-6495) State Law reference— State license as prerequisite, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-14.1. 
Sec. 30-1247. - Application; issuance. (a)  Any person desiring to carry on a detective business or private security business in this city shall make a verified application in writing to the police chief. (b)  The police chief may grant a permit to any person meeting the following qualifications: (1)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age. (2)  The applicant is a citizen of the United States or, if an alien, the applicant must have a U.S. Immigration Service work permit. (3)  The applicant has not been convicted of a felony or other violation showing a pattern of disregard for the law. (c)  The application fee is $25.00 for any company or individual acting independently and a company shall be required to pay $5.00 for each employee. (Code 1977, §§ 14-6497, 19-14.031) 
Sec. 30-1248. - Suspension or revocation.     The police chief may, after hearing, suspend or permanently revoke a permit or refuse to renew a permit issued under this division if it is determined that the holder of such permit or registration has committed an act which is a violation of this article or the provisions of any federal or state law which reasonably relates to the security industry. (Code 1977, § 14-6498) 
Secs. 30-1249—30-1270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - TATTOO ARTISTS AND OPERATORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-1271. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in coloring matter so as to form indelible marks or figures or by the production of scars; provided, however, the term "tattoo" shall not mean a tattoo placed upon the skin by a physician for medical identification purposes.     Tattoo artist means any person who actually performs the work of tattooing.     Tattoo establishment means any room or place where tattooing is practiced or where the business of tattooing is conducted or any part thereof.     Tattoo operator means any person who controls, operates, conducts or manages any tattoo establishment, whether actually performing the work of tattooing or not. (Code 1977, § 14-6421) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-1272. - Tattooing certain persons prohibited.     No tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall tattoo any person who is under 18 years of age, any person who is under either the influence of alcohol, drugs or other stimulants or depressants or any person of unsound mind. (Code 1977, § 14-6425) 
Secs. 30-1273—30-1285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
Sec. 30-1286. - Required.     No person shall operate a tattoo establishment or engage in the practice or business of tattooing as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist unless the person has first secured a permit from the city. (Code 1977, § 14-6422) 
Sec. 30-1287. - Application; minimum age; fingerprinting, photographing, medical certificate required. (a)  Any person desiring to operate a tattoo establishment or desiring to operate as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall make application for a permit to the department of police on forms supplied by the department. (b)  The minimum age of each applicant shall be 18 years of age. (c)  Fingerprints of all applicants shall be taken by the department of police. (d)  An applicant for a permit shall also furnish to the department of police two photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size 2½ inches by 2¾ inches. (e)  An applicant for a permit shall present to the department of police a medical certificate from a medical doctor certifying that the person is sound physically and mentally, has good eyesight and is not infected with a disease which can be communicated through openings in the human skin. (Code 1977, § 14-6429) 
Sec. 30-1288. - Approval of health authorities required.     A condition precedent to the issuance of a permit by the city under this division shall be satisfactory proof that the tattoo establishment has secured from the appropriate health authorities of either Fulton County or DeKalb County a permit or license to operate the establishment. (Code 1977, § 14-6423) 
Sec. 30-1289. - Location restricted.     No permit shall issue for the operation of a tattoo establishment or to any person engaged as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist in any area which is zoned for residential use by the city's zoning ordinance. (Code 1977, § 14-6427) 
Sec. 30-1290. - Contents, transferability.     Every permit granted under this division shall be issued in the name of the individual person applying therefor, shall contain the location of the tattoo establishment where the applicant shall operate and shall not be transferable. (Code 1977, § 14-6424) 
Sec. 30-1291. - Effect.     The permits issued under this division shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any business license issued by the city. (Code 1977, § 14-6428) 
Sec. 30-1292. - Revocation.     Any person who shall conduct a tattoo establishment or engage in the business as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist without first securing a permit therefor or who shall knowingly violate any of the sections of this article shall subject the permit to revocation upon appropriate notice of hearing. Additionally, revocation of a license or permit procured by the appropriate health department of either Fulton County or DeKalb County shall, upon notice of hearing, constitute grounds for revocation of the permit issued by the city. An artist's or operator's permit shall be subject to revocation upon proof that the holder of the permit has become infected with a disease which can be communicated through openings in the human skin. (Code 1977, § 14-6426) 
Secs. 30-1293—30-1315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - SIDEWALK PHOTOGRAPHERS[15] Footnotes: --- (15) --- Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 138. 
Sec. 30-1316. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-50(15-O-1456), § 1, approved October 28, 2015, repealed § 30-1316, which pertained to prohibited acts. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 30-1317—30-1340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - STREET PATROLS[16] Footnotes: --- (16) --- Cross reference— Private security services and private investigators, § 30-1231 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 98. State Law reference— Private security agencies, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-1 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-1341. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Street patrol business means engaging in the business as a private street patrol, for consideration on a private contractual basis and not as an employee. Street patrol business shall not include persons employed exclusively and regularly by only one employer in connection with the affairs of such employer only and where there exists an employer-employee relationship unless the employer is in the street patrol business. (Code 1977, § 14-6481) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-1342. - Violations.     Violation of any of the sections of this article by the holder of a permit issued under this article shall subject the holder of such permit to suspension or revocation of such permit. (Code 1977, § 14-6487) 
Secs. 30-1343—30-1355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
Sec. 30-1356. - Required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the street patrol business within the city unless a permit is obtained from the city. (Code 1977, § 14-6482) 
Sec. 30-1357. - Application. (a)  Required. All private street patrols and agencies within the city shall apply annually to the mayor or the mayor's designee for a permit to follow such business or vocation. (b)  Character of applicant. All private street patrols or street patrol agencies and their employees shall be of good moral and professional character. (c)  Photograph of applicant. Such private street patrol agents shall attach to each such application a photograph of the private street patrol agent making such application. If application is made by a firm, the photograph of each member of the firm shall be attached thereto. (d)  Filing. It shall be unlawful for any private street patrol or street patrol agency within the limits of the city to operate without filing annually the application and attaching the photograph required in this section and without having such application granted or approved, as provided in this division. The application and the photographs shall be filed in the department of police with a filing fee of $10.00. (Code 1977, §§ 14-6483, 19-14.030) 
Sec. 30-1358. - False information.     Any material omission, untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for a permit under this division shall be cause for the denial of the permit, and if any permit has been granted under these circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of the permit. (Code 1977, § 14-6488) 
Sec. 30-1359. - Certificate of approval of character of patrol persons.     No private street patrol agency having a permit issued by the city shall send out or employ any person or agent unless the character and proficiency of such person or agent has been approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee and a certificate to that effect lodged with the street patrol agency. (Code 1977, § 14-6484) 
Sec. 30-1360. - Bond required.     All persons approved under authority of this article to operate a street patrol agency or follow the occupation of street patrol agent shall give a bond in the sum of $5,000.00, payable to the city, for the use of any person injured or damaged because of any illegal act of such agency or agent or of a person employed as street patrol agent by such licensed agent or of any employee in and about such business. (Code 1977, § 14-6485) 
Sec. 30-1361. - Suspension or revocation. (a)  No permit issued by the city to any person under this division shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, and after a hearing and upon a prior five-day written notice to the holder of such permit of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. (b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such permit shall consist of the violation of any laws or sections of this Code or other ordinances regulating such businesses or for the violation of any sections of this Code or other city ordinances other than the sections of this Code pertaining to traffic. (c)  The license review board shall conduct the hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, impose a fine against, or revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew any existing permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (d)  The police chief is delegated the authority to suspend any such permit for due cause or in any emergency situation, and the suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next regular or called meeting of the license review board. (Code 1977, § 14-6486; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 18, 11-6-08) 
Secs. 30-1362—30-1380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - TELEPHONE SALES CAMPAIGNS[17] Footnotes: --- (17) --- Cross reference— Door to door sales, § 30-596 et seq.; charitable solicitations, ch. 42. 
Sec. 30-1381. - Permit required. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, in such person's own name or in the name or for the benefit of any other person or organization, to conduct any sales campaign or sales promotion of any nature whatsoever by use of the telephone without first obtaining a permit from the mayor after recommendation of the license review board made at a regularly scheduled meeting of the license review board. (b)  Such permit shall be valid for one year and may be renewed by the police chief or the chief's designee. If the police chief, upon application, fails to renew the permit, the applicant shall be authorized to appeal the denial of the permit to the license review board within 20 days of the permit holder's receipt of written notice from the police chief. (c)  The license review board shall conduct the hearing referenced in subsections (a) and (b) above at a regularly scheduled meeting of the license review board and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new permit, or grant the renewal of an expired permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (Code 1977, § 14-6453; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 19, 11-6-08) 
Secs. 30-1382—30-1399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - VENDING IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY (PUBLIC PROPERTY VENDING)[18] Footnotes: --- (18) --- Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, approved March 3, 2014, provides, "That Chapter 2, Article II, Division 1, Section 2-45 is waived to the extent that it is applicable to this ordinance." 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-1400. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Assistant vendor means a person who assists a Vendor at the Vendor's assigned vending site.     Blind person means a person whose vision, with correcting glasses, is so defective as to prevent the performance of activities for which eyesight is essential. See O.C.G.A. § 49-4-51(b).     Designated food truck area means a geographic area designated in this article wherein permitted food truck vendors may vend either from available metered parking spaces in accordance with this article and in accordance with Division 3 of Chapter 150 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances; or from spaces temporarily delineated, following the issuance of a weekly food truck vending pass pursuant to this article.     Disabled veteran means a resident of the state who may be either a war veteran or veteran of peace-time service as set forth below and such person must obtain a certificate of exemption issued by the state commissioner of veterans' service. (1)  A war veteran must furnish satisfactory proof that the veteran has a physical handicap which is disabling to the extent of ten percent or more; that the veteran's service in the armed forces of the United States was terminated under conditions other than dishonorable; and that the veteran's service or some part thereof was rendered during a war period, as defined by an act of the Congress of the United States, approved March 20, 1933, entitled, "An Act to Maintain the Credit of the United States," and commonly known as PL 2, 73rd Congress; or that some part of the veteran's service was rendered on or after December 7, 1941 and before December 31, 1946; or that some part of the veteran's service was rendered on or after June 27, 1950 and before January 31, 1955; or that some part of the veteran's service was rendered on or after August 5, 1946, and before May 8, 1975. Proof of such ten percent disability shall be established upon the written certificate of two physicians as to such disability or by letter or other written evidence from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs stating the degree of disability or by written evidence from the branch of the armed forces of the United States in which such veteran served. (2)  A veteran of peacetime service in the United States armed forces must furnish proof that the veteran has a physical disability to the extent of 25 percent or more incurred in the line of duty during the period of such service by a letter or other evidence from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs stating the degree of disability or by written evidence, from the branch of armed forces of the United States in which such veteran served, that the veteran's service in the armed forces of the United States was terminated under conditions other than dishonorable. (3)  That disabled veterans and blind persons shall only have to show proof of their disability upon their initial application, as opposed to annually. If the current language of O.C.G.A. § 43-12-2 is amended, then this definition of disabled veteran shall be controlled by O.C.G.A. § 43-12-2, as amended.     Food truck means any motor vehicle used for vending of food items to the public from designated food truck areas.     Food vending cart means a vending cart at which prepared food, prepared non-alcoholic beverages, pre-packaged food and non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages may be offered for sale.     Items permissible for sale means items which may be offered for sale by and are limited to tourist/traveler convenience items; third party published (non-adult) materials; non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages; pre-packaged food; prepared food; prepared non-alcoholic beverages; spirit merchandise; and cut single stem or bunched flowers. Items permissible for sale shall not include any tobacco products.     Kiosk means a valid vendor location which is a fixed structure owned by the city, installed in the city's right-of-way. The city shall maintain the right to advertise in a kiosk and the city shall manage the maintenance of a kiosk, such maintenance to be covered by annual maintenance fees. The sale of prepared food and/or prepared non-alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted from a kiosk.     Licenses and permits unit means that unit of the Atlanta Police Department which enforces the ordinances applicable to public property vending or any other unit or division of the Atlanta Police Department assigned by the chief of police to undertake the duties of the license and permits unit.     Lottery-type selection process means the process by which persons shall be selected to submit an application for a vending cart or kiosk valid vendor location. There shall be no consideration required for participation in the lottery-type selection process in which persons wishing to submit applications for the valid vendor locations shall be required to place their names in a separate drawing for each valid vendor locations. No individual prospective vendor may receive the ability to apply for more than ten percent of the available valid vendor locations through the lottery-type selection process at one time. The lottery-type selection process shall take place at which time the city determines newly created or open vending cart or kiosk valid vendor locations shall be entered/re-entered therein.     Moral turpitude means the act or behavior of baseness, vileness or the depravity in private and social duties which people owe to their fellow people, or to society in general, contrary to accepted and customary rule of right and duty between person and person; act or behavior that gravely violates moral sentiment or accepted moral standards of community and is a morally suitable quality held to be present in some criminal offenses as distinguished from others.     Non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages means beverages sealed in plastic or aluminum single serving containers excluding all beverages in glass containers, and excluding all alcoholic beverages as defined in section 10-1, including but not limited to malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits.     Office of revenue means the office of the City of Atlanta Department of Finance which issues permits for public property vending or any other unit or office of the department of finance assigned by the chief financial officer to undertake the duties of the office of revenue.     Operating area means: (1)  The area in which a vendor may operate from a vending cart and which may not exceed 28 square feet of sidewalk including the area of the vending cart, and, when externally located, the operator and trash receptacle; (2)  The parameters of the kiosk; (3)  The parameters of the food truck.     Pre-packaged food means single serving sealed packaged foods including but not limited to candy, popsicles, chips/bagged snacks which do not require any heating or powered refrigeration, and the service of which does not require authorization by the Fulton or DeKalb County Departments of Health.     Prepared non-alcoholic beverages means beverages prepared on site and which are not served in glass containers, and excluding all alcoholic beverages as defined in section 10-1, including but not limited to malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits.     Prepared food means food prepared on site, the sale of which requires authorization by the Fulton of DeKalb County Departments of Health.     Public property and public space both mean for the purpose of this article any property owned by the City of Atlanta within street rights-of-way, including any roadways and sidewalks, but excluding city-owned parks.     Public property vending means vending activity as permitted on publicly owned property under the jurisdiction of the City of Atlanta and in specifically designated city-owned parks. Other than where specifically designated, vending shall only be permitted in city-owned parks where such activity is associated with a special event and/or subject to regulation under a more specific permit.     Spirit merchandise means licensed branded merchandise or generic "Atlanta" branded merchandise. Merchandise shall be limited to shirts, hats, scarves and gloves.     Retail vending cart means a vending cart at which items permissive for sale other than prepared food and prepared non-alcoholic beverages may be offered for sale.     Third party published (non-adult) materials means periodicals, books, newspapers, and maps which have been published by a third-party and are not adult material as defined in section 16-29.001.     Tourist/traveler convenience items means, weather-related supplies such as umbrellas, scarves, hats, gloves and ponchos); convenience toiletries; over-the-counter medicines; cell phone accessories; and third-party produced souvenirs that celebrate Atlanta landmarks, institutions, or other Atlanta icons.     Valid vendor location means an area which is authorized in this article, in which vending can take place. Vending at a valid vendor location shall only be permitted from kiosks installed in the city's right-of-way, vending carts that meet the standards set forth in this article, or from food trucks from metered parking spaces in designated food truck areas. Other than kiosks or approved vending carts or food trucks, vending will be prohibited from tables or semi-permanent or permanent structures.     Valid vendor permit means a permit issued by the City of Atlanta. Such permit shall consist of a photo identification card which contains the vendor's name, photograph, vending type and classification, authorized valid vendor location(s) and time period for which such permit is valid.     Vending cart means a cart designated either as a food vending cart or a retail vending cart which meets the following design requirements: (1)  Length of the cart may not exceed seven feet and width may not exceed four feet height-excluding canopies, umbrellas, or transparent enclosures-may not exceed five feet; (2)  Umbrellas or canopies shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet and a maximum height of nine feet six inches above the sidewalk; (3)  Umbrellas or canopies may not exceed forty-eight square feet (eight feet x six feet); (4)  All carts must be mobile, and able to roll on wheels; (5)  The design, materials, and colors are to be of natural wood or metal products and considerate of the immediate surroundings of the proposed location; (6)  Materials must be in working order, and may not include peeling paint, visible defects or areas requiring maintenance; (7)  The wheels located under the car are preferred, however projecting wheels must have fenders; and (8)  Hitches attached to the cart must be removable and detached when in operation. (9)  If used, propane tanks must be enclosed.     Vendor means any person who has been issued a valid vendor permit.     Weekly food truck vending pass means the waterproof placard issued to food truck vendors wishing vend in any non-metered designated food truck area during any particular week. Weekly food truck vending passes shall be issued by the city to food truck vendors on a first come, first served basis and shall expire at 12:00 a.m. of the Saturday of the week of issuance. Weekly food truck vending passes shall be no smaller than 8.5 × 11 inches, and shall clearly display: (1)  The designated food truck area wherein they are operable; and (2)  The dates during which they are operable. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 1, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-18(14-O-1203), § 1, 5-28-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-04(16-O-1001), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 30-1401. - Purpose, intent and applicability. (a)  Vending on public property in the city, as defined in this article, shall be subject to regulation as set forth in this article, including the requirement of regulatory licenses and permits. Vending in the public right-of-way without a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be unlawful and subject to punishment as set forth in this section. (b)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as follows: (1)  First conviction. A fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. Second conviction. A fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. Third conviction. A fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. Fourth conviction. Any person convicted of four or more violations of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. (c)  It is the intent of council in enacting this article to: (1)  Serve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public. (2)  Establish a uniform set of rules and regulations which are fair and equitable. (3)  Provide economic development opportunities for small entrepreneurs in the city. (4)  Provide a variety of goods and services for sale. (5)  Promote stable vendors who will enrich the city's ambiance and be assets to public security. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1402. - Vending business required to remit sales taxes and keep records. (a)  Every vendor shall file Georgia Department of Revenue (GDOR) St-3 Forms and remit monthly sale tax revenues to GDOR. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the revocation of any permit in accordance with the provisions of Division 2 of this article. (b)  Prospective vendors, by filing an application, agree to produce documents and records which may be considered pertinent to the ascertainment of facts relative to the issuance and maintenance of the permit, including but not limited to the following: (1)  The prospective vendor's bank or other financial institution records, including those which are personal or from any business in which the vendor has any interest, such as savings and checking account records, bank statements, ledgers, deposit tickets, withdrawal slips, canceled checks, check stubs, bank drafts, cashier's checks, certificates of deposit, money market accounts, pass books and applications for each account; (2)  Personal state and federal income tax statements for the past five years; and (3)  Records of sales and receipts for purchases and expenses from any business in which a vendor has any interest. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1403. - Vending operational rules. (a)  Hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. (b)  Amplified sound or sound equipment must comply with the City of Atlanta Noise Ordinance. (c)  Any and all signage must comply with the City of Atlanta Sign Ordinance. (d)  Vendors may offer items permissible for sale only. (e)  All vendors shall display their valid vending permits and any required copies of licensing agreements at the valid vendor location. (f)  All vendors must maintain an auditable point-of-sale system to track and report on sales revenue and appropriate taxation in accordance with the requirements of section 30-1402. (g)  Vending operations may not obstruct vehicular traffic flow except for up to 15 minutes to load and unload kiosks and/or vending carts and merchandise. (h)  Vending operations, including but not limited to the display of merchandise and the provision of tables and/or chairs, may not exceed the approved operating area. (i)  Vending carts and/or food trucks shall not be left unattended or stored at any time in the operating area when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. (j)  The sale of prepared food and/or prepared non-alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted from a kiosk. (k)  The sale of branded items permissible for sale a vendor shall not be permitted absent a valid licensing agreement authorizing the vendor to engage in such sales a copy of which must be maintained at the valid vendor location. (l)  In designated food truck areas containing metered parking spaces, food trucks may only be open to and may only serve customers from the side of the truck facing the sidewalk, and are prohibited from operating with their trucks open to the roadway. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 2, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-04(16-O-1001), § 2, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 30-1404. - Littering.     All vendors engaged in the sale of pre-packaged food, non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages, prepared food, and/or prepared non-alcoholic beverages shall affix to their vending cart, or motor vehicle, or shall locate directly outside the kiosk food truck, or motor vehicle a receptacle for trash, which shall be maintained and emptied regularly and which shall be marked as being for trash. Vendors engaged in the sale of the items permissible for sale listed in this section are responsible for the removal of trash within a 25-foot radius surrounding the vending cart, kiosk or food truck. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 3, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-56(14-O-1591), § 1, 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1405. - Aesthetic standards.     Vending is permitted from kiosks, vending carts, food trucks, and motor vehicles in accordance with Section 30-1436 only. Vending carts must comply with the following aesthetic standards: (a)  Length of the cart may not exceed seven feet and width may not exceed four feet height-excluding canopies, umbrellas, or transparent enclosures-may not exceed five feet; (b)  Umbrellas or canopies shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet and a maximum height of nine feet six inches above the sidewalk; (c)  Umbrellas or canopies may not exceed 48 square feet (eight feet × six feet); (d)  All carts must be mobile, and able to roll on wheels; (e)  The design, materials, and colors are to be of natural wood or metal products and considerate of the immediate surroundings of the proposed location; (f)  Materials must be in working order, and may not include peeling paint, visible defects or areas requiring maintenance; (g)  The wheels located under the car are preferred, however projecting wheels must have fenders; (h)  Hitches attached to the cart must be removable and detached when in operation; and (i)  If used, propane tanks must be enclosed. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 4, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-56(14-O-1591), § 2, 12-10-14 ) 
Secs. 30-1406—30-1425. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND LICENSES 
Sec. 30-1426. - Vendor permit and business license required. (a)  No public property vending shall occur without a permit issued pursuant to this article, except that no permit shall be required for persons selling newspapers at-large other than from a fixed location on public property. (b)  Except for vendors selling ice cream or other pre-packaged food and/or non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages out of motor vehicles as prescribed in Section 30-1436, public property vending shall be permitted only on the location or designated food truck area stated on the permit. This permit requirement is in addition to any general business license required or other special permission requirement. (c)  No person shall engage in the business or trade of vending without first obtaining a business license. Disabled veterans and blind persons, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, are exempt from payment of business license fees, but must obtain such licenses. (d)  All valid vendor permits are nontransferable, and must be displayed in clear view, together with the vending permit photo identification card, at the permitted location or designated food truck area at all times when the vendor or assistant vendor is present. (e)  All valid vendor permits shall indicate if the permit authorizes the sale of licensed branded merchandise. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 5, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-56(14-O-1591), § 3, 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1427. - Lottery-type selection process. (a)  Persons permitted by the City of Atlanta to vend in kiosks during the calendar year of 2012 may submit applications for permits to vend in accordance with this article at the kiosk locations at which they had been permitted to vend in 2012. (b)  Any kiosk locations for which applications have not been submitted by persons described in subsection (a) of this section within 30 days of the approval of this ordinance shall be included in the lottery-type selection process. No fewer than ten percent of the available kiosk locations shall be reserved for disabled veterans and/or blind persons as described in section 30-1435. (c)  No earlier than 31 days following the approval of this ordinance, the office of revenue shall administer a lottery-type selection process by which persons shall be selected to submit an application for a kiosk or vending cart valid vendor location. (d)  There shall be no consideration required for participation in the lottery-type selection process. (e)  Persons wishing to submit applications for each kiosk or vending cart valid vendor location shall be required to place their names in a separate drawing for each kiosk or vending cart valid vendor location. (f)  No individual prospective vendor may receive the ability to apply for more than ten percent of the kiosk or vending cart valid vendor locations available in the lottery-type selection process. (g)  The lottery-type selection process shall take place at which time the city has determined there are newly created or open kiosk or vending cart valid vendor locations which shall be entered/re-entered therein. Persons wishing to submit application for any newly created or open kiosk or vending cart valid vendor locations shall be required to place their names in a separate drawing therefor. Vendors wishing to continue vending from a kiosk or vending cart valid vendor location at the time of the lottery-type selection process shall not be required to participate therein and shall instead be permitted to renew their permits to vend from the valid vendor location pursuant to section 30-1429. (h)  Designated food truck areas shall be open to food truck vendors on a first come first served basis subject either to the parking restrictions contained in this article and Chapter 150, Article IV, Division 3; or to the issuance of a weekly food truck vending pass pursuant to this article, and shall not be entered into the lottery-type selection process. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 6, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-04(16-O-1001), § 3, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 30-1428. - Application. (a)  Except for persons who may submit applications for kiosk locations pursuant to section 30-1427(a), following selection by the lottery-type selection process, an application shall be required by all persons seeking issuance of a kiosk or vending cart valid vendor permit. Applicants for food truck valid vendor permits shall not participate in the lottery-type selection process. Each applicant must apply in person and complete an application form. Application forms may be obtained from and filed with the office of revenue. (b)  Permit fees and applicable maintenance fees are due and payable by money order, certified check or cashier's check if and when the application is approved by the office of revenue. (c)  The application shall, at a minimum, consist of the following data: (1)  Each applicant shall submit detailed data as follows: a.  Applicant's name and current address. b.  Applicant's previous addresses within the last five years. c.  Social security number. d.  Valid vending location designated pursuant to section 30-1427. e.  A dimensional drawing that clearly shows the footprint and placement of the cart and the operating area. f.  The times during which the vendor estimates they will vend on the proposed property. g.  GDOR retail identification tax number. h.  State issued picture identification. i.  City business license. j.  A general description of the items permissible for sale to be sold or offered for sale. k.  A valid licensing agreement authorizing the vendor to engage in sales of licensed branded merchandise if applicable. (2)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the office of revenue within 30 days from the date of request. Failure to furnish such information within 30 days shall automatically dismiss, with prejudice, the application. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 7, 3-26-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1429. - Term and renewal of permits. (a)  A valid vendor permit for a valid vendor location will be issued for a one-year period. When the one-year permit expires, a vendor may apply for a renewal permit which allows the vendor to vend for another one-year period at the same location. All valid vendor permits are required to be renewed annually on or before March 1. All annual permit fees and applicable annual maintenance fees are due and payable at the time of renewal. (b)  No applicant may receive the ability to apply for more than ten percent of the valid vendor locations available through the lottery-type selection process. (c)  Vendors may present to the office of revenue an application for a renewal permit. Upon a review and approval of the renewal application by the appropriate agencies, satisfaction of all other license and permit requirements, and upon payment of the appropriate fees as indicated in section 30-1430, the vendor shall be furnished with a renewal permit. (d)  Each applicant for a renewal application shall submit an application which shall at a minimum consist of the data required for the issuance of an initial permit as set forth in section 30-1428. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 8, 3-26-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1430. - Annual fees. (a)  Annual permit fees and applicable annual maintenance fees are due and payable upon approval of the application. (b)  The annual permit fee for all valid vendor permits shall be $75.00. (c)  The annual maintenance fee for a kiosk valid vendor location shall be $2,500.00. In the year when the applicant for a valid vendor permit submits their initial application, the annual maintenance fee shall be prorated from the date of the approval of the application. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 9, 3-26-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1431. - Location. (a)  Valid vendor locations are designated by the city as follows: (1)  Phase 1: a.  19 Kiosks. b.  13 Downtown vending cart locations: i.  Lee Street: Four retail vending cart locations on the east side of Lee Street south of Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard; ii.  Washington Street: One retail vending cart location on the southwest side of Washington Street and Mitchell Street; iii.  Washington Street: One retail vending cart location on the west side of Washington Street between Mitchell Street and Trinity Avenue; iv.  Peachtree Street: One retail vending cart location on the east side of Peachtree Street between Martin Luther King Jr. Drive and Mitchell Street; v.  Peachtree Street: One retail vending cart location on the west side of Peachtree Street between Martin Luther King Jr. Drive and Alabama Street; vi.  Peachtree Street: One food vending cart location on the east side of Peachtree Street between Auburn Avenue and Edgewood Avenue; vii.  Peachtree Street: One food vending cart location on Peachtree Street between Harris Street and Andrew Young International Boulevard; viii.  Broad Street: One retail vending cart location on Broad Street SW between Martin Luther King Jr. Drive and Trinity Avenue; ix.  Baker Street: One food vending cart location on the north side of Baker Street NW between Centennial Olympic Park Drive NW and Luckie Street NW; x.  West Peachtree Street: One food vending cart location on the southwest corner of West Peachtree and Pine Street NE. c.  Government walk designated food truck area: i.  Central Avenue: Four metered parking spaces (two food trucks) on the west side of Central Avenue between Trinity Ave and Mitchell Street. ii.  Mitchell Street: Six metered parking spaces (three food trucks) on the south side of Mitchell Street between Central Avenue and Washington Street. iii.  Mitchell Street: Six metered parking spaces (three food trucks) on the north side of Mitchell Street between Central Avenue and Washington Street. iv.  Mitchell Street: Four metered parking spaces (two food trucks) on the south side of Mitchell Street between Pryor Street and Central Avenue. v.  Martin Luther King Jr. Drive: Four metered parking spaces (two food trucks) on the south side of Martin Luther King Jr. Drive between Washington Street and Central Avenue. vi.  Pryor Street: Six metered parking spaces (three Food Trucks) on the west side of Pryor Street between Martin Luther King Jr. Drive and Mitchell Street. Food trucks utilizing these spaces shall be subject to the posted rush hour parking restrictions. vii.  Pryor Street: Four metered parking spaces (two food trucks) on the east side of Pryor Street between Mitchell Street and Trinity Avenue. viii.  Trinity Avenue: Two metered parking spaces (one food truck) on the north side of Trinity Avenue between Central Avenue and Washington Street. Any food truck utilizing this space shall be subject to the posted rush hour parking restrictions. (2)  Phase 2: a.  12 Downtown vending cart locations: i.  Wall Street SW: One food vending cart or retail vending cart location at the southeast corner of Wall Street SW at Peachtree Street NW; ii.  Broad Street NW: One retail vending cart location on the west side of Broad Street NW, near the southwest corner with Walton Street NW; iii.  Walton Street NW: One retail vending cart location on the north side of Walton Street NW, near the northeast corner with Broad Street NW; iv.  Andrew Young International Boulevard NW: One food vending cart location at the southwest corner with Spring Street NW, adjacent to Walton Spring Park; v.  Andrew Young International Boulevard NW: One retail vending cart location at the southwest corner with Spring Street NW, adjacent to Walton Spring Park; vi.  Andrew Young International Boulevard NW: One retail vending cart near the northwest corner with Peachtree Street, in the curb extension; and; vii.  Andrew Young International Boulevard NW: One retail vending cart or food vending cart near the southwest corner with Peachtree Street, in the curb extension; and; viii.  Edgewood Avenue SE: One retail vending cart or food vending cart location at the northeast corner with Peachtree Center Avenue SE; ix.  Decatur Street SE: Two food vending cart locations at the southwest corner with Central Avenue SW; and x.  Decatur Street SE: One food vending cart or retail vending cart location at the northwest corner with Piedmont Avenue SE; xi.  Decatur Street SE: One food vending cart or retail vending cart location at the northeast corner with Piedmont Avenue SE; and xii.  Andrew Young International Boulevard NW: One food vending cart location in the street furniture zone on the south side of the street between Centennial Olympic Park Drive and Williams Street at a minimum distance of 30 feet from each street corner. b.  3 Hardy Ivy Park food vending cart locations: i.  One food vending cart location inside the circular hardscaped area of the park; ii.  One food vending cart location inside the rectangular hardscaped portion of the park that contains a double row of trees; and iii.  One food vending cart location adjacent to the southern entrance to the rectangular hardscaped portion of the park that contains the double row of trees. c.  Broad Street Plaza designated food truck area: i.  Broad Street Plaza: Eight temporarily delineated spaces located within Broad Street Plaza at 12 Broad Street NW, Atlanta, GA 30303, and located between the Five Points Marta Station and Marietta Street NW. d.  Broad Street Arcade designated food truck area: i.  Broad Street SW: Four metered parking spaces (two food trucks) on the east side of Broad Street SW between Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SW and Mitchell Street SW. Food trucks operating from this designated food truck area may operate from more than one-third of the metered parking spaces on Broad Street SW. (b)  Valid vendor locations shall: (1)  With the exception of food trucks vending within designated food truck areas, not be within 15 feet of street intersections or pedestrian crosswalks or 15 feet of building entrances/exits or within 50 feet of hotels/motels; (2)  With the exception of food trucks vending within designated food truck areas, not be within 15 feet of other valid vendor locations; (3)  With the exception of food trucks vending within the Broad Street Plaza designated food truck area, not be within 200 feet of permanent businesses selling the same or similar products as the vendor; (4)  Provide a minimum of five feet of unobstructed pedestrian space; (5)  Not be within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; and (6)  Not be within 600 feet of the closet property line of any public or private elementary, middle or high school. (c)  (1)  Within designated food truck areas containing metered parking spaces, food trucks may operate from no more than one-third of the metered parking spaces on each street on a block in accordance with sections 150-132 and 150-133, except as otherwise stated in this article. (2)  Food trucks may operate from two contiguous metered parking spaces within parking meter zones and shall not continue to occupy such spaces for a longer period of time than has been paid for. Food trucks shall not be the subject to the parking time limits referenced in sections 150-132 and 150-133. (d)  Valid vendors authorized to vend in valid vendor locations within city-owned parks are not subject to the park vending fees listed in section 110-3 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. (e)  Vending in the Broad Street Plaza designated food truck area is authorized on Fridays only. (f)  Valid food truck vendors vending in the Broad Street Plaza designated food truck area must clearly display a weekly food truck vending pass issued by the City of Atlanta on their food trucks during the hours of operation. Weekly food truck vending passes shall be issued on a first served basis, and upon the payment of a $68.00 fee. Weekly food truck vending passes shall expire at 12:00 a.m. of the Saturday of the week of issuance. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 10, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-18(14-O-1203), § 2, 5-28-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-26(14-O-1306), § 1, 6-25-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-04(16-O-1001), § 4, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 30-1432. - Notification of name change or change of address.     Whenever either the name or address provided by the vendor on the application for a valid vendor permit changes, the vendor shall notify the office of revenue in writing within ten days of such change and provide same with the name change or address change. Vendors shall assure that a current and correct name, residence address and mailing address are on file with the office of revenue at all times. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1433. - Denials, fines, suspensions and revocations. (a)  No valid vendor permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor relating to drug possession and related matter; crimes of moral turpitude; larceny, fraudulent conveyance, perjury and/or false swearing, or subrogation. Any conviction for dealing and/or trafficking in illegal drugs will automatically disqualify an applicant. (b)  Failure to maintain initial qualifications shall be grounds for revocation or denial of a renewal permit. (c)  A denial, fine, suspension, revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this article may be imposed for any of the following causes: (1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the application. (2)  Failure on the part of a vendor to maintain initial eligibility qualifications. (3)  Failure to furnish any and all documentation requested by either the police department, the office of revenue or the license review board for purposes of the investigation of any application or for the inspection of records pursuant to this division within 30 days of such request. (4)  Any failure to comply with any requirement set forth in this article. (d)  Any person whose permit is revoked may not reapply until one year following the effective date of the revocation. (e)  In addition to carrying out all other investigations as may be permitted under this article, the license and permits unit shall investigate any alleged violation of this article upon receipt of a written, sworn complaint by any person who witnesses or becomes aware of a potential violation. Such complaint shall be signed under penalty of perjury, and shall be accompanied by any supporting evidence. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 11, 3-26-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1434. - Public hearing on suspension, fine, revocation or denial. (a)  A fine, suspension, revocation or denial of a permit issued under this article may be appealed to the license review board within 20 days of the applicant or permit holder's receipt of notice as described herein. (b)  Notice of the denial, fine, suspension or revocation shall be given in writing, setting forth the complaint, the grounds for denial, fine, suspension or revocation, and the time, date and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the vendor at least five calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the address shown on the application. The license review board shall conduct the hearing at a regularly scheduled license review board meeting and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new permit and may revoke, within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony suspend, fine or refuse to renew any existing permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. The decision of the mayor may be appealed via Certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. (c)  Under this section: (1)  A first violation within 24 months will result in a $100.00 fine; (2)  A second violation within 24 months will result in a fine of no less than $100.00 and no more than $1,000.00 and/or up to a 12-month suspension of the permit, or revocation of the permit. (3)  A third violation within 24 months will result in the revocation of the permit. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1435. - Disabled veterans.     Permit fees are waived for disabled veterans, as that term is currently defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-12-2 or as amended, currently holding a valid certificate of eligibility as O.C.G.A. § 43-12-5, and blind persons who meet that definition of O.C.G.A. § 49-4-51(b) as it exists now or is from time to time amended. ( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1436. - Vendors selling ice cream or other pre-packaged food and/or non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages out of motor vehicles. (a)  Vendors selling ice cream or other pre-packaged food and/or non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages out of motor vehicles shall be subject to this section. This section shall not apply to food truck vendors operating from a designated food Truck area. Vendors permitted in accordance with this section shall not be permitted to sell prepared food or prepared non-alcoholic beverages. (b)  Every vendor selling ice cream or other pre-packaged food and/or non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages out of motor vehicles pursuant to this section shall, before making any sale, park the vehicle at the right curb and at least eight feet from any other vehicle that may be parked on the street and not less than 100 feet from any intersecting street. When the vending vehicle stops, all sound equipment or other devices used to notify customers of the presence of the vendor shall be stopped and shall not be resumed until the vehicle is again put in motion. (c)  No vehicle using sound equipment or other method of attracting customers shall operate such equipment before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. daily or between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays. Furthermore, such equipment shall not be operated within one block of a church between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays. On days in which schools are actually in session, no motor vehicle shall be operated within 600 feet of any public school in the city one hour before or one hour after published school hours. (d)  Vendors selling ice cream or other pre-packaged food and/or non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages out of motor vehicles pursuant to this section, shall not stop or stand and do business for more than 30 minutes. (e)  Vendors selling ice cream or other pre-packaged food and/or non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages out of motor vehicles pursuant to this section shall not be restricted to an operational area, valid vendor location selected via a lottery-type selection process, or location specifically described in Section 30-1431. ( Ord. No. 2014-56(14-O-1591), § 4, 12-10-14 ; Ord. No. 2017-28(17-O-1238), § 1, 5-15-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-35(17-O-1346), § 1, 6-28-17 ) 
Sec. 30-1437. - Temporary Turner Field locations. (a)  Temporary Turner Field Valid vendor locations will be located on city-owned property on Georgia Avenue between Pollard Boulevard and Capital Avenue for up to 15 locations designated by the city as follows: (b)  Lottery type selection process for temporary Turner Field locations: (1)  Persons wishing to submit applications for each temporary Turner Field valid vendor location shall be required to place their names in a separate drawing during the lottery-type selection process for each such location. (2)  Persons permitted on September 1, 2008 by the City of Atlanta as vendors (not as assistant vendors) authorized to vend on public property locations near Turner Field, (such) locations described in section 30-1405(a)(6) of the version of Chapter 30, Article XXIII of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances (vending on public property) in effect prior to September, 2008 and officially repealed in Section 2 of Ordinance (13-O-1339), shall be given first right of refusal in the drawings for each of the temporary Turner Field valid vendor locations described in this section. (3)  No individual prospective vendor may receive the ability to apply for more than one of the temporary Turner Field valid vendor locations available in the lottery-type selection process. (c)  This section shall expire in its entirety, and shall have no further effect on December 31, 2016. Following the expiration of this section: (1)  The locations contained in subsection (a) shall no longer be designated by the City of Atlanta as valid vendor locations, and no vending shall be authorized thereon; (2)  Valid vend or permits for temporary Turner Field locations shall expire and shall not be renewable. ( Ord. No. 2015-03(15-O-1043), § 1, 2-11-15 ) 
Secs. 30-1438—30-1460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - VENDING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 30-1461. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Assistant vendor means a person who assists a vendor at such vendor's vending site.     Athletic and entertainment vending means the commercial enterprise of selling merchandise to the general public on private property in connection with events held at athletic or entertainment venues which have a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons.     Blind person. A person shall be considered blind for the purpose of this article if such person's vision, with correcting glasses, is so defective as to prevent the performance of activities for which eyesight is essential.     Class C food vending station means a fully enclosed, self-contained non-motor vehicle that is approved by the Fulton County health department for the purpose of vending on private property.     Flea market means any event at which two or more persons offer merchandise for sale or exchange; and at which a fee is charged for the privilege of offering or displaying merchandise for sale or exchange; or at which a fee is charged to prospective buyers for admission to the area where merchandise is offered or displayed for sale or exchange; or regardless of the number of persons offering or displaying merchandise or the absence of fees, at which merchandise is offered or displayed for sale or exchange if the event is held more than six times in any 12-month period. The term "flea market" applies regardless of whether such sale of merchandise is conducted out of doors or within a building. The primary characteristic is that these activities involve a series of sales sufficient in number, scope, and character to constitute a regular course of business. The term "flea market" shall not mean and shall not apply to any event which is organized for the exclusive benefit of any community chest, fund, foundation, association, or corporation organized and operated for religious, educational, or charitable purposes, provided that no part of any admission fee or parking fee charged vendors or prospective purchasers or the gross receipts or net earnings from the sale or exchange of merchandise, whether in the form of a percentage of the receipts or earnings, as salary, or otherwise, inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or person participating in the organization or conduct of the event; or any event at which all persons selling, exchanging, or offering or displaying merchandise for sale or exchange are manufacturers or licensed retail or wholesale merchants. Flea markets shall not include developed and operating shopping centers, antique stores, jewelry stores, coin shops, salvage operations, clothing stores, or special sales events as accessory uses not to exceed 14 days, or other businesses of merchandise in common with flea markets where the vendor therein is not operating among a collection of vendors or renting or securing individual space within an overall operation.     Flea market promoter, operator, or owner means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other form of business entity which owns, operates, maintains, manages, or promotes flea markets.     Flea market vendor means any person, individual, firm, corporation, partnership, or other form of business entity of any type or character who engages in the retail sale of merchandise at a flea market. "Flea market vendor" shall not include licensed second-hand goods dealers or pawnbrokers. In addition to being subject to any regulations pertaining specifically to flea market vendors that may be included in this article, flea market vendors shall be subject to all regulations within this article pertaining generally to vendors.     Mobile food unit means any motor vehicle or non-motorized cart approved by the department of police used for the vending of food items to the public.     Moral turpitude means the act or behavior of baseness, vileness or the depravity in private and social duties which people owe to their fellow people, or to society in general, contrary to accepted and customary rule of right and duty between person and person; act or behavior that gravely violates moral sentiment or accepted moral standards of community and is a morally suitable quality held to be present in some criminal offenses as distinguished from others.     Permissible food item means any food product or substance, including beverages, that legally may be dispensed for the public's consumption pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Fulton, DeKalb, or Clayton County health department.     Private property vending means vending activity conducted out-of-doors or in a flea market on private property not owned by the city or by any other governmental agency. Produce means any agricultural product raised on a farm or orchard.     Recording means a tangible medium on which sounds, images, or both are recorded or otherwise stored, including an original phonograph record, disc, tape, audio or video cassette, wire, film, or other medium now existing or developed later on which sounds, images, or both are or can be recorded or otherwise stored, or a copy or reproduction that duplicates in whole or in part the original. An illicit recording is a recording produced without the authorization of the recording's owner, or which is otherwise sold or offered for sale in violation of any state or federal law pertaining thereto.     Registered agent means any person who is authorized by a vendor or itinerant vendor and who agrees to accept service or process and legal notices on behalf of the vendor or itinerant vendor.     Seasonal vendors means a temporary vendor who vends from private property at a fixed location for seasonal vending.     Site plan means a visual depiction of the vending site showing 1) the exact location of the vending operation on the property; 2) the length, width, and height of the vending stand; 3) the location of all on-site parking spaces which serve the property; and 4) the location of any power sources which the vendor intends to use. The site plan shall be filed along with each application.     Stand means any fixed or movable structure, table or device used by a vendor for the purpose of displaying or storing any merchandise, article or food which is offered for sale.     Valid vendor location means an area which is authorized in this article, and if applicable, subsection 170-2166(10), in which vending can take place.     Valid vendor permit means a permit issued by the department of police. Such permit shall consist of a police photo identification card which contains the vendor's name, photograph, vending type and classification, authorized location and time period for which such permit is valid.     Vending business means any commercial enterprise operated for profit in which merchandise, food, services or a combination thereof are rendered for sale to the general public on private property and approved by the city.     Vendor means any person whose primary business is the selling or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter, or exposing therefor, any goods, wares, merchandise, services, food, confectionery or drink carried by hand from portable stands or tables, by manually propelled vehicles, or by motor vehicle. (Code 1977, § 14-5175; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 7-14-05; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 1, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 2008-58(07-O-1905), § 1, 7-16-08; Ord. No. 2011-37(11-O-0994), § 1, 9-15-11) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-1462. - Purpose and intent. (a)  Vending on private property in the city, as defined in section 30-1461, shall be subject to regulation as set forth in this article, including the requirement of regulatory licenses and permits. (b)  It is the intent of council in enacting this article to: (1)  Serve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public. (2)  Establish a uniform set of rules and regulations which are fair and equitable. (3)  Provide economic development opportunities for small entrepreneurs in the city. (4)  Provide a variety of goods and services for sale. (5)  Promote stable vendors who will enrich the city's ambiance and be assets to public security. (6)  Ensure that persons vending on private property have the permission of the property owner prior to providing goods and services to the public. (7)  Ensure that persons vending on private property do not impede on public vending spaces. (Code 1977, § 14-5174) 
Sec. 30-1463. - Vending business required to keep records. (a)  Every vendor, including flea market vendors, shall maintain a permanent record book in which shall be entered in ink and in legible English at the time any property is acquired for the purpose of retail sale.     Nothing in this section shall prohibit the suspension or revocation of any permit by the police department's license and permit section, the license review board, or the mayor in accordance with the provisions of division 2 of this article. (b)  Vendors, by filing an application, agree to produce documents and records which may be considered pertinent to the ascertainment of facts relative to the issuance and maintenance of the license, including but not limited to the following: (1)  The vendor's bank or other financial institution records, including those which are personal or from any business in which the vendor has any interest, such as savings and checking account records, bank statements, ledgers, deposit tickets, withdrawal slips, canceled checks, check stubs, bank drafts, cashier's checks, certificates of deposit, money market accounts, pass books and applications for each account; (2)  Personal state and federal income tax statements for the past five years; and (3)  Records of sales and receipts for purchases and expenses from any business in which a vendor has any interest. (Code 1977, § 14-5180.4; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 2, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1464. - Vending restrictions and prohibitions. (a)  In addition to the provisions set forth in subsection 16-28.008(10), persons vending on private property shall not be permitted to operate in the following areas: (1)  Within 15 feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. (2)  Within ten feet of any driveway. (3)  Within 15 feet of another vending location assigned pursuant to article XXIII of this chapter to another vendor on a public sidewalk. (4)  Within a minimum of nine feet of unobstructed pedestrian space. (5)  Any area within 15 feet of a building exit, or in the case of a hotel or motel, within 50 feet of building entrances or exits. (6)  Within 1,500 feet of a permanent business selling the same or similar products. This provision shall not apply to vendor sites located near athletic and entertainment venues which have a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons. (b)  Any power sources must be depicted on the site plan and must meet all applicable electrical code standards. (c)  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. (d)  Hours of operation shall be 5:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. (e)  Amplified sound or sound equipment must comply with the City of Atlanta Noise Ordinance. (f)  Any and all signage must comply with the City of Atlanta Sign Ordinance. (Code 1977, § 14-5180.8; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 2, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 30-1465. - Littering.     All vendors engaged in food vending shall affix to their vending station a receptacle for litter, which shall be maintained and emptied regularly and which shall be marked as being for litter. (Code 1977, § 14-5180.9) 
Sec. 30-1466. - Penalties.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as follows: (1)  First conviction. A fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. (2)  Second conviction. A fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. (3)  Third conviction. A fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. (4)  Fourth conviction. Any person convicted of four or more violations of this article within any 12-month period shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both; and a court-ordered referral shall be forwarded to the chief of police for revocation of their permit. (Code 1977, § 14-5180.10) 
Sec. 30-1467. - Aesthetic standards. (a)  Vending is permitted from skirted tables only. Tables shall not extend beyond the perimeter of the covered canopy area. (b)  Canopy. If used, must be a portable folding canopy only. One canopy shall be permitted (not required), shall be white in color, shall not contain any writing and shall not exceed ten by 20 feet in size. (c)  Vending structures must be removed from the open vending site when the vendor is not doing business and during restricted hours of operation. (d)  Vending structures must be in good repair at all times. (e)  Merchandise shall be displayed on the table only and shall be stored within the interior area of the canopy. (f)  All storage of merchandise shall be beneath the skirted tables. (g)  If signage is allowed, no more than one sign which shall not exceed two × three feet in size and displayed only on or attached to the vending table. Any such sign shall be included in the site plan, if signage is to be used. (h)  A description of the structure and the hours of operation shall be included in the site plan. (Ord. No. 2006-85, § 5, 12-12-06) Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 2006-85, adopted Dec. 12, 2006, provided for a new section 30-1488. Inasmuch as § 30-1488 was previously enacted by Code 1977, § 14-5180.3, the provisions of said ord. have been included as a new § 30-1467 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 30-1468. - Athletic and entertainment vending.     In order to commence vending on private property, all athletic and entertainment vendors must have an initial permit issued and must meet all the qualifications set forth in this article. An athletic and entertainment vending permit for a private property vending location shall be issued for one-year periods. A vendor who has been issued an athletic and entertainment vending permit shall not be subject to any limitation as to the length of time from which she or he can operate from the same vending location. (Ord. No. 2008-58(07-O-1905), § 2, 7-16-08; Ord. No. 2009-55(09-O-1652), § 1, 9-30-09) 
Sec. 30-1469. - Prohibitions and restrictions; athletic and entertainment vending. (a)  In addition to the provisions set forth in subsection 16-28.008(10); persons vending on private property shall not be permitted to operate in the following areas: (1)  Within 15 feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. (2)  Within ten feet of any driveway. (3)  Within 15 feet of another vending location assigned pursuant to article XXIII of this chapter to another vendor on a public sidewalk. (4)  Within a minimum of nine feet of unobstructed pedestrian space. (5)  Any area within 15 feet of a building exit, or in the case of a hotel or motel, within 50 feet of building entrances or exits. (6)  Within 1,500 feet of a permanent business selling the same or similar products. This provision shall not apply to vendor sites located near athletic and entertainment venues which have a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons. (b)  Any power sources must be depicted on the site plan and must meet all applicable electrical code standards. (c)  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. (d)  Hours of operation shall be 5:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. (e)  Amplified sound or sound equipment must comply with the City of Atlanta Noise Ordinance. (f)  If signage is allowed no more than one sign which shall not exceed two by three feet in size and displayed only on or attached to the vending table. Any such sign shall be included in the site plan, if signage is to be used. Handwritten signage is prohibited. (Ord. No. 2008-58(07-O-1905), § 2, 7-16-08) 
Sec. 30-1470. - Aesthetics; athletic and entertainment vending. (a)  Vending is permitted from skirted tables only. Tables shall not extend beyond the perimeter of the covered canopy area. (b)  Canopy. If used, must be a portable folding canopy only. One canopy shall be permitted (not required), shall not contain any writing and shall not exceed ten feet by 20 feet in size. (c)  Vending structures must be removed from the open vending site when the vendor is not doing business and during restricted hours of operation. (d)  Vending structures must be in good repair at all times. (e)  Merchandise shall be displayed on the table only and shall be stored within the interior area of the canopy. (f)  All storage of merchandise shall be beneath the skirted tables. (g)  If signage is allowed, no more than one sign which shall not exceed two by three feet in size and displayed only on or attached to the vending table. Any such sign shall be included in the site plan, if signage is to be used. (h)  A description of the structure and the hours of operation shall be included in the site plan. (Ord. No. 2008-58(07-O-1905), § 2, 7-16-08) 
Sec. 30-1471. - Vending from mobile food units. (a)  Regulations, restrictions and prohibitions. Persons conducting business from a mobile food unit on private property may conduct such business only in compliance with the following: (1)  They must have the written expressed consent of the owner to use the business property on which they propose to operate. (2)  They must have a valid city business license unless otherwise exempted by city ordinance. (3)  The business use must be a use that is otherwise allowed within the zoning district in which the vendor proposes to operate. (4)  Vending on private property shall also comply with the requirements of Chapter 30, Article XXIV, Vending on Private Property. Persons conducting business from a mobile food unit on private property shall not be permitted to operate in the following areas: (5)  Within 15 feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. (6)  Within ten feet of any driveway. (7)  Within 15 feet of another vending location assigned pursuant to article XXIII of this chapter to another vendor on a public sidewalk. (8)  Within a minimum of nine feet of unobstructed pedestrian space. (9)  Any area within 15 feet of a building exit, or in the case of a hotel or motel, within 50 feet of building entrances or exits. (10)  Within 200 feet of a stationary business selling the same or similar products. This provision shall apply to vendor sites located near athletic and entertainment venues which have a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons, nor shall it apply to vendor sites where the stationary business and the mobile food unit(s) share a common ownership interest. (b)  Any power sources must be depicted on the site plan and must meet all applicable electrical code standards. (c)  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. (d)  Hours of operation shall be 5:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. (e)  Amplified sound or sound equipment must comply with the City of Atlanta Noise Ordinance. (f)  Any and all signage must comply with the City of Atlanta Sign Ordinance. (g)  Mobile food unit vendors shall be allowed to vend from the multiple locations as indicated on the vending permit. (Ord. No. 2011-37(11-O-0994), § 2, 9-15-11) 
Secs. 30-1472—30-1480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 
Sec. 30-1481. - Vendor permit and business license required. (a)  No person shall vend any article, merchandise, produce, permissible food item, or service on private property in the city without first having obtained an initial vending permit and satisfied all other requirements, including but not limited to those of the health department in the county in which the vending site is located. No permit shall be required for persons selling newspapers at-large other than from a fixed location on private property. (b)  No person shall vend in the city on privately-owned property, except in conformity with the privileges granted for the particular class or permit issued to such person, and only on the location stated on the permit. This permit requirement is in addition to any general business license required or other special permission requirement. (c)  No person shall engage in the business or trade of vending without first obtaining a business license from the bureau of treasury, licensing and employee benefits. Disabled veterans and blind persons, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, are exempt from payment of business license fees, but must obtain such licenses. (d)  All permits issued to vendors, including flea market vendors or assistant vendors, or registered agents are nontransferable, and must be displayed in clear view, together with the vending permit photo identification card, at the permitted location at all times when the vendor or assistant vendor is present. (e)  All permits issued to vendors, including flea market vendors, shall contain a general description of the merchandise, food, services, or any combination thereof to be offered for sale by such vendor at the permitted location, and shall indicate if the permit authorizes the sale of recordings. (Code 1977, § 14-5176; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 4, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1482. - Classification of permits. (a)  Food permit. A food permit shall authorize a person to vend permissible food items in an individually assigned vending site or from a motor vehicle, but not from door-to-door. A food permit shall allow the sale of food only pursuant to the conditions specified by the health department of the county in which the vending site is located. Fulton County Health Department regulations class A nonhazardous, nonregulated foods do not require a health department food service permit. Where applicable, class B and class C foods require a valid certificate of inspection from the county in which the vending site is located and must specify the particular foods authorized to be sold. No vendors shall sell any cooked food from an open-pit barbecue grill from any private property location within the city without first obtaining written approval from the health department of the county in which the vending site is located. (b)  Merchandise permit. A merchandise permit shall authorize a person to vend items including but not limited to the following from a designated location on private property: (1)  Crafts: a.  Baskets. b.  Jewelry. c.  Leather. d.  Quilts. e.  Wood carvings. f.  Needle crafts. g.  Fragrances/incenses. (2)  Fresh flowers. (3)  Clothing and apparel. (4)  Seasonal items, such as Christmas trees, firewood. (5)  Accessories: a.  Leather goods. b.  Sunglasses. c.  Umbrellas. (6)  Licensed nonethnic apparel. In order to vend any items which are licensed by an organization (e.g., the Braves), a vendor must have a license from the appropriate organization to sell such goods and must produce such license to the police department for inspection when requested. (c)  Service permit. A service permit shall authorize a person to sell services, including but not limited to the following: (1)  Face paintings. (2)  Shoe shining. (3)  Portrait painting. (4)  Street music. (5)  Photography. (d)  Combination permit. A combination permit shall authorize a person to vend food and merchandise at individually assigned vending sites and locations. Any person may apply for and receive a combination permit, if all applicable requirements are met. (e)  Flea market vending permit. In addition to any other permits that must be obtained pursuant to paragraphs (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section for the items or services sold, a flea market vending permit shall authorize the sale of items or services by a flea market vendor. Such a permit must be obtained by a flea market vendor as well as by any flea market promoter, operator, or owner. Flea market vending permits obtained by the flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall authorize the operation of the flea market. Such flea market vending permits shall be administered in the same manner as other permits required under this article, and the holders of such permits shall be subject to all applicable requirements of this article as a condition to holding such permits. (Code 1977, § 14-5177; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 5, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1483. - Annual application. (a)  An application shall be required by all persons seeking issuance of an initial permit for vending on private property, and such application shall be filed annually. Each applicant must apply in person and complete an application form. Application forms may be obtained from and filed with the department of police license and permits unit. (b)  A nonrefundable application fee of $50.00 is required to accompany each application for an initial private property vendor's permit. (c)  Permit fees for food, merchandise, service or combination permits are due and payable if and when the application is approved by the city. (d)  The application for an initial private property vendor's permit shall, at a minimum, consist of the following data: (1)  Each applicant shall submit detailed data as follows: a.  Applicant's name and current address. b.  Applicant's previous addresses within the last five years. c.  Social security number. d.  Vending location sought, including exact location on such property. e.  Size of the proposed vending station, if applicable, i.e., length, width, and height. f.  Name and current address of each proposed assistant vendor. g.  The exact times during which the vendor intends to vend on the proposed property. h.  State department of revenue retail identification tax number. i.  State i.d. j.  City business license. k.  A general description of the food, merchandise, or services to be sold or offered for sale at the proposed vending location, including whether recordings will be sold or offered for sale. (2)  All applicants who intend to vend from private property must present to the department of police a private property permission letter on the form as issued by the license and permits division of the police department. The private property permission letter shall be provided along with the permit application and shall be a part of the required site plan. Such vendors shall be subject to all zoning restrictions and must be approved through the city bureau of buildings prior to the issuance of any vending permit (see subsection 170-2166(10)). This provision must be followed each and every time a vendor changes location. (3)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the police department licenses and permits unit within 30 days from the date of request. Failure to furnish such information within 30 days shall automatically dismiss, with prejudice, the application. (Code 1977, § 14-5178; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 6, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 30-1484. - Application procedure.     All private property vendor applications shall be reviewed by the bureau of buildings to determine compliance with applicable zoning regulations as stated in subsection 16-28.008(10). Subject to favorable determination and written verification by the bureau of buildings and a private property permission letter issued by the License and Permits Division of the Atlanta Police Department, the bureau of treasury, licensing and employee benefits shall issue the business license for the applicant. Upon completion of all prerequisites, the police department license and permits units shall then issue a permit. (Code 1977, § 14-5179; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 4, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 30-1485. - Term and renewal of permits. (a)  In order to commence vending on private property, all vendors must have an initial permit issued and must meet all the qualifications set forth herein before reapplying for a permit. The length of time that a vendor on private property may remain on such property, excluding those holding a food permit as set out in section 30-1482(a), but including those holding a merchandise, service or combination permit as set out in section 30-1482(b)—(d), shall be two years, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. A vendor permit for a private property vending location will be issued for a one-year period. When the one-year permit expires, a vendor may apply for a renewal permit which allows the vendor to vend for another one-year period. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, after a vendor has been issued a renewal permit to vend on the same parcel of land for an additional year, the vendor, excluding those holding a food permit as set out in section 30-1482(a), but including those holding a merchandise, service or combination permit as set out in section 30-1482(b)—(d), may not renew a vending permit for such location for two years, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. At the expiration of the two-year vending term, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the property owner shall not allow another vendor to vend on said property for a period of 90 days. (b)  If, after two years at one location, a vendor wishes to vend on that same parcel of land for another period up to two years, the vendor must secure a new initial permit as provided in sections 30-1483 and 30-1484. An initial permit issued in accordance with this subsection shall be otherwise subject to the provisions of this section, (30-1485), in the same manner as other initial permits. (c)  No applicant shall be issued more than one permit; provided that an applicant for a flea market vending permit may be issued a flea market vending permit in addition to any other permit. (d)  After the initial permit for the first year expires, vendors may present to the police department an application for a renewal permit. Upon a review and approval of the renewal application by the appropriate agencies, satisfaction of all other license and permit requirements, and upon payment of the appropriate fee as indicated in section 30-1486, the police department license and permits unit shall furnish the applicant with a renewal permit. (e)  Each applicant for a renewal application shall submit an application which shall at a minimum consist of the following data: (1)  Applicant's name and current address. (2)  Applicant's previous addresses within the last five years. (3)  Social security number. (4)  Vending location sought, including exact location on such property. (5)  Size of the proposed vending station, if applicable, i.e., length, width, and height. (6)  Names and current addresses of proposed assistant vendors. (7)  The exact times during which the vendor intends to vend on the proposed property. (8)  City business license. (9)  A general description of the food, merchandise, services, or combination thereof to be sold or offered for sale at the proposed vending location, including whether the permit authorizes the sale or offering for sale of recordings. (Code 1977, § 14-5180; Ord. No. 1997-15, §§ 1, 2, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 2002-4, § 1, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2002-85, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 7, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2005-35, § 1, 6-23-05; Ord. No. 2007-19(07-O-0498), §§ 1, 2, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2012-06(12-O-0278), § 1, 3-14-12) Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-19(07-O-0498), § 3 states that this ordinance shall take effect on April 5, 2007, so the current permit holders can apply for a new permit for the same location, and said permit shall be for a period of two years beginning at the end of the expired permit. 
Sec. 30-1486. - Fees. (a)  Initial permit fees are due and payable by certified funds after approval of the initial vending application. Initial permit fees for vending shall be as follows: Merchandise permit $ 75.00 Food permit   75.00 Combination permit  125.00 Service permit   25.00 Assistant vendors   15.00 Flea market vending permit   50.00  In on event shall a vending permit be issued prior to payment of the above fees. (b)  The fee for a replacement vending permit photo identification card that has been lost shall be $30.00 and may be obtained at the police department's license and permit section. (c)  Fees for renewal permits shall be the same as those fees for new permits. (Code 1977, § 14-5180.1; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 8, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1487. - Location.     Permits are to be used only for the location specified in the vendor's application and such location shall be clearly written on the permit. The vendor or an assistant vendor to whom the permit is issued shall be present at the location specified on the permit at all such times as merchandise, food, services, or any combination thereof are sold or offered for sale at such location. (Code 1977, § 14-5180.2; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 9, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1488. - Notification of name change or change of address.     Whenever either the name or address provided by the permit holder on the application for a vending permit or health or building inspection certificate changes, the licensee shall notify the department of police's license and permit section in writing within ten days of such change and provide same with the name change or address change. Vendors shall assure that a current and correct name, residence address and mailing address are on file with police department's license and permit section at all time. (Code 1977, § 14-5180.3) 
Sec. 30-1489. - Denials, revocation and suspension. (a)  No permit shall be issued for vending to any person who has been convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor relating to alcohol or drug offenses and related matter; crimes of moral turpitude; gambling offenses and related matters; larceny, fraudulent conveyance, perjury and/or false swearing, or subrogation. Any conviction for dealing and/or trafficking in illegal drugs will automatically disqualify a vending applicant. (b)  Failure to maintain initial qualifications shall be grounds for revocation or suspension. (c)  Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked by the police department's license and permit section for any of the following causes: (1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the application for the vending permits. (2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in connection with the selling of any article, merchandise, produce or permissible food item. (3)  Violation of the provisions of Fulton County or DeKalb County Health Department regulations applicable folders of food permits. (4)  Conduct of a vending business in an unlawful manner or in such a way as to constitute a menace or detriment to the health, safety or welfare of the public. (5)  Failure on the part of a vendor to maintain initial eligibility qualifications. (6)  Failure on the part of the vendor's assistant to maintain initial eligibility qualifications shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of the vendor's assistant permit. (7)  Failure to furnish any and all documentation requested by either the police department, the department of finance or the license review board for purposes of the investigation of any application or for the inspection of records pursuant to section 30-1463 within 30 days of such request. (8)  Failure to abide by the duties imposed on the permit holder pursuant to section 30-1491. (d)  Any person whose permit is revoked may not reapply for a vending permit until after the expiration of one year from the date of revocation. Four violations of any part of this article within a 12-month period shall constitute grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a vendor permit. (e)  In addition to carrying out all other investigations as may be permitted under this article, the police department's license and permit section shall investigate any alleged violation of this article upon receipt of a written, sworn complaint by any person who witnesses or becomes aware of a potential violation. Such complaint shall be signed under penalty of perjury, and shall be accompanied by any supporting evidence. After receiving a properly filed complaint, the police department's license and permit section shall conduct its investigation and, based on the results of such investigation, may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article to the person who is the subject of such complaint by providing notice as required by section 30-1490(b). A copy of such notice also shall be provided to the person who filed the complaint. (Code 1977, § 14-5180.5; Ord. No. 2004-59, §§ 10, 11, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1490. - Public hearing on suspension, revocation or denial. (a)  A suspension, revocation or denial of a permit issued under this division may be appealed to the license review board within 20 days of the applicant or permit holder's receipt of notice as described in section 30-1490(b). (b)  Notice of the denial, suspension or revocation shall be given in writing, setting forth the complaint, the grounds for denial, suspension or revocation, and the time, date and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the vending permit holder at least five calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the address shown on the application. The license review board shall conduct the hearing at a regularly scheduled license review board meeting and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new permit and may revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew any existing permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (Code 1977, § 14-5180.6; Ord. No. 2001-75, § 2, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 21, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-1491. - Duties of permit holder.     Every person authorized to vend under this article shall: (1)  A vendor shall comply with all laws and regulations applicable to the operation of a vending business; (2)  A vendor shall refrain from engaging in any vending business after the expiration of the vendor permit and during any period when it has been suspended or revoked; (3)  A vendor shall surrender the vendor permit promptly to the police department's license and permit section upon its expiration, or upon revocation or suspension. (4)  A vendor shall have no more than two assistants who shall first obtain assistant vendor permits from the police department licenses and permits unit. At no time shall more than three vendors or assistant vendors be present at the assigned vending location. (5)  A vendor conducting a vending business out-of-doors on private property within any zoning district in which such activities are permitted by the city's zoning code, shall be regulated by the provisions of section 16-28.008(10). (6)  A vendor shall be responsible for the on-site activities of the vendor's assistants. (7)  No vendor or flea market vendor shall sell or offer for sale any illicit recordings. (8)  No flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall permit any flea market vendor operating on the premises controlled by such flea market promoter, operator, or owner to sell or offer for sale any illicit recordings. (9)  No flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall permit any flea market vendor operating on the premises controlled by such flea market promoter, operator, or owner to sell or offer for sale any services, merchandise, or combination thereof unless the vendor's vending permit photo identification card, and that of all assistant vendors, are displayed as required by section 30-1481(d). (Code 1977, § 14-5180.7; Ord. No. 2002-4, § 2, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 12, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1492. - Duties of flea market promoter, operator, or owner. (a)  Every flea market promoter, operator, or owner authorized to operate a flea market under this article shall, on a regular basis, inspect or cause to be inspected the merchandise sold or offered for sale by flea market vendors who are operating on the premises of the flea market promoter, operator, or owner. Such inspections shall also verify that each vendor's vending permit photo identification card, and that of any assistant vendors, are displayed as required by section 30-1481(d). Such inspections shall be carried out on at least a monthly basis during the time the flea market is in operation; provided that the inspection of merchandise maintained by flea market vendors selling recordings shall be inspected on a weekly basis. In connection with such regular inspections, flea market promoters, operators, or owners shall be authorized to inspect the records maintained by flea market vendors pursuant to section 30-1463. Should the flea market vendor fail or refuse to provide such merchandise for inspection, or should the inspection of such merchandise or any records kept regarding such merchandise indicate to the flea market promoter, operator, or owner, or their designee, that illicit recordings are being sold or offered for sale by the flea market vendor, the flea market promoter, operator, or owner, or their designee shall within 24 hours provide such information, together with information identifying the flea market vendor, to law enforcement officials, and take all such other actions as may be reasonable under the circumstances to stop such illegal activities, including the filing of a written complaint as provided in section 30-1489(e). (b)  Failure by a flea market promoter, operator, or owner or their designee to carry out the inspections required by this section; to report the failure or refusal of flea market vendors to make merchandise or any associated records available for inspection by the flea market promoter, operator, or owner or their designee; or to report the sale or offering for sale of illicit recordings to law enforcement officials within 24 hours shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of the flea market promoter's, operator's, or owner's flea market vending permit, as provided in section 30-1489. (c)  Each flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall, as a condition of receiving a flea market vending permit for the operation of any flea market, certify that he or she is aware of the duties imposed on flea market promoters, operators, and owners to take all actions as required by this section to prevent the sale of illicit recordings by flea market vendors who are operating on the premises of the flea market promoter, operator, or owner. (Ord. No. 2004-59, § 13, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1493. - Exemptions.     The provisions of chapter 30, article XXIV (section 30-1461 et seq.) shall not apply to any real person who engages only in outdoor sales of merchandise no more than two days in any one-week period, but who otherwise meets the definition of flea market vendor as defined in section 30-1461. (Ord. No. 2005-39, § 1, 7-14-05) 
Secs. 30-1494—30-1499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXV. - CAR WASHES[19] Footnotes: --- (19) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, approved June 8, 2001, amended §§ 30-1500—30-1507 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to similar subject matter. Further, said ordinance added §§ 30-1508 and 30-1509 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 30-1500. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Active participation means control or supervision over the employees and the premises licensed under this article.     Agent means any person, real or artificial, designated by the owner in the application for a license to operate a car wash to receive correspondence from the mayor's office and/or department of police. The owner may also be the agent.     Attendant means a person on duty at the car wash premises employed by or at the instance of the owner or agent of the car wash establishment.     Car wash establishment means any commercial enterprise operated for profit and open to the public for the purpose of cleaning, washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination thereof.     Car wash premises means the property on which the car wash establishment is located, including parking areas and all areas on the licensed property that may be lawfully used by the owner, employees, agents, and patrons of the car wash establishment.     Full-service car wash means a car wash establishment operated for profit and open to the public for the purpose of cleaning, washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination thereof with the assistance of one or more attendants/cashiers in active participation during all hours of operation and which provides other services incidental to the car wash business, including but not limited to, car maintenance, car repair and/or other retail services.     Hand and/or detail car wash means a car wash establishment where vehicles are washed by hand, by persons permanently employed by the car wash or by persons allowed to remain on the premises to perform this service, operated for profit and open to the public for the purpose of cleaning, washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination. Said washes do not include mobile car washes and/or car washes done for charitable and/or fund-raising purposes on a temporary basis.     In-bay automatic car wash means a car wash establishment operated for profit and open to the public for the purpose of cleaning, washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination thereof that utilizes mechanical equipment to wash, rinse, and sometimes dry a stationary occupied vehicle.     Owner means any and all person(s) who have any ownership interest in the car wash establishment.     Self-service car wash means a car wash establishment operating for profit and open to the public for the purpose of cleaning, washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination thereof without the assistance of a full-time on-site attendant. (Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1501. - Intent.     It is the intent of the council in enacting this article to: (1)  Serve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public. (2)  Establish a uniform set of rules and regulations governing self-service car washes. (3)  Assure that businesses licensed by the city do not promote or allow illicit or illegal activity to take place on the premises. (Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1502. - Required.     It shall be unlawful for any agent or owner to operate a self-service car wash establishment without having first obtained a license issued by the city as provided by this section. The license issued under this article shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any other license or license required by law. Full service automatic car wash establishments, in-bay automatic car washes, and hand or detail car wash establishments with attendants on duty during all hours when the business is open are expressly exempted from the license requirements in this article. (Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1503. - Application for license. (a)  Any person seeking to operate a self-service car wash shall obtain a license by filing a written application with the Atlanta Police Department, License and Permits Unit. A separate application is required for each self-service car wash location, even if owned by the same person. Moreover, a new application for license must be filed in the event there is a change of ownership or location of a currently licensed car wash establishment. Upon receiving an application for a self-service car wash license, the permits division of the department of police, shall forward a copy of said application to the chairperson(s) of the affected neighborhood planning unit(s) for review. Said NPU(s) shall subsequently forward its recommendation, which shall become a part of the permits division's report to the license review board." (b)  Any person operating a self-service car wash on the effective date of this article shall apply for a license as prescribed above by September 1, 2001. (c)  A non-refundable application fee of $50.00 for the processing of each license application is required to accompany each application for a car wash establishment license. (d)  A complete application for a car wash license shall include the following: (1)  Owner and agent's name and current address. (2)  Owner and agent's social security number. (3)  Owner and agent's previous address for the last five years. (4)  Location of car wash establishment. (5)  Days and hours of operation of car wash establishment. (6)  If the owner and/or agent is a corporation, written verification from the Secretary of State that the corporation is in good standing. (7)  Written verification such as a lease, deed, rental agreement etc., demonstrating that the applicant has legal access to the proposed premises. (e)  When the investigation has been completed, this application will be considered at a regular meeting of the license review board which may recommend that the mayor grant or deny the license. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (f)  Any change of the agent designated in the license application must be reported to the Atlanta Police Department, License and Permits Unit within 30 calendar days of the change. Failure to report a change may result in a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of the license. (Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 22, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 2009-10(07-O-1526), §§ 1, 2, 2-25-09) 
Sec. 30-1504. - False information contained in application.     Any material omission, untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for a license under this article shall be cause for the denial thereof, and if any license has previously been granted under these circumstances, such shall constitute "due cause" for the imposition of a fine and/or suspension, revocation or non-renewal of the license. This subsection is independent of any other penalty provisions in this article. (Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1505. - Grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or imposition of a fine. (a)  No application for a new license, a renewal license or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership shall be denied, and no license that has been issued or that may hereafter be issued hereunder shall be revoked, suspended, or be subjected to a fine except upon a finding of "due cause" as defined in this subsection, and after a hearing before the license review board. In the event of a decision to deny, revoke, or suspend a license and/or impose a fine under this article, written notice shall be mailed to the agent and the owner, stating the place, date, time and purpose of such hearing. The notice shall set forth with specificity the reasons for the proposed adverse action for which the hearing shall be held. (b)  As used in this section, the term "due cause," for the denial of applications for a new license or renewal of an existing license, for denial of a transfer of location or transfer of ownership or for revocation, suspension, or imposition of a fine includes, but is not limited to the following: (1)  The conviction of the owner or agent of any felony reasonably related (as explained throughout this article and particularly in this section and in section 30-1509 of this Code) to the ability of the owner to operate and maintain the car wash premises in a proper manner. (2)  The violation of any law, ordinance or regulation or operational rules set forth governing the operation of a car wash establishment. (3)  Allowing the commission by, or solicitation of, patrons on the car wash premises for any unlawful act (such as prostitution, gambling, or drug-related crimes) where the operator or the operator's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. Evidence of arrests on the premises for any of the unlawful acts above shall not be considered, for purposes of this section, as evidence of "allowing the commission" of these acts where the owner has participated or cooperated in the arrest and/or prosecution of these individuals by providing evidence or testimony as requested by the police or the prosecuting authority. (4)  The failure to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license under this article. (5)  Failure by the operator or agent to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the car wash premises in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. Evidence of arrests on the premises shall not be considered, for purposes of this section, as evidence of failure by the operator to "adequately supervise and monitor" the conduct of patrons and others on the car wash premises where the owner has participated or cooperated in the arrest and/or prosecution of individuals by providing evidence or testimony as requested by the police or the prosecuting authority. (c)  The license review board, after any hearing pursuant to this article, shall report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor or the mayor's designee. The mayor or the mayor's designee, upon receiving the report, may deny applications for new or renewal licenses or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership and may impose a fine and/or revoke or suspend any license for due cause. In lieu of or in addition to, the mayor or the mayor's designee may impose a fine upon any owner or agent in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation occurring on the licensed premises. Should the mayor or the mayor's designee decide to impose a fine and/or deny, revoke, suspend or not renew a license, the applicant shall be notified in writing within ten calendar days of this decision and be provided with the specific reasons for said decision. (d)  The decision of the mayor or the mayor's designee may be appealed by the filing of a petition for writ of certiorari in the Fulton County Superior Court within 30 calendar days of the decision. (Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1506. - Term and renewal of license. (a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, all licenses issued under this article shall be valid for one calendar year after the date of issue. (b)  Owners or operators of car washes, except those expressly exempted, shall renew their licenses not later than January 1 of each year with the department of police. (c)  Any car wash establishment that ceases operation for more than six months, or for which no city business license is maintained for more than six months, shall not subsequently be operated as a car wash, except by making a new application for and receiving a license as required by this article. (Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1507. - License fees. (a)  License fees are due immediately upon approval of the license. A license shall not be issued prior to payment of said fees. License fees for car wash establishments shall be $100.00 per year, per location. (b)  The fees for renewal or transfer of a license shall be the same as the initial license fee specified above. (Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1508. - Duties of car wash establishments. (a)  Comply with all laws and regulations applicable to the operation of a car wash establishment; (b)  Refrain from operating a self-service car wash after the expiration of a car wash license and during any period when it has been suspended or revoked; (c)  Surrender car wash license promptly to the Atlanta Police Department, License and Permits Unit, upon its expiration, revocation or suspension. (Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1509. - Car wash establishment regulations. (a)  The following shall apply at all times to all car wash establishments, except those expressly exempted: (1)  The establishment shall maintain reasonable lighting on the premises during the hours it is open for business. Illumination shall be provided at a minimum of six lux/0.6 foot candles on the entire premises during the hours the establishment is open for business. Where available, public street lighting may be utilized to either partially or totally fulfill the lighting requirements. Otherwise, it shall be the responsibility of the car wash establishment to independently provide the requisite levels of illumination. (2)  At all times during the operation of the car wash, the agent for the car wash, or his or her designee, must be on-site or available by telephone. (3)  A notice shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises and shall set forth: a.  The telephone number for the agent of the car wash establishment; b.  The days and hours of operation for the establishment; and c.  A statement that loitering as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36 or being on the premises for any purpose other than washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination thereof or for any purpose for which the operator/agent has given express permission is prohibited under state law and a warning that such activity is considered trespassing for which law enforcement agencies are authorized to enter onto the car wash premises and take appropriate action. (4)  No public telephones located on car wash premises shall be capable of receiving incoming calls; (5)  The owner, his or her agent, or a designee of either shall maintain an active participation in the operation of the car wash premises and shall be on the premises at least once a day. (Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Secs. 30-1510—30-1520. - Reserved. 
Chapter 34 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), §§ 1.0—20.0, adopted November 28, 1994, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Ch. 34 was at the direction of the city. See also the Code Comparative Table. Cross reference— Telecommunications franchises and revocable licenses, § 138-126 et seq. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; theft of cable services, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2 et seq. 
Sec. 34-1. - Title.     This chapter shall be known as the "City of Atlanta Cable Communications Ordinance." (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 1.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-2. - Definitions.     For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.     Access cablecasting means that form of cablecasting wherein the production and content of the programming is under the control of a party other than a grantee, and wherein such programming is carried on certain channels dedicated for the use of individuals and groups within the city, subject to the provisions of the franchise, any related agreements between the city and the grantee, and any agreements between the city and the designated access channel users.     Alphanumeric means consisting of a combination of letters, numbers or other symbols, used in reference to electronic systems capable of generating messages in such form and in reference to channels or programs transmitting information in such form.     Basic service means, unless otherwise defined by the Cable Act or other laws or regulations of the United States of America, all signals of domestic television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station,, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system), any public, educational, and governmental programming required to be carried on the basic tier, and any additional video programming signals and services added to the basic tier by a grantee.     Broadcast means over-the-air transmission of a television or other radio frequency signal.     Cable Act means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (1992) and the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, 98 Stat. 2779 (1984), which amend the Communications Act of 1934, and as hereafter amended.     Cablecast means transmission of a non-broadcast video, broadcast video, or other radio frequency signal through a cable system.     Cable service means the one-way or two-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or video, voice, data or other service as may be developed, including subscriber interaction. Cable service shall not include telephone services as defined and regulated by Georgia law.     Cable system or cable communications system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of Communications Act of 1934, as it may be amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of said Communications Act of 1934, as it may be amended) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of cable service directly to subscribers; or (D) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.     Cable system facilities means the cable communications system constructed for use within the city, including without limitation, the headend, antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, converters, health and property security systems, equipment or facilities located within or without the corporate limits of the city designed, constructed or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave or other means, audio, radio, television and electronic signals, and video, voice, and data to and from subscribers, in the city and any other equipment or facilities located within the corporate limits of the city intended for the use of the cable communications system; provided, however, such cable system facilities excludes building, contractual sites, facilities, and equipment where its sole use is for providing service to other cable system facilities located outside the city limits.     Closed-circuit or institutional service means such video, audio, data and other services provided to institutional users. These may include, but are not limited to, one-way video, two-way video, audio or digital signals transmitted among institutions and/or to residential subscribers.     Commercial subscriber means a subscriber who receives a service in a place of business where the service may be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession.     Complaint means a verbal or written indication from a subscriber of a problem with any aspect of cable service provided by grantee.     Converter means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and any channel selector which permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated converter dial locations at the set or by remote control.     Council means the governing authority of the City of Atlanta, i.e., the city council.     Days means calendar days unless otherwise specified.     Discrete channel means a channel which can only be received by the person and/or institution intended to receive signals on such channel.     DROP means a service connection from feeder cable to the subscriber/user television set, radio or other terminal.     Educational access channel means any channel designated for educational use and which is provided by the grantee to the city at no charge to the city or the programmers of the channel.     Fair market value means the price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going concern based on the cable system valuation prevailing in the industry at the time.     FCC means the Federal Communications Commission (the federal regulatory agency having jurisdiction on the effective date of this chapter) or such other federal regulatory agency as may have jurisdiction at any time during the term of any Franchise, or any extension thereto, granted pursuant to this chapter.     Franchise means a franchise contract entered into by the grantee, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including referenced specifications, franchise proposal, applications and other related material. Franchises granted pursuant to this chapter shall grant nonexclusive rights to construct, operate and maintain cable communications systems along the streets and public grounds within all or a specified area in the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required by other ordinances and laws of the city.     Franchise area means the entire city, or portions thereof, for which a franchise is granted under the authority of this chapter. If not otherwise stated in the franchise, the franchise area shall be the corporate limits of the city, including all territory thereafter annexed to the city.     Franchise fee means the percentage, as specified by this chapter and the franchise, of the grantee's gross revenues.     Franchisee or grantee means any natural person(s), partnership(s), domestic and foreign corporation(s), association(s), joint venture(s), or organization(s) of any kind which has been legally granted a franchise by the city.     Government channel or government access channel means any channel specifically designated or dedicated for government use and which is provided to the city by the grantee at no charge to the city or the programmers of the channel.     Gross revenues means all revenues received from subscribers for the provision of cable service or video service, including franchise fees for cable service providers and video service providers, and advertising and home shopping services revenues and shall be determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Gross revenues shall not include: (1)  Amounts billed and collected as a line item on the subscriber's bill to recover any taxes, surcharges, or governmental fees that are imposed on or with respect to the services provided or measured by the charges, receipts, or payments therefore; provided, however, that for purposes of this Code section, such tax, surcharge, or governmental fee shall not include any ad valorem taxes, net income taxes, or generally applicable business or occupation taxes not measured exclusively as a percentage of the charges, receipts, or payments for services; (2)  Any revenue, such as bad debt, not actually received, even if billed; (3)  Any revenue received by any affiliate or any other person in exchange for supplying goods or services used by the provider to provide cable service or video programming; (4)  Any amounts attributable to refunds, rebates, or discounts; (5)  Any revenue from services provided over the network that are associated with or classified as noncable or nonvideo services under federal law, including, without limitation, revenues received from telecommunications services, information services other than cable service or video service, Internet access services, or directory or Internet advertising revenue, including, without limitation, yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisements, and electronic publishing advertising. Where the sale of any such noncable or nonvideo service is bundled with the sale of one or more cable services or video services and sold for a single nonitemized price, the term "gross revenues" shall include only those revenues that are attributable to cable service or video service based on the provider's books and records; such revenues shall be allocated in a manner consistent with generally accepted accounting principles; (6)  Any revenue from late fees not initially booked as revenues, returned check fees, or interest; (7)  Any revenue from sales or rental of property, except such property as the subscriber shall be required to buy or rent exclusively from the cable service provider or video service provider to receive cable service or video service; (8)  Any revenue received from providing or maintaining inside wiring; (9)  Any revenue from sales for resale with respect to which the purchaser shall be required to pay a franchise fee, provided the purchaser certifies in writing that it shall resell the service and pay a franchise fee with respect thereto; or (10)  Any amounts attributable to a reimbursement of costs including, but not limited to, the reimbursements by programmers of marketing costs incurred for the promotion or introduction of video programming.     Installation means the connection of the cable system from feeder cable to the point of interconnection with subscriber-owned facilities.     Leased access channel means any channel designated or dedicated for use by persons unaffiliated with the grantee, at rates in accordance with the Cable Act.     Mayor means the Mayor of the City of Atlanta, Georgia, or his or her designee.     Non-cable service means any service which is distributed over the cable system other than a cable service.     Normal business hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours.     Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.     Pay cable or premium service means those certain optional, video program services in addition to cable programming service, offered by a grantee at an additional charge beyond the monthly charge for each grantee basic service tier and equipment.     Plant mile means a linear mile of strand-bearing cable as measured on the street or easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal.     Public access channel, community access channel or community channel means any channel designated or dedicated for use by the general public or noncommercial organizations which is provided to the city by the grantee at no charge to the city or the programmers of the channel.     Public-rights-of-way or streets and public grounds means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkways, waterways, utility easements or other public right-of-way or hereafter held by the city which shall entitle the city and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee's cable communications system. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the "streets and public grounds" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain only such rights to use property in the city as the city may have the undisputed right and power to give.     Reasonable notice shall be a written notice received by the grantee at its principal office within the city or such other office as the grantee has designated to the city as the address to which notice shall be transmitted to it, which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less than ten days prior to that day in which the party giving such notice shall commence any action which requires the giving of notice. In computing said ten days, holidays recognized by the city shall be excluded.     Renegotiation means the right of a party to a franchise executed pursuant to this chapter to require the other party thereto to discuss and consider in good faith a proposal for a modification of a franchise, it being understood that unless and until the parties agree to a modification, their agreement shall remain in full force and effect.     Residential subscriber means a subscriber who receives a service in an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession.     Sale shall include any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.     Service means any cable service or non-cable service, including any basic service, or any other service, whether or not originated by a grantee which is offered to any subscriber in conjunction with, or distributed over the cable system.     Service area means the entire geographic area within the franchise territory.     Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels.     Service related activity means any activity or function associated with the production or distribution of any service over the cable system, including without limitation, use of studio or other facilities or equipment, billing, audience promotion, or installation or lease of equipment.     State means the State of Georgia.     Subscriber means any person, firm, corporation or other entity who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee in the operation of a cable communications system.     Upstream signal means a signal originating from a terminal to another point in the cable communications system including video, audio or digital signals for either programs or other uses such as security alert services, etc.     VTR/VCR service means that service which makes available a second converter and necessary equipment to provide subscribers with the ability to record programming from one converter while viewing programming from the second converter. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 2.0, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 2009-51(09-O-1222), § 1, 9-11-09) 
Sec. 34-3. - Grant of non-exclusive franchise. (a)  Grant. Grantees which are determined, in the discretion of the council, to meet the standards and requirements set forth herein to provide a modern cable communications system to the residents and institutions of the city may be granted, subject to the provisions hereof, a non-exclusive right, privilege and authority to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, retain, operate and provide cable service in, over, under, upon, across and along any street, way, lane, avenue, sidewalk, alley, and other public place, now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the City of Atlanta, Georgia, such poles, towers, necessary wiring, lines, cables, fiber optics, conductors, ducts, conduit vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the purpose of the transmission and distribution of audio, visual, electronic and electric impulses, and other forms of electronic and electric signals through cables and/or wires, commonly called a cable system, in accordance with the Cable Act and other laws and regulations of the United States of America, and the State of Georgia, and the Ordinances and regulations of the city.     All rights granted herein to provide cable service shall not be construed to include telephone services, as defined and regulated by Georgia law and as traditionally required by the city to be obtained by separate franchise, but upon application of any grantee for a telephone franchise, any portion of the rights granted herein may be re-designated as a part of such telephone franchise, if appropriate. Nor shall such rights be construed to authorize the license or lease to any person or entity of the right to occupy or use the public rights-of-way for the conduct of any private business unless such person or entity has obtained a franchise or right-of-way agreement from the city for such use.     There shall be granted a further non-exclusive right, privilege, and authority to each grantee to lease, rent, or in any other lawful manner obtain the possession or use of towers, poles, lines, cables, conduit, and other equipment and facilities from any and all holders of public licenses and franchises within the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta, including but not limited to the Southern Bell Telephone Company and the Georgia Power Company, and to use such towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities, subject to all existing and future Ordinances and regulations of the city. The poles used by a grantee other than those owned by each grantee, shall be those erected and maintained by existing public utility systems or those owned by the city, when and where practicable, provided mutually satisfactory agreements can be entered into with said utility systems and with the city by separate agreements subject to the provisions of the Cable Act and state law.     All rights granted for the construction and operation of the cable communications system shall be subject to the continuing right of the city to require such reconstruction, relocation, change or discontinuance, of the appliances used by the cable communications system in the streets, alleys, avenues, and highways of the city, as shall in the reasonable opinion of the city be necessary in the public interest.     The application for and the acceptance of a franchise by a grantee under this chapter shall constitute by said grantee an acknowledgement of and consent to the provisions of this chapter as it may be amended; provided, however, that any amendment to this chapter binding on the grantee shall be confined to the lawful exercise of the city's police powers and to changes which do not materially alter the rights of the grantee under the franchise. The granting of a franchise hereunder shall not prevent the city from granting a franchise to any person other than the grantee. (b)  General ordinances. Any franchise granted by the city is hereby made subject to the general ordinance provisions now in effect and hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the city regarding permits, taxes, fees to be paid, or manner of construction. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 3.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-4. - Application procedure and franchise. (a)  Applications. Before any person, firm or corporation shall be allowed to proceed with the installation of its cable system hereunder, it shall first file an application for such franchise with the bureau of purchasing and real estate of the city in the form of a response to a request for proposal prepared by the city which includes but is not limited to, the following information: applicant's name and address; the date and place of incorporation if applicant is incorporated; a list of the names and addresses of stockholders, directors and officers of applicant if incorporated; the most recent certified balance sheet of the corporation or partnership or a sworn statement of net worth if the applicant is an individual; location of all other cable operations of the applicant; location and telephone numbers of all offices and facilities inside and outside the city to be used in building, operating, and maintaining the cable communications system in the city; the means of erecting wires contemplated by applicant; names of companies from which permission has been obtained to use existing poles or lines; plans (including a map) and timetable of construction and expansion of the cable system; plan of financing the cable system; financial projections for the cable system; a plan showing the effects of competition or interconnection with any existing franchise; cable system design, capacity, equipment, and performance specifications; operations, maintenance, and construction practices; programming and other services; rates; public, educational, and government access channels, equipment, facilities, and services; institutional network facilities, equipment, and services; EEO and affirmative action plans; equal business opportunity plans; customer service and consumer protection policies and procedures; and such other information as may be required by the city.     Application shall also include policies or certified copies of said policies of insurance and indemnification as prescribed by this chapter; a certified check in the amount of $35,000.00, plus cost of living adjustments based on CPI-PI published by the United States Department of Commerce determined from the initial date of adoption of this chapter, as a non-refundable filing fee, payable to the city; an agreement to comply with and be bound by all ordinances of the city existing as of the date of the issuance of the franchise as may be amended as provided herein.     The mayor shall review the application and may request related information from the applicant, and shall thereafter make a recommendation to the council. Following its review of the application and related information the council, in its sole discretion, shall either grant or deny the application. Upon granting the application, the council shall, by ordinance, authorize the mayor to execute a franchise with the applicant. (b)  Franchise. Each grantee shall execute a franchise consistent with this chapter which shall meet the cable communications needs of the community and which shall include the following items: (1)  Acknowledgement of the regulatory authority of the city and the legal right of the city to issue a franchise and to grant other franchises for cable communications systems. (2)  Agreement to be bound by all terms of the cable ordinance. (3)  Term of franchise. (4)  Provisions for service to residential and commercial areas, and single-family and multi-family dwellings. (5)  Detailed description of the cable system design, cable system capacity, and equipment to include without limitation, the bandwidth capacity; the number of homes served per fiber node; the equipment for the distribution cable system, the headend, status monitoring and reception of signals; converter specifications; emergency override capability; standby power capacity; parental control devices; stereo capability; and audio scrambling capability. (6)  Schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire franchise area. (7)  Technical standards, performance specifications, and testing procedures for the cable system. (8)  Franchisee's ongoing preventive maintenance plan and construction practices. (9)  Information relating to programming services to be offered. (10)  Bandwidth capacity on the cable system for city use. (11)  Plans for maintaining state of the art technology and improving cable system facilities. (12)  Construction standards in conformance with all local, state, and federal laws and regulations. (13)  Public, educational, and government access channels, equipment, facilities, and services to be provided. (14)  Cable drops and services to be provided at no charge. (15)  Institutional network equipment, facilities, and services to be provided. (16)  Interconnection between jurisdictions to be provided. (17)  Customer service and consumer protection policies and procedures which meet or exceed local, state, and federal standards. (18)  Equal employment opportunity, equal business opportunity, first source jobs, and business non-discrimination plans which comply with city law. (19)  Sale of cable system provisions. (20)  Franchise fee provisions. (21)  Performance bond provisions in an amount required by the city. (22)  Insurance provisions in an amount required by the city. (23)  Indemnification and defense of litigation provisions. (24)  Records and reports provisions as the city deems necessary and appropriate to review the performance of the franchisee with respect to the franchise, the Cable Ordinance, and applicable laws and regulations. (25)  Security fund and liquidated damages provisions. (26)  Such financial commitments as may be required pursuant to the franchise. (27)  Such other requirements as the city may include in a request for proposal for cable communications systems. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 4.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-5. - Ownership.     Grantee Ownership. Except as otherwise provided herein, each grantee shall at all times during the term of the franchise and any extension thereto, be the owner of, or have possessory rights to, all facilities and property, real and personal, of the cable system. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 5.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-6. - Service area, cable system, construction. (a)  Service area. Each grantee shall provide cable service to the franchise area authorized by the city which may include territory annexed to the city which is not already served by another cable system, provision of cable service to commercial areas shall be in accordance with the franchise. (b)  Cable system. Each grantee shall install a broadband telecommunications system capable of distributing at least 78 NTSC television channels or their equivalent, said cable system to be installed, maintained, operated and upgraded in accordance with the generally accepted standards of the cable communications industry, the Federal Communications Commission's Cable Television Technical Standards, and any requirements contained in the franchise. (c)  Construction. (1)  Compliance with construction and technical standards. No franchise shall be approved which does not provide that the grantee shall construct, rebuild, install, operate and maintain its cable system in a manner consistent with all laws, construction standards and codes, safety regulations, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, Bellcore Manual of Construction Procedures ("Blue Book"), and detailed technical standards provided for in the franchise. The grantee, through the cable system, shall provide uniform, strong signals which are free from any significant distortion and interference. The cable system shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained for 24-hours-a-day continuous operation. The cable system shall produce, for reception on subscribers' receivers which are in good working order, either monochrome or color pictures (providing the receiver is color capable) which are free from any noticeable interference or distortion which would cause any material degradation of video or audio quality. The cable communications system permitted to be operated shall be installed and operated in conformance with this cable ordinance, the franchise, and FCC rules and regulations. Any FCC technical standards or guidelines related to the cable communications system and facilities (unless invalidated by federal law) shall be deemed to be regulations under this chapter. At such time as the FCC does not regulate technical standards, grantee will continue to comply with the FCC standards which were effective prior to such discontinuance of regulation by the FCC. (2)  City approval of construction plans. Prior to the erection of any towers, poles or conduits or the upgrade, rebuild, or extension of the cable communications system under this chapter, the grantee shall first submit to the city and other designated parties for approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if required, together with maps and plans indicating the proposed location of all such facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, underground conduit, or fixture or any upgrade, rebuild, or extension of the cable communications system shall be commenced by any person until approval therefor has been received from the city. (3)  Joint use of facilities. Grantee shall grant to the city, free of expense, joint use of any and all poles and up to 25 percent of any unused conduit space owned by it for any proper municipal purpose, insofar as it may be done without interfering with the free use of grantee's own wires and fixtures. Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules covering construction and maintenance in effect at the time of construction. If, in accommodating the city's joint use of its poles, grantee is required to change or replace poles or install new poles, the city shall compensate grantee for such additional expense. (4)  Tests and performance monitoring. Not later than 30 days after any new or substantially rebuilt portion of the cable system is made available for service to subscribers, and thereafter annually, the grantee shall conduct technical performance tests to demonstrate full compliance with all applicable technical standards contained in this chapter and the franchise, and the technical standards and guidelines of the FCC. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 6.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-7. - Bond, security fund, and liquidated damages. (a)  Performance bond. Upon being granted a franchise, a grantee shall file with the chief financial officer of the city and shall thereafter during the period of the franchise maintain in full force and effect a corporate performance bond or other adequate surety agreement acceptable to the city, in its sole discretion, in the amount of $250,000.00 to guarantee grantee's performance of all obligations under the franchise. The bond shall be so conditioned that in the event that grantee, other than for reasons beyond grantee's control, shall fail to meet the yearly time schedule for the installation of all necessary equipment, as required herein, the city may call upon the surety to complete the installation work scheduled for that year. (b)  Security fund. (1)  Initial deposit. Immediately upon execution of a franchise, the grantee shall deposit with the chief financial officer (or upon direction to a designated depository as provided in the next succeeding paragraph) of the city, and maintain on deposit throughout the term of the franchise, the sum of $35,000.00 as security for the faithful performance by the grantee of all the provisions of the franchise, compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the city having jurisdiction over the grantee's acts or defaults under the franchise, and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, ownership, operation or maintenance of the cable system. The city shall cause the deposit of the security fund in an interest-bearing account, payable, in whole or in part, solely to the city only upon demand. Interest on the security fund, as accrued, shall be withdrawn and paid to the grantee semi-annually by the city; provided that, until paid, all such accrued interest shall be subject to withdrawal by the city for the same purposes for which the security fund is subject to withdrawal. (2)  Withdrawal from security fund. If the grantee fails to pay the city any compensation within the time fixed herein; or, fails, after ten days' notice to pay to the city any taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay to the city, within such ten days, any damages, costs or expenses which the city shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with the franchise or this chapter; or fails to pay any liquidated damages after three days from receipt of a decision of an arbitration panel confirming said liquidated damages pursuant to section 34-7(c)(4) (below); the chief financial officer of the city may immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the chief financial officer of the city shall notify the grantee of the amount and the date thereof. (3)  Replenishment of security fund. Within 20 days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn pursuant to section 34-7(b)(2) above, from the security fund deposited pursuant to section 34-7(b)(1) above, the grantee shall pay to, or deposit with, the chief financial officer of the city, a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount of $35,000.00. (4)  Disposition of security fund. Amounts received by the city from the grantee, whether directly paid by the grantee to the city or withdrawn from the security fund by the city, may be used by the city for any purposes it deems fit. The grantee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit with the chief financial officer of the city, at the expiration of the term of the franchise, provided that there is no outstanding default on the part of the grantee. The city shall return the balance of the security fund to the grantee within 90 days of the expiration of the franchise. (c)  Liquidated damages. (1)  Determination and assessment. Upon a determination by the city that the grantee has violated any of the material provisions of the franchise, or has, after reasonable written notice from the city, repeatedly failed to comply with other provisions of the franchise or this cable ordinance, the city shall direct the grantee by written notice sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to correct such violation within a time and manner and upon such terms as are reasonable. Upon failure of the grantee to correct the violation within the reasonable time and upon the reasonable terms as the city may direct, the city may assess the grantee and the grantee agrees to pay to the city, liquidated damages in accordance with the schedule of liquidated damages set forth in section 34-7(c)(4). Because the grantee's failure to comply with certain material provisions of the franchise and this cable ordinance will result in injury to the city, its residents and/or to subscribers, and because it will be difficult to estimate the extent of such injury, the city and the grantee hereby agree that the liquidated damages stated herein represent both parties' best estimate of the damage resulting from the specified injury. Such assessment shall not constitute a waiver by the city of any other right or remedy it may have under this chapter, or under applicable law, including, without limitation, its right to recover from the grantee and its sureties such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses as may have been suffered or incurred by the city by reason of, or arising out of, such breach of this chapter. (2)  Notification. Upon the city's assessment of liquidated damages pursuant to section 34-7(c)(1) above, written notice of such assessment shall be sent to the grantee by certified mail, return receipt requested, with a concise statement of the reason(s) therefor. (3)  Arbitration. Within ten days after the grantee has received a notice from the city pursuant to section 34-7(c)(2) above, the grantee may request arbitration. Pendency of the arbitration procedure shall suspend payment of liquidated damages until three days after mailing to the grantee by first-class mail of the decision of the arbitration panel confirming said liquidated damages in whole or in part. The decision of the arbitration panel shall be final and binding upon the parties hereto. Arbitrable matters shall be determined by a panel of three arbitrators. One arbitrator shall be appointed by the city, one by the grantee, and the third by the first two arbitrators appointed pursuant to this section. The expenses of the arbitration, including the fees of the arbitrators, shall be borne by the parties in such manner as the arbitrators may provide in their award. The determination of a majority of the arbitrators shall be binding on the parties. (4)  Schedule of liquidated damages. Pursuant to section 34-7(c)(1) above, the following liquidated damages shall be chargeable to the security fund on a per day basis. The determination of the date of commencement of the liquidated damages shall be determined at the time of the decision by the arbitration panel: a.  For failure to complete construction or extend service in accordance with franchise for reasons not beyond grantee's control: $1,000.00/day for each day the violation continues; b.  For failure to make franchise fee payments as required: $375.00/day for each day the violation continues; c.  For failure to comply with provisions of the franchise for public, educational and government access: $250.00/day for each day the violation continues; d.  For failure to comply with provisions of the franchise for the municipal network for reasons not beyond grantee's control: $500.00/day for each day the violation continues; e.  For violation of consumer protection requirements and customer service standards required by the franchise, this chapter, or by FCC regulation: $250.00/day per standard violated; f.  For violation of the equal employment opportunity and equal business opportunity requirements of the franchise and this chapter: $250.00/day for each day the violation continues; and g.  For violation of other material provisions of the franchise or this chapter: $250.00/day for each day the violation continues.     No damages shall be chargeable for violations which are minor, isolated, trivial or de minimis in nature, or which occur as a result of force majeure. As used herein the term "force majeure" shall mean, without limitation, the following: acts of God; strikes, orders of any kind of the city, of the government of the United States of America or the state or any of their respective departments, agencies or officials, or any civil or military authority; insurrections, riots; epidemics; landslides; lightning; earthquakes; fire; storms; floods; washouts; droughts; arrests; restraints of government and people; civil disturbances; explosions; partial or entire failure or unavailability of utilities; or any other cause or event not reasonably within the control of the franchisee (specifically, not including the availability of funding from any financing source). (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 7.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-8. - Insurance and indemnification. (a)  Insurance. (1)  Requirements. Prior to commencement of construction, but in no event later than 60 days after the effective date of the franchise and thereafter continuously throughout the duration of the franchise and any extensions or renewals thereof, the grantee shall meet the insurance requirements of the city as established by the city's chief financial officer. The city shall reserve the right to inquire periodically into the adequacy of any grantee's insurance coverage and, from time to time, the city may require, and the grantee shall furnish, reasonable changes in such policies to reflect changing liability limits and/or to compensate for inflation. (2)  No liability limit. None of the provisions of this chapter or any insurance policy required herein, or any damages recovered by the city hereunder, shall be construed to excuse the faithful performance by or limit the liability of grantee under this chapter or the franchise for damages either to the limits of such policies or otherwise. (3)  Financial security requirements. Any and all companies providing insurance required by this chapter must meet certain minimum financial security requirements set forth below. These requirements conform to the ratings published by A.M. Best & Co. in the current Best's Key Rating Guide - Property Casualty. The ratings for each company must be indicated on the Acord Certificate of Insurance Form. a.  Best's Rating not less than B and current. b.  Best's Financial Size Category not less than Class XIII. c.  Companies must be authorized to conduct and transact insurance contracts by the Insurance Commissioner, State of Georgia; furthermore, all bid, performance and payment bonds must be a U.S. Treasury Circular 570 listed company. (4)  Additional insured. The city shall be covered and named as an additional insured for all insurance policies written under the provisions of this chapter or the franchise. Confirmation of this shall appear on all said policies and certificates of insurance. (5)  Commercial general liability insurance. The grantee shall purchase, and will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, general liability insurance insuring the grantee in the minimum of: a.  $1,000,000.00 for property damages per occurrence; b.  $2,000,000.00 for property damage aggregate; c.  $5,000,000.00 for personal bodily injury or death to any one person; and d.  $10,000,000.00 bodily injury or death aggregate per single accident or occurrence, (6)  Policy inclusions. Such general liability insurance must include coverage for all of the following: commercial form, premises-operations, explosion and collapse hazard, underground hazard, products/completed operations hazard, contractual insurance, broad form property damage, and personal injury. (7)  Automobile liability insurance. The grantee shall purchase, and will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, automobile liability insurance for owned, non-owned, hired, or leased vehicles in the minimum amount of: a.  $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and consequent death per occurrence; b.  $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and consequent death to any one person; and c.  $500,000.00 for property damage per occurrence. (8)  Workers' Compensation and Employer's Liability Insurance. The grantee shall purchase and will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, worker's compensation and employer's liability, valid in the state, in the minimum amount of: a.  Statutory limit for Workers' Compensation; b.  $100,000.00 for bodily injury by accident/disease, each accident; c.  $100,000.00 for bodily injury by accident/disease, each employee; and d.  $500,000.00 for bodily injury by accident/disease, each policy limit. (9)  Subcontractors. If grantee employs any subcontractor who does not obtain insurance in his or her name, then the grantee will either cover such subcontractor by obtaining endorsements to be attached to its policies or require the subcontractor to obtain the necessary insurance coverage. In no event will the subcontractor be allowed to commence work on the project covered by the franchise unless and until certificates of insurance for the necessary types of insurance are provided. (10)  Self-insurance. Grantee shall be allowed to provide in above-referenced types and amounts of insurance through self-insurance. The city shall have the right to request reasonable information to assure itself that grantee has the necessary financial resources to self-insure. The city shall not unreasonably withhold approval from grantee to self-insure. (b)  Indemnification. The grantee agrees to indemnify, save harmless and defend the city, its agents, servants, and employees, and each of them against and hold it and them harmless from any and all lawsuits, claims, demands, liabilities, losses and expenses, including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees for or on account of any injury or losses to any person, or any death at any time resulting from such injury, or any damage to any property, which may arise or which may be alleged to-have arisen out of or in connection with the work covered by the franchise and performed or caused to be performed by the grantee; provided, however, the grantee shall not be liable for the negligent acts of the city and its employees. The grantee shall also pay for the cost to the city of defending in any court any action brought against the city arising out of the operations of the grantee hereunder. The grantee shall carry insurance in the above-described amounts to protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities which may arise or result directly or indirectly from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. All insurance required shall be written with a company or companies approved by the city and shall remain in full force and effect for the entire term of the franchise. Grantee shall provide to the city certificates of insurance evidencing that the insurance required herein is in full force and effect. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 8.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-9. - Compensation. (a)  Franchise fee. Each grantee shall pay the franchise fee hereinafter set forth. In exchange for the rights granted pursuant to this chapter and under the franchise, each grantee shall pay to the city on a monthly basis a franchise fee, as specified in its franchise. Such payment by the grantee to city shall not be in lieu of any occupation tax, license tax, or similar levy, property tax, or any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers). (b)  Failure to make required payment. In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified herein, grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the city's primary depository bank during the period that such unpaid amount is owed. (c)  Payments to be made monthly. The franchise fee and any other cost or damages assessed shall be payable monthly to the City of Atlanta. The grantee shall file a complete and accurate verified statement, itemized by category and for the franchise area only, of all gross revenue as defined in section 34-2 showing subscriber revenues from each and every category of service and non-subscriber revenues from each and every source during the period for which said monthly payment is made. Said payment shall be made to the city not later than 30 days after the expiration of each calendar month. (d)  The city right to inspection. The city shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter. Audits shall be at the expense of the city; provided that if such audit establishes that grantee is in arrears of more than five percent, grantee shall reimburse the city for reasonable audit expenses. Any additional amount due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the grantee by the city which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. (e)  Use of franchise fees. Consistent with the cable act, use of the funds derived from franchise fees shall be at the sole discretion of the city. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 9.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-10. - Rate regulation. (a)  Regulation. Subject to the provisions of applicable laws and regulations, the city shall have the authority to regulate the rates of the grantee. The mayor, or his designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges. (b)  Nondiscriminatory rates. Grantee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within the same general class of subscribers which must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee in its sole discretion from offering (i) discounts to multiple family dwelling subscribers billed on a bulk basis; (ii) promotional discounts; (iii) reduced installation and service rates for subscribers who have multiple services; (iv) discount for senior citizens and/or low income residents; or (v) commercial rates. Grantee's charges and rates for applicable services shall be itemized on subscribers' monthly bills. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 10.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-11. - Consumer protection.     Each grantee shall, at a minimum, meet the customer service standards released by the Federal Communications Commission on April 7, 1993, or any standards subsequently adopted by the FCC which supersede those released on April 7, 1993. Should grantee not meet the FCC customer service standards or any customer service standards set forth in this chapter or the franchise for two consecutive quarters, grantee shall submit to the city a written plan which describes the corrective action that the grantee is taking and plans to take to ensure compliance within a reasonable period of time. The city reserves the right to promulgate new, revised or additional customer service standards.     Each grantee shall also comply with the consumer protection and customer service provisions of its franchise and with, at a minimum, the following: (1)  Business office. Each grantee shall be required to establish, operate and maintain in the city a conveniently located walk-in facility for the purpose of receiving inquiries, requests and complaints concerning all cable services, all aspects of the construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the cable system, all aspects of billing policies and procedures, and for the payment of subscribers' service charges. Said facility shall be open during normal business hours. Grantee shall provide all subscribers or users with at least 30 days' prior notice of a change in said facility's business hours. The facility shall maintain a staff adequate to process complaints and requests for installation, service or repairs, and to conduct other business in a timely and efficient manner. Additional offices and payment stations to be provided by the grantee shall be included in the franchise. (2)  Telephone service. The grantee shall have a listed, toll free, staffed telephone number for service calls available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Said number shall be made available to subscribers and the general public. Grantee shall add additional phone lines when existing lines are substantially utilized. The grantee shall provide an unlisted, toll free telephone number to the city and utility companies to enable the city or utility companies to reach the grantee in case of emergency on a 24-hour, seven-days-a-week basis. The grantee shall prominently display its business and service telephone numbers on each monthly subscriber statement. (3)  Repair response. Each grantee shall maintain a repair and trouble-shooting force capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service within 24 hours after receipt of the complaint or request. (4)  Complaint procedures. Each grantee shall ensure that all subscribers, programmers, and members of the general public have recourse to a satisfactory complaint resolution procedure. Each grantee shall present to the city, no later than three months after the execution of its franchise, a set of rules, regulations, and procedures concerning the handling and settling of complaints. Provided, further, that each grantee shall provide its subscribers with copies of procedures for filing complaints, and shall provide additional copies to any persons on request. (5)  Complaint records. Written complaints received by grantee and service complaint summary reports shall be maintained for at least a five-year period. Aggregate data based upon these written complaints shall be made available for inspection by the city. Service complaint summary reports shall include verbal and written complaints and shall be segregated by type and category of complaint. (6)  Non-discrimination. All cable services shall be offered throughout the franchise area on a non-discriminatory basis. Grantee shall not refuse service to any resident who will not provide his or her social security number; however, grantee may require subscribers who do not provide their social security numbers to pay no more than two months of monthly service, deposits, and other applicable connection charges in advance of connection to the cable system. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit test marketing. (7)  Subscriber solicitation. Each grantee representative and all other grantee employees entering upon private property shall be required to wear an employee identification card issued by grantee and bearing a picture of said representative. (8)  Sales and annual information. Upon in-person solicitation of service or connection of cable service and annually thereafter, and at any time upon request, grantee shall furnish to each subscriber or potential subscriber a simple, but complete written explanation of all services offered; the fees, charges, terms and conditions of such services; information regarding billing, rebates, and service calls; procedures for ordering changes in or termination of services; complaint procedures; information regarding the availability of parental control devices; a complete statement of the subscriber's right to privacy in conformance with Section 631 of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C.; information concerning the utilization of video cassette recorders (VCRs) with cable service(s) and the cost for hooking up such VCRs so that they function as manufactured. Such written materials shall clearly disclose the price and other information concerning grantee's least costly service. (9)  Information with respect to viewing habits and subscription decisions. Grantee shall at all times comply with the protection of subscriber privacy provisions of the Cable Act and all laws governing subscriber privacy. The city reserves the right to promulgate new laws governing subscriber privacy. (10)  Subscriber and user contracts. Grantee will include the following provision in every contract agreement between grantee and any subscribers or user;     The subscriber/user as part of this contract, has certain rights of privacy restricting the collection and publication of personal information under the control of (name of grantee), including without limitation, information regarding program selections or service uses. (Name of grantee) shall make available upon the request of the subscriber/user further description of said rights as established in its chapter and franchise with the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 11.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-12. - Equal employment opportunity and equal business opportunity (EEO and EBO).     Each grantee shall comply with the city's requirements for contractors with respect to equal employment opportunity, equal business opportunity, first source jobs, and business non-discrimination. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 12.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-13. - Term and renewal of the franchise. (a)  Term. The term of the franchise shall be specified in the franchise. (b)  Renewal. Upon completion of the term of any franchise granted under this chapter, the city may grant or deny renewal of the franchise of the grantee in accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act. Discussions between the city and a grantee of each grantee renewal request shall include, but not be limited to, all terms and conditions of the franchise, such additional requirements as either party may request, whether the grantee has complied with the terms and conditions of its franchise, and the provision of a state-of-the-art cable system. The city's consideration of each grantee request for renewal shall be in accordance with the renewal of provisions of the cable act. The grantee shall own the cable communication system, but shall have no right to use of public rights-of-way upon the expiration of the franchise term. Upon notice to the grantee at least 30 days prior to expiration of the franchise, the city may direct the grantee to operate the cable system for a period of time not to exceed 12 months under the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as existed under the non-renewed franchise, and the company agrees to comply with such direction. (c)  Application fee. A grantee may file an application for a renewal of a franchise and upon filing shall be required to pay an application filing fee payable to the City of Atlanta in the amount of $35,000.00, plus cost of living adjustments based on CPI-PI published by the United States Department of Commerce determined from the initial date of adoption of this chapter. (d)  City right of first purchase. In the event of non-renewal as permitted by the cable act, the city reserves the right of first purchase of the cable system in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 34-16 of this chapter. If the city does not exercise its right to purchase the cable system, then such grantee shall be free to sell the physical assets of the cable system, in place, to any operator subject to city approval of such sale. If the grantee does not sell its assets, the city may require such grantee to remove, at its own expense, all portions of the cable system from all public ways and places within the franchise area. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 13.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-14. - Assignment and transfer. (a)  Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder shall not be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, by means including but not limited to, transfer by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, hypothecation or other means, nor shall the control of the grantee be changed, without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, In this regard, the city may inquire into, and determine to its reasonable satisfaction, the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist in any such inquiry. Failure to provide all information reasonably requested by the city as part of said inquiry shall be grounds for denial of the proposed change, transfer, or acquisition of ownership or control. The city may impose conditions on its consent regarding the technical, operating, customer service, and financial aspects of the cable system as well as the transferee's acceptance of conditions related to past non-compliance with this chapter or the franchise. The grantee shall cooperate with and respond to any city inquiry on whether any change of control has taken place. (b)  City right of first purchase. The city reserves the right of first purchase in any sale, transfer, lease, assignment or disposal of the cable system in accordance with the terms set forth in section 34-16 of this chapter. (c)  Transfer application fee. Upon requesting city consent as provided in section 34-14(a), the Grantee shall be required to pay a transfer application fee in the amount of $25,000.00, plus cost of living adjustments based on CPI-PI published by the United States Department of Commerce determined from the initial date of the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 14.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-15. - Revocation and cancellation. (a)  Revocation. Subject to the provisions of this section 34-15, the city may revoke a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter in the event of any of the following after notice and an opportunity for cure by the grantee as provided in section 34-15(b): (1)  The grantee defaults in the performance of any of the material obligations under this chapter or under such documents, contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the city and the grantee. (2)  The grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the liability and indemnification coverage, performance bond, or the security fund as required herein. (3)  The grantee violates any substantial and material final orders or rulings no longer subject to review, reconsideration or appeal of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this chapter or the franchise. (4)  The grantee evades any of the material provisions of this chapter or the franchise or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city or cable subscribers. (5)  The grantee substantially fails to comply with the construction standards and schedule in the franchise for reasons not beyond the grantee's control. (6)  The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged bankrupt. (7)  The grantee has failed to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of service area-wide interrupted service, except for reasons beyond the grantee's control. (8)  The grantee has permanently ceased to provide service over the cable communications system for any reason not beyond the grantee's control. (9)  The grantee substantially fails to meet the requirements regarding cable system characteristics or technical performance standards as provided in this chapter or the franchise. (10)  The grantee substantially fails to comply with the access or municipal network provisions of this chapter or the franchise. (11)  The grantee fails to comply with material customer service standards as provided in this chapter or the franchise. (12)  The grantee fails to make franchise fee payments as provided herein. (13)  The grantee repeatedly fails to comply with material EEO or EBO provisions of this chapter or the franchise. (14)  The grantee materially misrepresents facts in the application for or negotiation of the franchise or any extension or renewal thereof.     The use of the term "beyond the grantee's control" in this section 34-15(a) shall have the same meaning as the term "force majeure" as set forth in section 34-7(c)(4). (b)  Procedure prior to revocation. The mayor shall give written notification to the grantee and to the council at any time that one or more of the violations set forth in section 34-15(a) are deemed to exist. (1)  In the event the violation continues for a period of 60 days following such written notification without good faith action by the grantee to cure or initiate action to cure the violation, the mayor may request the council to revoke the franchise. (2)  The council shall consider the request of the mayor for revocation and in connection therewith shall, with not less than 15 days' prior written notice to the grantee, hold a public hearing, following advertisement to the public in a newspaper of general circulation in the community, at which time it shall hear any persons interested therein. Grantee shall have the right at such public hearing to address the issue of violations and to respond to any public or city concerns. The council shall then determine whether or not any such violation has occurred and warrants revocation of the franchise. (3)  If the council shall determine that such violation by the grantee occurred and warrants revocation of the franchise, then the council may, by ordinance, declare that the franchise is revoked and forfeited unless there be compliance by the grantee within such period as the council may fix to cure any violation determined to have occurred within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. (4)  The revocation and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the city under any provision of law or ordinance. (c)  Failure to operate. In addition to the procedures set forth above complete failure of a grantee to operate or otherwise make any use of the cable system for a continuous period of 12 months shall serve automatically to terminate the franchise, and the city shall have the option to purchase the cable system as provided herein. (d)  City option to purchase. Upon non-renewal or revocation for cause, or termination or cancellation pursuant to section 34-15(c), 34-15(e) or 34-15(f) of a grantee's franchise and any extensions thereto pursuant to the terms of this chapter, the city may, at its option, purchase the cable system as provided in section 34-16 herein subject to the provisions of the cable act. If the city does not exercise its right to purchase the cable system, then such grantee shall be free to sell the physical assets of the cable system, in place, to any operator, subject to city approval, to provide cable service in the city. If the grantee does not sell its assets, the city may require such grantee to remove, at its own expense, all portions of the cable system from all public ways and places within the franchise area. (e)  Cancellation upon foreclosure or judicial sale. Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the cable system, an affected grantee shall notify the city of such fact within ten days of its occurrence, whereupon the city shall have the right to cancel the franchise unless, (a) within 90 days after the foreclosure or other judicial sale, the purchaser at such sale shall have fully complied with all provisions of this chapter and remedied all defaults under the franchise; and (b) such purchaser, within said 90-day period, shall have executed an agreement whereby such purchaser assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this chapter and the franchise. (f)  Cancellation upon appointment of receiver or trustee. Each grantee's franchise shall be subject to cancellation upon the expiration of 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of any grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless: (1)  Within 120 days after his or her election or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter and remedied all defaults thereunder; and (2)  Such receiver or trustee, within said 120 days shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this chapter and the franchise. (g)  Abandonment by grantee. In the event that the use of any part of the cable system should permanently cease operation for any reason, or the rights granted hereunder or pursuant to a franchise have been terminated, canceled or have expired, the grantee shall promptly remove from the streets and public places all such property and poles of such cable system, other than any which the city may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the city.     Any property of grantee's to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the city may prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of a grantee in place, each grantee shall submit to the city an instrument to be approved by the city, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 15.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-16. - Purchase by city.     Upon the termination, revocation pursuant to section 34-15, expiration of franchise term without request for renewal, cancellation pursuant to sections 134-5(c), 34-15(e) or 34-15(f), or the non-renewal of any grantee's franchise, the city shall have the right to purchase the cable system as provided herein subject to the provisions of the cable act, and the city may direct such grantee to cease operation of the cable system.     If, upon termination, revocation pursuant to section 34-15, expiration of franchise term without request for renewal, cancellation pursuant to sections 34-15(c), 34-15(e), or 34-15(f), or the non-renewal of a franchise, the city exercises its option to purchase the cable system, the value calculated below upon the date of such termination, cancellation, non-renewal or revocation, shall constitute the agreed purchase price subject to the provisions of the cable act.     The purchase price to the city for the cable system shall be the fair market value of the cable system as of the date of such termination, cancellation or non-renewal. Such fair market value shall be determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern, but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. Such fair market value, if not agreed upon by the city and the grantee, shall be determined by mediation, or if still unresolved, the parties may seek resolution in the courts. The purchase price to the city for the cable system in the event of revocation shall be at an equitable price.     Prior to the transfer or assignment of the beneficial ownership of any franchise, pursuant to section 34-14, the city shall have the right to purchase such cable system assets at the price and on the terms comparable to those offered by the proposed transferee or assignee, within 60 days of grantee's notice to the city of such proposed transfer or assignment, provided, however that the city shall not have such right of purchase in the event of transfer to an affiliated entity directly or indirectly controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, such grantee or its parent company.     If the city elects to purchase the cable system, such grantee shall be required, upon payment of the purchase price, promptly to execute all appropriate documents to transfer title to the city, and shall assign all of the contracts, leases, licenses, permits, and any other rights necessary, in the discretion of the city, to maintain continuity of service to the public. The grantee shall be required to cooperate with the city or with any other person, partnership, corporation or legal entity authorized or directed by the city to operate the cable system for a temporary period, in maintaining continuity of service. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 17.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-17. - Regulatory authority. (a)  Change in law or regulation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the local, state and federal government, including, without limitation, those applicable to the construction and operation of the cable communications system. Nothing herein shall be deemed a waiver of grantee's right to challenge the validity of any such law, rule or regulation. In the event that any actions of the state or federal government or any agency thereof, or any court of competent jurisdiction upon final adjudication, substantially reduce in any way the power or authority of the city under this chapter or the franchise, or if in compliance with any local, state, or federal law or regulation, the grantee finds conflict with the terms of this chapter, the franchise, or any law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the city of the point of conflict believed to exist between such law or regulation and the laws or regulations of the city, this chapter and the franchise. The city, at its option, may notify the grantee that it wishes to negotiate those provisions which are affected in any way by such modification in regulations or statutory authority. Thereafter, the grantee shall negotiate in good faith with the City to develop alternate provisions which shall fairly restore the city to the maximum level of authority and power permitted by law. (b)  Authority. The city reserves the right to exercise the maximum plenary authority, as may at any time be lawfully permissible, to regulate the cable communications system, the franchise and the grantee. Should applicable legislative, judicial or regulatory authorities at any time permit regulation not presently permitted to the city, the city may without the approval of the grantee engage in any such additional regulation as may then be permissible, whether or not contemplated by this chapter; provided, however, that any amendment to this chapter shall be confined to the lawful exercise of the city's police powers and to changes which do not materially alter the rights of the franchisee under the franchise. (c)  Right of inspection of records. To the extent consistent with laws governing subscriber privacy and any other applicable laws, the city shall have the right to inspect all books, records, reports, maps, income tax returns (at the time of transfer, renewal or rate proceedings where necessary), financial statements, service complaint summary reports, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the franchise, upon reasonable prior notice, at any time during normal business hours. (d)  Right of inspection of cable system facilities. The grantee shall grant the city the right to inspect all cable system facilities or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter, the franchise and applicable laws and regulations, and shall have the right to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter, the franchise, and other applicable laws and regulations. (e)  Right of inspection of property. At all reasonable times and upon reasonable notice to grantee, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the city, of cable system facilities, together with any appurtenant property of grantee situated within or without the city. (f)  Right to require removal of property. In the event of non-renewal of the franchise, or upon its revocation or expiration, as provided for herein, the city shall have the right to require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all portions of the cable communications system required by public necessity and convenience from all streets and public ways within the city. (g)  Expense reimbursement to city. The grantee shall pay the city a sum of money which will, when added to any application fees received, reimburse all costs and expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting, transferring which requires city consent as provided herein, extending for more than two years, or renewing a franchise, including, but not limited to, consultant fees, attorneys' fees, publication fees, travel expenses and all other direct costs; provided, however, that the city shall submit a detailed schedule of all such costs. Such payment shall be made within 30 days after the city furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses. Such payment by the grantee shall not be deemed to be part of the franchise fee obligations of the grantee pursuant to section 34-9(a) of this chapter and the franchise. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 17.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-18. - Records and reports. (a)  Records. (1)  Grantee right of inspection of records. To the extent consistent with laws governing subscriber privacy and any other applicable laws, the city shall have the right to inspect all books, records, reports, maps, income tax returns (at the time of transfer, renewal or rate proceedings where necessary), financial statements, service complaint summary reports, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the franchise, upon reasonable prior notice, at any time during normal business hours. (2)  Review. The grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine and copy or transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by grantee or under its control concerning the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee. If any such maps or records are not kept in the city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the city shall determine that an examination of such maps or records is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of their duties, then all travel and maintenance expenses necessarily incurred by the city in making such examination shall be paid by grantee. (3)  Records required. The grantee shall at all times maintain for a five-year period, coinciding with the city's five-year performance review, the following: a.  All written complaints received and service complaint summary reports. b.  A record of service interruptions or degradation of service experienced. c.  A comprehensive record of all personnel transactions and utilization of contractors, subcontractors, vendors and suppliers by race and sex. d.  Records from which customer service standards compliance data are derived.     The grantee shall at all times maintain a full and complete set of plans, records and "as built" maps showing the exact location of all cable communication system equipment installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops.     The grantee shall provide to the city such additional information, records and documents the city may deem reasonably necessary and appropriate to review the performance of the grantee with respect to this chapter and the franchise. (b)  Reports required. The grantee shall file the following reports with the city. Unless otherwise specified, all annual reports shall be submitted 60 days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year. (1)  Regulatory communications. A copy of material reports and documents required by and/or submitted to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), including any proof of performance tests, annual employment reports (FCC Form 395-A), basic signal leakage reports (FCC Form 320), and annual reports of cable television systems (FCC Form 325) shall be submitted simultaneously to the city by delivery to the office of marketing and communications. Financial information, and all petitions, applications and communications of all types; and all materials required by and/or submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation of the grantee's cable system will be made available to the city upon request. (2)  Construction reports. Construction reports shall be submitted to the city within 90 days after the franchise is awarded and quarterly thereafter within 14 days after the end of the month for any construction undertaken during the term of the franchise until construction is complete, including the rebuild, as specified in the franchise. Such report shall include a description of the progress in applying for any necessary agreements, licenses, or certifications and any other information the city and the grantee may reasonably deem necessary. The content and format of the report will be reasonably determined by the city and the grantee and may be reasonably modified at their discretion. (3)  Proof of performance tests. Proof of performance test results shall be submitted to the city when sections of the cable system are rebuilt and annually as required by the franchise. (4)  Tests required by city. Report of technical tests required by the city shall be submitted as specified in the franchise. (5)  Change in service. A report on any change in programming or service shall be provided to the city 30 days prior to implementation. (6)  Franchise rules. All printed materials related to rules, regulations, terms and conditions adopted as the grantee's policy in connection with its subscribers, and which may be included on the grantee's contract or application form for subscriber service shall be filed with the city at the time the material is first provided to subscribers. (7)  Customer service reports. Within 30 days after the end of each quarter, the grantee shall submit reports which demonstrate the grantee's compliance with the FCC customer service standards, and any additional standards of this cable ordinance and franchise. The grantee shall use best efforts to segregate City of Atlanta data from metro Atlanta data. (8)  Financial reports. The grantee shall submit annually to the city the following financial reports within 90 days following the end of the grantee's fiscal year: a.  An ownership report, indicating all persons, who at any time during the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest in the franchise of five percent or more. b.  An annual, fully audited and certified financial report for the previous fiscal year, including year-end balance sheet; gross income statement showing subscriber revenue from each and every category of service and non-subscriber revenue from each and every source; line item operating expenses, depreciation expense, interest expense and taxes paid; statement of sources and applications of funds. c.  A list of officers and directors of the grantee and of any parent corporation and/or officers or managers of partnerships or other entities having an ownership interest of at least five percent. d.  For the franchise area only, a current annual statement of all capital expenditures, including new construction and equipment. (9)  Proof of insurance. The grantee shall submit annually to the city certificates of insurance for any and all policies of insurance required hereunder and in the franchise. (10)  Operational reports. Grantee shall submit annually a summary of the previous year's activities including, but not limited to, subscriber totals for each category of service offered including number of pay units; subscriber penetration, number of bulk and commercial subscribers; rates, channel alignment and program services; public, educational, government, and leased access services offered; new services offered; hours of operation; customer service agreement and handbook; service complaint summary reports; and the physical miles of plant construction and plant in operation. (11)  Future projections. The grantee shall submit annually a projection of cable system and service plans for the future. (12)  EEO and EBO. The grantee shall submit all reports relating to equal employment opportunity, equal business opportunity, business non-discrimination, and first source jobs at the time and in the form prescribed in the franchise. (13)  Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or property, the city may deem reasonably necessary and appropriate to review the performance of the grantee with respect to the franchise, this chapter, and applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 18.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-19. - Renegotiation.     The field of cable communications is a rapidly changing field which shall, no doubt, see many legal regulatory, technical, and, financial, changes during the term of the franchise. Therefore, in order to provide for a maximum degree of flexibility and to achieve a continued advanced and state-of-the art cable system for the city, the grantee shall plan for re-negotiation sessions within 120 days of every five-year anniversary date of the award of the Franchise. The following topics shall be discussed at every scheduled re-negotiation session: rates; application of new technologies; state of the art; cable system performance; subscriber and non-subscriber services offered in the city and available nation-wide; customer service; subscriber privacy; amendments to this chapter; new laws and regulations; judicial and FCC rulings; equal employment opportunity and equal business opportunity and franchise fee. Topics in addition to those listed may be added by either party. Members of the general public may add topics either by working through the negotiating parties, or by presenting a petition. If such a petition bears the valid signatures of 500 or more qualified electors of the city, the proposed topic or topics shall be added to the list of topics to be discussed at the re-negotiation session. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 19.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-20. - Miscellaneous provisions. (a)  Captions. The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. (b)  Severability. If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision of this chapter is determined to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional upon final adjudication by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any state or federal regulatory agency having jurisdiction thereof, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain full force and effect. (c)  Effective date. This chapter shall take effect and be in force from the date of adoption. (d)  No waiver of rights. No course of dealing between the grantee and the city nor any delay on the part of the city in exercising any rights hereunder shall operate as a waiver of any such rights of the city or acquiescence in the actions of the grantee in contravention of rights except to the extent expressly waived by the city or expressly provided for in the franchise. (e)  Limitation on use of financial commitments. As may be specified in a franchise, any financial commitments obtained by the grantee which have been confirmed to the city pursuant to the franchise shall be used solely in connection with the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable communications system or the grantee's performance of the terms, obligations, and conditions of this chapter and the franchise. (f)  Effect of pending litigation. In the absence of a stay or other similar remedy granted by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, no pending litigation or appeal to any regulatory body or court having jurisdiction over the grantee shall excuse the grantee from the performance of its obligations under this chapter or the franchise. Failure of the grantee to perform such obligations because of pending litigation or petition may result in forfeiture or revocation pursuant to the provisions of this section. (g)  Conflict. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 20.0, 11-28-94) 
Chapter 38 - CEMETERIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 86. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; cemeteries generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 38-1—38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL CEMETERIES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Naming of public facilities and streets in honor of persons, § 2-2; vending machines on city property and in city facilities, § 2-3. State Law reference— Receipt of cemetery lots in trust, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 38-26. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commissioner means the commissioner of parks, recreation and cultural affairs.     Department means the department of parks and recreation. (Code 1977, § 10-2001; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-27. - Designation of use; adoption of rules and regulations.     The commissioner may designate the use of any cemetery and may adopt appropriate rules and regulations governing the use of any cemetery and the general operation of all cemeteries. (Code 1977, § 10-2071) 
Sec. 38-28. - Free burial permits for paupers.     The mayor may grant free burial permits for the interment of the bodies of paupers or of those dying in charitable institutions or in similar cases, if the mayor decides that the circumstances justify them. (Code 1977, § 14-7034) Cross reference— Social services, ch. 126. 
Sec. 38-29. - Disturbing graves.     It shall be unlawful to disturb any grave, or deface, pull up or remove anything placed to mark a grave. (Code 1977, § 17-1003) 
Sec. 38-30. - Injuring or destroying tombs or flowers.     It shall be unlawful to destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure placed in the cemetery, or any fence, railing or other work used for the protection or ornament of any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure, or for the ornament or protection of the cemetery, or to willfully destroy, cut, break, remove or injure any tree, shrub or plant that may have been planted or may be growing in the cemetery, or to commit any other trespass within the limits of the cemetery. (Code 1977, § 17-1004) State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Secs. 38-31—38-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OAKLAND CEMETERY[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Oakland Cemetery landmark district, § 701-2001 et seq. 
Sec. 38-41. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Cemetery means Oakland Cemetery.     Sexton means the Sexton of Oakland Cemetery. (Code 1977, § 10-2001) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-42. - Scope.     The provisions of this division apply to the cemetery. 
Sec. 38-43. - Use of funds for restoration.     All revenues derived from the operation of the cemetery and the sale of spaces therein shall be used for the restoration of the cemetery. (Code 1977, § 10-2072) _____
Sec. 38-44. - Schedule of charges for cemetery services.     The schedule of charges for specified services at the cemetery is established as follows: Weekday Weekend Holiday (1) Internment—Opening and closing $800.00 $1,000.00 $1,250.00 (2) Disinterment—Opening and closing fee 700.00 800.00 (3) Cremation space 600.00 600.00 (4) Infant/children—Opening and closing 650.00 750.00 750.00 (5) Disinterment of cremains 300.00 400.00 (6) Vault installation fee 250.00 (7) Marker installation 100.00 (8) Charge for the use of tents and chairs 100.00  (Code 1977, § 10-2079; Ord. No. 2002-66, § 1, 8-26-02) _____
Sec. 38-45. - Schedule of charges for guided tours. (a)  The following fee schedule of charges is adopted by the department for guided tours of the grounds in historic Oakland Cemetery: (1)  Students (ages 7—22) ..... $6.00 (2)  Senior citizens (ages 65 and above) ..... 5.00 (3)  Adults (ages 23—64) ..... 10.00 (4)  Group rates: Students (age 7—22, with ID) ..... 6.00 Adults (age 23—64) ..... 12.00 Senior citizen (age 65 and above) ..... 6.00 (5)  Minimum charge for any adult group of less than ten ..... 50.00 (6)  Family of four, two adults, two children ..... 28.00 Each additional child ..... 6.00 (b)  Payment of the charges stated in subsection (a) of this section are due at the start of the tour based on the number of attendees. (c)  All revenues generated from the tours will be used for restoration of historic Oakland Cemetery as contemplated in section 38-43. (d)  No person shall sell merchandise in the cemetery except literature of the cemetery and tickets for conducted guided tours or cultural events. (Code 1977, § 10-2077; Ord. No. 2002-66, § 2, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 2004-34, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2010-40(10-O-0936), § 12, 7-15-10; Ord. No. 2015-37(15-O-1216), § 1, 7-15-15 ) 
Sec. 38-46. - Use at night prohibited.     No person, unless authorized by the commissioner or director, bureau of parks, shall be within the limits of the cemetery between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Code 1977, § 10-2073) 
Sec. 38-47. - Care of lots. (a)  No tree, shrub, plant or grass shall be planted on or removed from any private plot in the cemetery without the permission of the sexton. (b)  No lot in the cemetery shall be covered with gravel, cement or concrete. (Code 1977, § 10-2074) 
Sec. 38-48. - Trespass on plots.     No person shall trespass on any plot within the cemetery. (Code 1977, § 10-2075) 
Sec. 38-49. - Stone rubbings.     No person shall conduct any stone rubbings within the cemetery, unless approved by the commissioner or director, bureau of parks. (Code 1977, § 10-2076) 
Sec. 38-50. - Disturbing graves; disinterments. (a)  Where evidence of a grave exists, either in the records of the cemetery or by sounding, a rightful burial by permission of the lot owner shall be presumed, and the body shall not be moved. Removal may be allowed only when proof is tendered that the person requesting removal is the next of kin and has the right of removal. A copy of this proof must be tendered to the sexton at the time of removal with payment therefor, and the city shall be supplied by the person requesting removal with a statement of indemnity by the person releasing the city from liability by the performance of the removal. (b)  No person shall exhume a dead body at the cemetery without a permit as required by law. (c)  The opening of a grave in the cemetery and the interring in the grave of an additional body is forbidden. (Code 1977, § 10-2078) Disinterment of dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-42 et seq. 
Sec. 38-51. - Pets. (a)  No person shall walk or possess any pet in the cemetery. (b)  It shall be the responsibility of any person bringing a pet into the cemetery to clean up any matter excreted by the pet. (c)  The prohibition in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any guide dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a totally or partially blind person or a deaf person or a service dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a physically disabled person. (Code 1977, § 10-2015(a), (b), (d)) Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. State Law reference— Right of visually handicapped and deaf persons to be accompanied by guide dog or service dog, O.C.G.A. § 30-4-1. 
Secs. 38-52—38-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CEMETERY OR BURIAL GROUND DISTURBANCE PERMIT[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2006-58, adopted Aug. 29, 2006 states: The provisions of this article shall not apply to any cemetery owned by the City of Atlanta, including but not limited to, Oakland Cemetery. 
Sec. 38-60. - Intent.     The urban design commission (UDC) shall have the power to hear, grant or deny applications for a cemetery or burial ground, as defined in paragraphs (3) and (5) of O.C.G.A. § 36-72-2, as amended, disturbance permit in accordance with the powers delegated to the City by O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq. as amended. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-61. - Procedures.     Applications shall be filed with the director, urban design commission or their designee and shall include any supporting material as required by the rules of the commission or this section. Upon receipt of a complete application and the supporting material the UDC shall place the application on a regularly scheduled meeting agenda for public hearing, cause due notice of the time and place thereof to be published and give notice to surrounding property owners and descendants of those located in the cemetery or burial ground subject to the application. UDC staff shall review the information submitted and submit a findings of fact and recommendation to the urban design commission for their review and recommendation. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-62. - Application.     Application for a permit shall include, at a minimum, the following information: (a)  Evidence of ownership of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located in the form of a legal opinion based upon a title search; (b)  A report prepared by an archeologist as defined in paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A. § 36-72-2, as amended, stating the number of graves believed to be present and their locations as can be determined from the use of minimally invasive investigation techniques, including remote sensing methods and the use of metal probes, which activities shall not require a permit; (c)  A survey prepared by or under the direction of a registered surveyor showing the location and boundaries of the cemetery or burial ground based on an archeologist's report; (d)  A plan prepared by a genealogist as defined in paragraph (7) of O.C.G.A. § 36-72-2, as amended, for identifying and notifying the descendants of those buried or believed to be buried in such cemetery. If those buried or believed to be buried are of aboriginal or American Indian descent, the genealogist, in preparing the notification plan, shall consult with the Council on American Indian Concerns created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-12-280, as amended, and shall include in the notification plan not only any known descendants of those presumed buried but also any American Indian tribes as defined in paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A. § 44-12-260, as amended, that are culturally affiliated; and (e)  A proposal for mitigation or avoidance of the effects of the planned activity on the cemetery or burial ground. If the proposal includes relocation of any human remains or burial objects, the proposal shall specify the method of disinterment, the location and method of disposition of the remains, the approximate cost of the process, and the approximate number of graves affected. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-63. - Identification and notification of descendants.     The applicant shall implement its plan for identifying and locating descendants no later than the date the application is submitted to the director, urban design commission. The UDC staff shall review the applicant's plan for identifying and notifying the descendants of the deceased persons and may require as a condition for issuing a permit that the applicant implement additional reasonable attempts to identify and locate descendants. Notice to possible descendants shall include information on how to contact the city and a summary of the rights of descendants under this chapter. The UDC shall promptly inform any descendant who indicates an interest in the disposition of the human remains and burial objects regarding any proposals for mitigation, the terms of any permit issued, the time and place of any scheduled public hearings, and appeal procedures and events. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-64. - Public hearing; decision of city council. (a)  The commission shall conduct the public hearing within 60 days of the filing of an application and shall make a written recommendation to the city council no later than 15 days following the public hearing with respect to the sufficiency of the notice to descendants, the plan for mitigation, the disturbance and adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground, the survey of the cemetery, and plans for disinterment and reinterment. The applicant shall be required to post the nearest public road and the burial ground not less than 30 days prior to the both public hearing to be conducted by the UDC and the hearing before city council. (b)  Within 15 days following receipt of the recommendations of the UDC, the city council shall schedule a second public hearing at which any interested party or citizen may appear and be given an opportunity to be heard. In addition to the notice required in section 38-63, notice of the public hearing shall be advertised in the legal organ of the jurisdiction once a week for the two consecutive weeks immediately preceding the week in which any such hearing is held. (c)  Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision. The city council shall have the authority to deny the application with written reasons therefore, to issue a permit adopting the application in whole or in part, or to issue a permit which may include additional requirements to mitigate the proposed activity's adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground, including but not limited to relocation of the proposed project, preservation of the cemetery or burial ground as an undeveloped area within the proposed development or use of land, and respectful disinterment and proper disposition of the human remains. The city may adopt the applicant's proposal for mitigation. (d)  Findings required. The city council shall consider the following in making its findings: (1)  The presumption in favor of leaving the cemetery or burial ground undisturbed; (2)  The concerns and comments of any descendants of those buried in the burial ground or cemetery and any other interested parties; (3)  The economic and other costs of mitigation; (4)  The adequacy of the applicant's plans for disinterment and proper disposition of any human remains or burial objects; (5)  The balancing of the applicant's interest in disinterment with the public's and any descendant's interest in the value of the undisturbed cultural and natural environment; and (6)  Any other compelling factors which the city council deems relevant. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-65. - Application fee.     The city council shall be authorized to impose an application fee which shall reflect the cost to the city for processing and reviewing the application including, but not limited to, the cost of hiring an attorney, independent archeologist, publication of notices and independent surveyor to assist in making recommendations regarding the applicant's plan. Such fee, if imposed, shall not exceed $2,500.00. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-66. - Appeals.     Should any applicant or descendant be dissatisfied with a decision of the city council, he or she, within 30 days of such decision, may file an appeal in the Superior Court of Fulton County by filing with the clerk of said court a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the decision of city council is rendered. (a)  Activities during time for appeal and after filing of appeal. Until the expiration of the time for appeal as set forth in section, the applicant shall not begin or resume activities which comply with the permit issued by the city. If an appeal is filed, the applicant may begin or resume activities which comply with the permit only upon consent of the city and the party seeking judicial review or upon order of the reviewing court for good cause shown. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-67. - Inspections.     The department of police shall inspect as necessary to determine whether the applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter requiring cessation or limitation of activity and with the terms of the permit as issued by the city council or as modified by the superior court or reviewing court. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-68. - Disinterment and disposition of human remains.     Any disinterment and disposition of human remains or burial objects permitted under this chapter shall be supervised, monitored, or carried out by the applicant's archeologist and shall be done at the expense of the person or entity to whom the permit is issued. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-69. - Violations.     Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-8 of the Atlanta City Code. (Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Chapter 46 - CIVIC AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Bureau of cultural affairs, app. IV, § 33. Cross reference— Payment of certain investment income to Atlanta Art Association, § 2-923; library, ch. 102; parks and recreation, ch. 110. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 46-1. - Lease agreements for Cyclorama. (a)  Authority to negotiate and execute. The mayor or a designee, which is presumed to be the director of the Cyclorama of the city, is authorized on behalf of the city to negotiate and execute lease agreements from time to time with persons or organizations wishing to rent the Cyclorama. (b)  Discrimination prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any lessee of the Cyclorama to discriminate among potential exhibitors or patrons because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. (c)  Contents of contracts. All contracts entered into for the leasing of the Cyclorama shall contain language which incorporates subsection (b) of this section pertaining to antidiscrimination and shall provide that a material violation of this section shall, at the option of the mayor or a designee, operate to void the contract and to terminate the event being held, should the mayor or a designee so declare. (Code 1977, § 10-4012; Ord. No. 2000-72, 12-12-00) Cross reference— Discrimination generally, § 94-66 et seq. 
Secs. 46-2—46-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIVIC CENTER[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Naming of public facilities and streets in honor of persons, § 2-2; vending machines on city property and in city facilities, § 2-3; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; duties of Civic Center director relevant to boxing and wrestling contests, § 14-37. 
Sec. 46-36. - Prohibited activities. (a)  No person shall smoke in the Civic Center except in the restrooms and areas designated by the Civic Center director. (b)  No person shall skateboard or roller skate on the sidewalks which are on the premises of the Civic Center, including the area composing the plaza of the Civic Center. (c)  The violation of subsection (b) of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-8. (Code 1977, § 10-4003) 
Sec. 46-37. - Lease agreements. (a)  Authority to negotiate and execute. The mayor or the mayor's designee, which is presumed to be the director of the Civic Center, on behalf of the city, shall negotiate and execute lease agreements from time to time with persons or organizations wishing to rent the Civic Center. (b)  Discrimination prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any lessee of the Atlanta Civic Center to discriminate among potential exhibitors or patrons on the grounds of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. (c)  Contents of contracts. All contracts entered into for the leasing of the Civic Center shall contain language which incorporates subsection (b) of this section pertaining to anti-discrimination and shall provide that a material violation of this section shall, at the option of the mayor or a designee, operate to void the contract and to terminate the event being held, should the mayor or a designee so declare. (d)  Surcharge on tickets. All contracts for the leasing of the Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center entered into shall contain language requiring the lessee to collect for and on behalf of the City of Atlanta a surcharge in the amount of $1.50 for each ticket sold for admission to any event taking place at the Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center during such lease. The surcharge is due no later than close of business on the first business day following the closing of the box office for each such event. The surcharge is to be delivered to the Director of the Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center or designee in the form of a certified check or cash, an amount equal to $1.50 for each such ticket sold and certified ticket sales accurately reflecting the number of tickets sold and the surcharge due and paid, such amounts are to be dedicated to the Civic Center's capital and non-capital improvements and is to be deposited in FDOA: 5581 (Civic Center Revenue Fund) 000002 (Default/Revenue Department 3473001 (Ticket Surcharge; General). (Code 1977, § 10-4001; Ord. No. 2000-71, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2004-35, § 1, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2010-26(10-O-0629), § 2, 6-16-10) Discrimination generally, § 94-66 et seq. _____
Sec. 46-38. - Rental rules and regulations. (a)  Rules and regulations. The Mayor or her designee may establish rules and regulations governing the use of the Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center complex. (The Code of Ordinances, Section 10-4002 (a)) (b)  Rates. The following fee schedule is hereby adopted for the Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center: (The Code of Ordinances, section 10-4002(b)) Item All Users Conducting Revenue Generating Activity All Users, Non-Ticketed Events Auditorium Evening Events (per performance) $4,000 $6,000 Matinee (per performance) $3,000 $4,000 Non-Performance Day $3,000 $3,000    Item Customers/Clients Exceptions Piedmont Rm. For receptions, fashion shows, parties, etc.  Full room $2,000.00  ½ (half-room) $1,000.00  Full room $1,000.00 For events with no food or beverage.  ½ (half-room) $500.00 Lobbies (per day) None  Upper lobby $1,000.00  Lower lobby $1,500.00  Plaza area $3,000.00 Other (per day) $75.00 None Kitchen usage $75.00 Chair rental $0.75 Table rental $25.00 (skirted w/linen)  (Code 1977, § 10-4002; Ord. No. 2004-35, § 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2010-26(10-O-0629), § 1, 6-16-10; Ord. No. 2010-26(10-O-0629), § 1, 6-16-10) _____
Secs. 46-39—46-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WORKS OF ART IN PUBLIC PLACES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Procurement of construction, architect, engineer and land surveying services, § 2-1266 et seq. 
Sec. 46-76. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Construction project means any capital project, including but not limited to those paid wholly or in part by the city with voter non-school general obligation bonds, annual general obligation non-school bonds, public grants except where prohibited, park improvement funds, revenue bonds and general funds, for the purpose of constructing or remolding any building, decorative or commemorative structure, park, street, sidewalk, parking facility or utility or any portion thereof within the city.     Eligible funds means funds which pay for actual construction costs. This excludes funds which pay for engineering, architecture, acquisition, land acquisition and interest costs, as well as any incidental costs not associated with construction. Further, it refers only to that portion of public funds, which come from sources other than general obligation school bonds, private grants (except where expressly stated in the conditions of the grant itself) and assessment programs.     Municipal art account means the account within each eligible fund in which one and one-half percent of all eligible funds for construction projects are deposited each year, and of which 80 percent shall be expended on the selection, design and development of works of public art, and 20 percent reserved for maintenance of works of public art and arts administration by the bureau of cultural affairs (BCA). BCA shall be the administrator of all municipal arts accounts and have sole expenditure authority on said accounts.     Municipal art plan means an annual plan developed and administered by the bureau of cultural affairs for the aesthetic enhancement of all capital construction projects paid for by eligible funds in a particular year. (Code 1977, § 10-4005; Ord. No. 2001-55, § 4, 7-24-01) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-77. - Policy.     A policy is established to direct the inclusion of works of art in the public works projects of the city and to place art on municipally owned or rented property. The city's public art master plan shall guide the development, administration and maintenance of public art in Atlanta. (Code 1977, § 10-4004; Ord. No. 2001-55, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 46-78. - Funds for works of art.     All request for appropriations for construction projects from eligible funds as defined in section 46-76 shall include the encumbrance of an amount equal to one and one-half percent of the estimated cost of such projects for public works of art and shall be accompanied by contractual requirements authorizing the bureau of cultural affairs to expend such funds after the same have been deposited in a municipal arts account. When any such request for construction projects is approved, the appropriation for such construction projects shall be made and shall include an appropriation of funds for works of art, at the rate of one and one-half percent of project costs to be deposited into the municipal arts account as a line item in each fund. Money identified by each bureau, or agency for its public art percentage program shall be expended for payees as prescribed by the municipal arts plan, as provided in section 46-79(2). (Code 1977, § 10-4006; Ord. No. 2001-55, § 5, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 46-79. - Authority of bureau of cultural affairs.     To carry out its responsibilities under this article, the bureau of cultural affairs shall: (1)  Prepare for review by the mayor and council, a municipal arts plan which shall outline the expenditure of funds from the municipal arts account(s). Such plan shall include, but not be limited to, the method(s) of commissioning artists, specific locations and expenditures for specific works of art, and maintenance and administration of the public arts program; (2)  Cause the municipal arts plan to be an integral part of the office's recommendations with regard to the city's comprehensive development plan and the capital improvement plan; (3)  Bring to the attention of the city council any proposed work of art requiring extraordinary operation or maintenance expenses; (4)  Recommend the placement of works of art consistent with section 46-81; (5)  Make recommendations regarding artist(s) selections without regard to an individual's or the perception of an individual's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a trained dog guide by a blind, deaf or otherwise physically disabled person; (6)  Make recommendations to the council as to the amount of money required in advance to carry out contracted projects by artist(s); the amount advanced shall not exceed one-third of the total allocable to such artist(s) for the contracted work of art and shall be approved by the council and mayor prior to payment; and (7)  Review prior to final payment all works in order to report on the conformity of the finished work with the approved plans or other document describing the work of art to be carried out. (8)  Approve all expenditures from municipal arts accounts of which 80 percent shall be expended on the design, selection and development of works of public art, and 20 percent shall be expended on maintenance and administration of the public art program. (9)  Develop procedures for implementation of the policy governing the acceptance of gifts of public art to the city and the policy governing the process for the de-accessioning of public art. (10)  Establish guidelines for and recommend the appointment of a public art advisory committee comprised of representatives from the business community, the arts community and the citizens of the city, to advise and assist the bureau of cultural affairs on matters regarding the implementation of public art policies for Atlanta. (11)  Review and approve all capital construction projects for compliance with the percent for art section of the Code of Ordinances, and determine if said percent for art funds shall be utilized on or about a specific project, or pooled with other funds for larger public arts projects located within the city, with the assistance of the public art advisory committee. (Code 1977, § 10-4007; Ord. No. 2000-70, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2001-55, § 6, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 46-80. - Placement of art.     Works of art selected and implemented pursuant to this article may be placed in, on or about any city construction project or other city-owned, city-leased or city-rented property. They may be attached or detached within or about such property and may be either temporary or permanent. Placement of works of art shall be authorized by the city council after a report of the mayor or the mayor's designee. (Code 1977, § 10-4008) 
Sec. 46-81. - Account and payments.     There is established a special account within each eligible fund designated the "municipal arts account into which funds are appropriated as contemplated by section 46-78 and 46-79 hereof shall be deposited. Each disbursement from such account(s) or from other appropriations for works of arts shall be approved by the bureau of cultural affairs, as authorized by the city council. Twenty percent of each municipal arts account shall be reserved for the administration and maintenance of works of public art by the bureau of cultural affairs. (Code 1977, § 10-4009; Ord. No. 2001-55, § 7, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 46-82. - Waiver of article.     This article may be waived by resolution adopted by the city council and approved by the mayor when the construction project covered under this article is not appropriated for works of art. (Code 1977, § 10-4010) 
Secs. 46-83—46-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENTERTAINMENT FILMING 
Sec. 46-100. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Applicant means the individual applying for a permit, who is legally authorized to bind the Producer.     Application means the document created by the CAOE that must be completed and submitted to the CAOE by a producer or the producer's authorized representative, in order to request a permit.     CAOE means the City of Atlanta Office of Entertainment.     Change request means the document created by the CAOE that must be completed and submitted to the CAOE by a producer or the producer's authorized representative in order to request a material change to a permit.     City means the City of Atlanta.     Code means the Atlanta, Georgia Code of Ordinances.     Department of purview means the city department that decides or recommends to the CAOE whether to allow an aspect of filming that is within the department's operational responsibilities.     Director means the Director of the City of Atlanta Office of Entertainment.     Element means an activity that is listed in Code section 46-105 below.     Entertainment industry work means the production of motion pictures, television series, commercials, music videos, interactive games and animation, where the final product is intended to be commercially released and/or commercially distributed.     Filming means creating motion picture images on public property, including the on-site/on-location pre-production activities associated therewith, where the final product is intended to be commercially released and/or commercially distributed. Filming does not include activities performed as part of: 1) documenting current affairs; or 2) producing newscasts. In addition, Filming does not include location scouting.     Permit means a permit validly issued by the CAOE director that authorizes Filming and the Elements contained therein, if any.     Producer means an individual, organization, corporation or any other entity that is ultimately responsible for the filming that is the subject of the application and the permit (where applicable).     Public property means real property owned by the city or for which the city is a lessee, including, without limitation, parks, streets, sidewalks, other rights of way, and buildings. Public property shall not include real property which is being leased by the city to a lessee.     Traffic control plan means a drawing that is submitted with a request for a sidewalk, lane and or street closure that details the location of the closures, the alternative routes that will be utilized for the detoured vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic, and the mechanisms (including without limitation barricades and signage and the locations thereof) for implementing the closures and alternatives. (Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-101. - Purpose and intent.     The intent of the city in adopting this entertainment filming ordinance is to facilitate entertainment industry work performed in Atlanta while safeguarding the interests of Atlanta's residents and businesses. The article creates the City of Atlanta Office of Entertainment which will be dedicated to responding to the needs and issues pertaining to entertainment industry work. The article simplifies the permitting requirements associated with filming by enabling entertainment industry professionals to obtain required city approvals through the CAOE rather than through numerous individual departments. It strengthens the city's ability to anticipate and provide adequate services for the multiple filming projects throughout Atlanta. It also enhances the city's ability to accommodate unanticipated circumstances and requested changes. The CAOE similarly will respond to the needs of Atlanta's neighborhoods regarding entertainment industry work. and will promote community awareness of the entertainment industry's impact upon Atlanta's economic development. This article furthers the city's commitment to being a best-in-class location to work and to live. (Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-102. - Office of entertainment as resource and liaison.     The office of entertainment will serve as a resource for Atlanta's residents and businesses, providing information upon request about current or scheduled filming, helping to resolve problems that arise from entertainment industry work, and acting as a liaison between residents, businesses and the entertainment industry to address inconvenience experienced generally and with regard to a specific project. The office will also serve as an ambassador to the entertainment industry, providing information, answering questions, helping to resolve challenges and facilitating the industry's work in the city. The office of entertainment will offer a "hot-line" to receive and respond to complaints and concerns after normal business hours; the hot-line will be available to Atlanta's residents and businesses and to the industry. The office will implement other mechanisms that enhance the experience of all people performing and effected by entertainment industry work, which may include an informational web-page and on-line permitting. While permits are required for entertainment industry work that occurs on public property only, the office of entertainment will be a resource and liaison for all entertainment industry work, including work that occurs on private property. (Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-103. - Permits for filming. (1)  Any producer that wishes to perform filming must first obtain a filming permit. No filming permit is required unless the entertainment industry work is performed on public property. (2)  Filming permits shall be issued by the CAOE director. Permits shall be issued to the producer. (3)  A permit will specify the filming that may occur at a particular location at a particular time. The permit will authorize element(s) to be performed as part of the filming provided that the elements have been approved by the department of purview. After receiving a permit, a producer may request modifications to the permit as described in subsection 46-107(1) below. (4)  Where the filming application includes a request to close a city street, lane and/or sidewalk, the request shall be evaluated under and the closure must comply with code section 138-75 ("Fees charged for permits which allow blocking or closing sidewalks or streets") and with all other sections and subsections of chapter 138 article III that are applicable to the filming at issue. (5)  A producer that receives a permit is responsible for knowing and complying with all other laws, including other ordinances and regulations, that establish prerequisites, authorizations and other required permissions applicable to the filming. (6)  Where permitted filming includes advertising signs or other displays of commercial speech, the signs and/or displays must be removed upon the expiration of the permit. (7)  Notwithstanding any other part of this Code, any producer that performs filming without receiving a permit, violates the material terms of a permit, or is otherwise in violation of this entertainment filming ordinance, shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-8 of the Code. (8)  While it is the intent of the city to honor each permit, the issuance of such permit shall not grant the producer a constitutionally protected property interest. (Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-104. - Exemption from filming permit requirement—First amendment activity.     The following types of filming are exempt from the permitting requirement of subsection 46-103(1) above. This provision does not exempt a producer from complying with other applicable Code provisions, laws, ordinances or regulations that require elements or other activities included in the filming to be permitted or approved by the appropriate governmental entity. (1)  Filming associated with any permitted or unpermitted rally, protest or demonstration, except when the same is staged for the sole purpose of being included in the filming's final product. (2)  Filming associated with an outdoor event that is authorized by a city-issued outdoor event permit, as defined in chapter 142 of the Code, except when the same is staged for the sole purpose of being included in the filming's final product. (Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-105. - Filming elements. (1)  An applicant shall indicate on the application each of the elements listed below that will be included in the filming. (2)  The final decision of whether to allow the element shall be made by the department of purview after consultation with the CAOE, and communicated to the applicant by the CAOE. Prior to denying permission to perform an element, representatives of the department of purview and CAOE shall consult with the producer in an attempt to find alternative ways to accommodate the producer's filming needs. (3)  This section applies to the activities listed below only when they occur on public property. Where the element requires approval from an additional governmental jurisdiction, the producer must obtain that approval as well. (4)  The elements are as follows: (a)  Night-time filming with the use of outdoor lighting where a residence exists within 150 feet from the location of an outdoor light; (b)  Filming in buildings that are owned by the city and not leased to a third party, or in buildings of which the city is a lessee; (c)  Use of public property that is owned or maintained by the department of watershed management; (d)  Use of a temporary structure that requires permitting by the office of buildings and/or the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department; (e)  Use of intellectual property belonging to the city; (f)  Closure of a street, lane and/or sidewalk; (g)  Use of pyrotechnics or other explosives; (h)  Smoke effects, water effects, or flame effects; (i)  Display of real or artificial fire arms, grenades, or other weapons that would cause the public to fear violence; (j)  Vehicle chases and/or vehicle crashes: (k)  Dangerous stunts that have a reasonable likelihood of causing substantial personal injury; (l)  Use of large or any other equipment that has a reasonable likelihood of causing damage to public property; (m)  Filming in a city park; and (n)  Use of wild animals controlled under federal, state, or county law and/or ordinances. (Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-106. - Processing of permit applications.     A producer that wishes to perform filming must submit to the CAOE a completed application and the application fee set forth in code section 46-110 below. Where the producer is an organization, corporation or other entity, the application must be signed and submitted by an individual authorized to bind the producer. The CAOE will process the applications and the director will make permit determinations in accordance with this article IV. (1)  The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: a.  The filming project name; b.  The name and contact information of the applicant, including postal address, email address, and telephone number; c.  A valid photo identification of the applicant; d.  The name and contact information of the producer (if the applicant is not the producer); e.  The dates, times and locations of the filming for which a permit is being requested, and a general description of the filming activity that will occur at each location; f.  A description of any elements that may be performed during the filming, including the dates, times and locations of each; g.  A description of any aspects of the filming, other than the elements, that may require city services; h.  A description of any assistance the producer may need from the CAOE, and/or concerns that the producer wants the CAOE to be aware of; and i.  Where the producer is a student, an official letter or document from her/his school confirming that s/he is currently enrolled there. In addition, the student must appear in person at the CAOE and present her/his current student identification card and a valid driver's license. Where the student does not have a driver's license, s/he may present a different form of identification that includes her/his photo. (2)  When more than one application is received for filming at substantially the same place and time, and the director reasonably determines that the filmings cannot logistically and/or safely occur together, the earlier or earliest of the applications that is received by the CAOE in a substantially completed form, which includes submission of the requisite application fee, shall be given priority as to the time and place requested. The CAOE shall make reasonable efforts to consult with the other applicant(s) in an attempt to find alternative times and/or locations that are acceptable. (3)  There is no deadline by which a filming permit application must be submitted to the CAOE; however, where a filming permit application includes a request for a street closure, the street closure portion of the application will not be approved unless it is received at least five business days prior to the closure. (4)  The CAOE and the departments of purview shall compile and maintain rules and guidelines applicable to the use of public property for filming, including the elements that are part of the filming, and shall apply those rules and guidelines equally regardless of the subject matter of the filming and/or the content of the speech therein. (5)  In the event that permission to perform an element is denied pursuant to subsection 46-105(2) above, the CAOE will process the remainder of the permit and grant all other aspects of the filming for which the requirements have been met. (6)  The CAOE may deny an application only if the director reasonably determines that one or more of the below-listed conditions exists. Prior to denial, the CAOE shall make reasonable efforts to consult with the producer in an attempt to resolve issues of concern and/or find alternative ways to accommodate the producer's filming needs, as described in subsections 46-106(7), (8), (9) and (10) below. a.  The filming poses an unreasonable risk of personal injury or property damage to people or property not associated with the filming; b.  The filming poses an unreasonable risk of damage to public property that could not be quickly and/or fully remediated; c.  The date and time requested for a particular filming location conflicts with previously-issued permits or permissions for filming, outdoor events, or other activities; d.  Use of the filming location, or use of the location during the date or time requested, would unreasonably interfere with the operation of city functions; e.  Use of the filming location or the proposed activity at the location would violate a law, ordinance, statute or regulation, regardless of whether the illegal activity is part of the message or content of the filming. A permit shall not be denied based upon simulation of an illegal activity where the actual illegal activity is not being performed; f.  The producer owes an outstanding debt to the city; g.  The producer previously caused significant damage to public property and, at the time of submitting the application under consideration, failed to adequately repair the damage or pay in full the city's invoice for damage repair and restoration services; h.  The producer previously violated this entertainment filming ordinance on two or more occasions, including without limitation by violating a material condition and/or restriction of a permit; i.  On two or more occasions, the producer's entertainment industry work in the city violated a city ordinance or other applicable law; and j.  The applicant made a material misrepresentation or gave incorrect material information on the application. (7)  Prior to denying an application, if the CAOE determines that the requested filming includes one or more of the conditions described in subsections 46-106(6)a., b., c., or d. above, the CAOE shall employ reasonable efforts to identify alternative filming locations, times and/or dates that eliminate the unacceptable condition(s) and that are mutually acceptable to the producer and the city. The producer shall modify the application to incorporate any agreed-upon alternatives. (8)  Prior to denying an application, if the CAOE determines that the requested filming or related activity creates a violation as described in subsection 46-106(6)c. above, the CAOE shall allow the producer to revise the application so that the filming activities comply with applicable law. (9)  Prior to denying an application pursuant to subsections 46-106(6)f. or g. above, the CAOE shall notify the producer of the potential denial and allow her/him to remedy the conditions described in those subsections. The CAOE shall process the application after such repair, restoration or payment is complete, and may require the producer to obtain a refundable sanitation bond for the filming permit in an amount equivalent to the cost of the repair, restoration or debt. (10)  Prior to denying an application pursuant to subsections 46-106(6)h., i. or j. above, the CAOE shall provide the applicant an opportunity to present documents or other evidence that refutes the director's finding of previous permit violations, of previous violations of the law, or of misrepresentation or misinformation on the application, as applicable. (11)  Where the director has complied with subsections 46-106(7), (8), (9) and/or (10) above and reasonably determines that one or more of the conditions set forth in subsection 46-106(6) continues to exist and that the application should therefore be denied, the director shall issue a written communication to the applicant that includes a detailed explanation for the denial. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the director from also notifying the applicant orally. (12)  If the director denies an application, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the chief of staff or her/his designee, provided that a written request for such appeal is made to the chief of staff within three business days after the applicant's receipt of the director's determination. The person considering the appeal must be impartial, and must have had no involvement in the director's decision. The appeal shall be heard or considered within three business days after the city receives the applicant's request, and shall be decided de novo. The person considering the appeal shall evaluate the application and the director's decision in accordance with the criteria of this article IV. (13)  The person considering the appeal may issue her/his decision verbally, and shall issue a written decision within three business days of receiving written evidence from the applicant and/or meeting with the applicant, whichever is later. The written decision shall be the final decision of the city regarding the application. The applicant or producer may appeal the decision by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County pursuant to the procedures set forth by Georgia law. (14)  In no event shall the director's or any city employee's evaluation of whether to grant or deny the application, including any of the elements, include consideration of: a) the race, color, creed, religion, gender, age, disability, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, political affiliation or associational relationships of the applicant, producer or any person associated with the filming; or b) the message or content of the filming. (Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-107. - Modification, suspension or cancellation of a permit. (1)  After receiving a permit, the producer may request a material modification of the permit at any time by submitting to the CAOE a change request and change fee as set forth in code section 46-110. The CAOE's ability to process the change request shall be determined pursuant to the provisions established for processing applications, as set forth in subsections 46-106(2) and (3) above. The director's decision of whether to grant or deny the modification request shall be determined as set forth in subsections 46-106(4) through 46-106(14). Submission of a change request will not impact the validity of the permit already issued, except upon written request of the producer. (2)  Where a producer has obtained a permit and abides by the material requirements thereof, the permit shall prevent the city's stoppage of activities that are authorized by the permit, except as otherwise set forth in subsection 46-107(3) below or as a result of applicable law. (3)  In the event that the Atlanta Police Department, Atlanta Fire Rescue Department and/or other department of purview identifies a substantial public health or safety risk arising from or caused by the filming, and the producer is in material compliance with the permit, the following shall occur: (a)  Where the substantial risk is identified prior to the commencement of the filming, the director and applicable department of purview shall employ reasonable efforts to consult with the producer and identify permit changes that are mutually acceptable to the producer and the city, and that remedy the health/safety issue(s). Where such efforts are unsuccessful, the director shall modify the permit in a manner that minimizes disruption of the filming as determined at the director's reasonable discretion, and that eliminates the substantial risk as reasonably determined by the department of purview. (b)  Where the substantial risk is not imminent and is identified after the commencement of the filming, the director and applicable department of purview shall employ reasonable efforts to consult with the producer and identify permit changes that are mutually acceptable to the producer and the city, and that remedy the health/safety issue(s). Where such efforts are unsuccessful, the director shall modify the permit in a manner that minimizes disruption of the filming as determined at the director's reasonable discretion, and that eliminates the substantial risk as reasonably determined by the department of purview. (c)  Where the substantial risk is imminent as reasonably determined by the department of purview and is identified after the commencement of filming, said department may place a stop work order on the filming if it finds that the order will likely alleviate the substantial risk. The stop work order may be issued without advance notice where the department of purview deems that a delay of the order will jeopardize public health and safety, and shall be lifted as quickly as possible after the risk is eliminated. The department of purview shall notify the director of the stop work order within two hours of its issuance. The director and applicable department of purview shall employ reasonable efforts to consult with the producer and identify permit changes that are mutually acceptable to the producer and the city, that will minimize the length and impact of the stop work order as decided by the producer, and that remedy the health/safety issue(s) as determined by the department of purview. (d)  Changes made to the permit pursuant to this subsection 46-107(3) shall not require payment of a change fee. (4)  Where the director, or a department of purview in consultation with the director, determines that the producer is violating material term(s) of the permit, the director shall decide the appropriate remedial actions after consulting with the department of purview and the producer. If the director and/or department of purview finds that a substantial public health or safety risk is arising from or caused by the material violation, the department of purview in consultation with the director may place an immediate stop work order on the filming without prior notice to the producer, and consultation with the producer shall occur after the work stoppage. The consultation between the director, department of purview and producer shall evaluate the nature and severity of the violation, whether the violation was intentional, whether permit modifications should be made, whether the stop work order should be lifted (where applicable), and what other actions should be taken (if any). Where the violation creates a substantial public health and/or safety risk, the remedial actions decided by the director will not be deemed final until the department of purview reviews the remedial actions and confirms that they will eliminate the health and safety risks. (Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-108. - Responsibilities of a producer once a permit is obtained. (1)  A producer or producer's designee must have the permit on site at the time and location of the filming, and must also have on site any other permits required for that location by the CAOE or any other governmental agency. (2)  A producer must confine filming to the locations, times, guidelines and conditions specified in the permit and must abide by all other material terms of the permit. (3)  Permits are not transferable. (4)  A producer must clean and repair the filming location, and restore it to the condition it was in immediately prior to the filming, unless otherwise agreed upon in writing by the director and the producer. The CAOE will inspect the filming location after the filming is completed to ascertain whether this requirement has been met. Where a producer fails to fulfill this requirement, the director will bill the producer for the cleaning, repair and/or restoration costs borne by the city, and the producer must pay the invoice in full within 30 days of receipt. (5)  Permits shall require the producer to notify the CAOE within three hours or sooner of learning of any emergency event regarding or arising from the filming that involves the media, the police or fire departments or emergency medical services. (6)  A producer is responsible for: (a) knowing and complying with all city ordinances and other laws applicable to the filming and to the other activities arising from the producer's permit; and (b) requiring and using commercially reasonable efforts to enforce the requirement that any person working for or at the direction of the producer (including without limitation contractors) complies with all city ordinances and other laws applicable to the filming and to the other activities arising from the permit. Applicable city ordinances include without limitation the Atlanta Noise Ordinance, set forth in chapter 74, article IV of the Atlanta Code of Ordinances. (7)  The requirements of number (6) above shall include without limitation that the producer is responsible for obtaining any and all permissions, licenses or other required authorizations for use of intellectual property, including intellectual property which is on public property but is not owned by the city. (8)  Permits must prohibit a producer from acting as a representative or agent of the city, and from indicating city endorsement of the filming, except as otherwise agreed to in writing by the director. This provision shall not prohibit the producer's use of the city logo in the filming credits. (9)  The CAOE shall require that notification be given to residents and businesses within a three-block radius of a location for which a filming permit has been issued. The CAOE may provide the notification, may require the producer to provide the notification, or may utilize a different mechanism for providing notification. The notification must state that a filming permit has been issued, and must include the date(s), time(s), location(s) and activities that are authorized by the permit. Additionally, the CAOE shall require that notification be given to the councilmember representing the district in which the filming will occur. The CAOE shall determine the most effective means and timing of notification based upon factors such as the type of impact that the filming will have on the neighborhood, the time between receipt of the application and commencement of the filming, the producer's budget and previous communications from a neighborhood regarding notification preferences. (Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-109. - Other permit requirements.     After a permit has been approved by the director, it will be issued once the following have occurred: (1)  The producer signs an indemnification provision on the permit whereby the producer agrees to indemnify the city and its officials and employees from all claims, losses and expenses, including attorneys' fees and costs, that may arise from the permit and any of the activities performed pursuant to the permit by, on behalf of, or at the direction of the producer, except to the extent that that claims, losses and/or expenses are caused by the negligence or intentional misconduct of the city, its officials and/or employees; (2)  The producer signs a provision agreeing to comply with all applicable environmental laws, including an agreement not to allow legally-prohibited contaminants from entering the sewage and stormwater drainage systems serving the area where the filming will occur. The producer must sign a separate indemnification clause, such as the one described in number (1) immediately above, that pertains specifically to environmental breaches and includes without limitation the fines and clean-up costs associated therewith; (3)  The producer obtains insurance coverage in an amount determined by the city's risk manager, covers the city as an additional insured on the policy, and provides proof of the coverage in a manner established by the city's risk manager. In no event shall the risk manager base any decisions regarding the filming on the criteria set forth in subsection 46-106(14) above; and (4)  The producer pays the permit fee and any other applicable fees set forth in section 46-110 below. (Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-110. - Fee schedule.     The CAOE shall collect all applicable fees arising pursuant to this article. These fees are set forth below in this section 46-110, and in other sections of the Code pertaining to the cost of services or goods provided by other city departments. Where the CAOE receives funds that are attributable to services performed by another city department, such funds shall be paid to the department providing those services where prescribed by the Code. (1)  Nonrefundable application fee. A filming permit application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount set forth below. A filming permit application shall not be deemed complete until the application fee is received by the CAOE. a.  $100.00, except for students. b.  $25.00 for students. (2)  Filming permit fee. A filming permit authorizes all filming for a particular filming project during a calendar month, regardless of the number of filming locations. A filming permit is valid through the last day of the calendar month and may be renewed for additional calendar months. a.  Standard Permit Fee. The following fees apply when the completed filming permit application is submitted to the CAOE more than three business days prior to the effective date of the permit: (i)  $300.00 for original filming permit, except for students. (ii)  $300.00 for each renewal filming permit, except for students. (iii)  $150.00 for students, valid for length of filming project. Monthly renewals not required. b.  Rush permit fee. Where a completed filming permit application is submitted to the CAOE three or fewer business days prior to the effective date of the permit, the producer must pay the standard permit fee plus the rush fee set forth below in this subsection. Additionally, where a producer submits an application more than three business days prior to the effective date of the permit, the producer voluntarily may pay the standard permit fee plus the rush fee in order to have the application processed within three or fewer business days. (i)  $300.00, except for students. (ii)  $150.00 for students. c.  Material changes to filming permit. (i)  There is no charge for modifying a filming permit where the director reasonably determines that the modification is not material. For purposes of this article IV, "material" means that processing the requested change will require an expenditure of city staff time or services that is more than de minimus. (ii)  There is no charge for a material change to a filming permit where a completed change request is submitted to the CAOE more than three business days prior to the effective date of the permit. Where a material change is requested after the permit has taken effect, there will be no charge if the completed change request is submitted to the CAOE more than three business days prior to the implementation of the requested change. (iii)  Where a change request for a material change is submitted to the CAOE three or fewer business days prior to the effective date of the permit or the implementation date of the change, as described in subsection 46-110(2)c.(ii) above, the producer must pay the rush change fee set forth below in this subsection. Additionally, where a producer submits a change request more than three business days prior to the implementation of the requested change, the producer voluntarily may pay the rush fee in order to have the change request processed within three or fewer business days: (A)  $300.00, except for students. (B)  $150.00 for students. d.  Cancellation fee. (i)  Except as set forth in subsections 46-110(2)d.(ii) and (2)d.(iii) below, a filming permit fee is nonrefundable. (ii)  Where the producer submits a change request to the CAOE and the change results in cancellation of a filming permit for a particular calendar month, the producer may utilize the filming permit fee for the cancelled month to purchase a new filming permit for the same project for a different calendar month. Regardless of whether a new filming permit fee is owed, the CAOE shall determine whether a rush fee is applicable based upon the timing of the change request and the standards set forth in subsection 46-110(2)c. above. (iii)  A filming permit fee is refundable if cancellation is required because of extraordinary circumstances for which the producer is not responsible and which are not within the producer's control. Inclement weather, except for declared states of emergency, and common illness shall not be deemed extraordinary circumstances. (3)  On-site services fee. An on-site services fee is assessed for each public property location where filming occurs, as authorized by the filming permit, for each day that filming occurs at that site. Where a producer films at more than three locations in a day for the same filming project, s/he shall be charged an on-site services fee only for the first three locations. a.  Standard on-site services fee. The following on-site services fee applies when the completed filming application or change request seeking authorization to film at the site is submitted to the CAOE more than three business days prior to the day of filming: (i)  $100.00 per location per day except for students, not to exceed $300.00 per day. (ii)  No Charge for students. b.  Rush on-site service fee. When a completed filming application or change request seeking authorization to film at the site is submitted to the CAOE three or fewer business days prior to the requested day of filming, the producer must pay the standard on-site services fee plus the rush fee set forth below in this subsection. There is no daily maximum regarding this rush fee. (i)  $300.00, except for students. (ii)  $150.00 for students. c.  Cancellation fee. (i)  Except as set forth in subsections 46-110(3)c.(ii) and (3)c.(iii) below, an on-site services fee is nonrefundable. (ii)  Where the producer submits a change request to the CAOE that results in cancellation of requested on-site services for a particular day, the producer may utilize the on-site services fee for the cancelled day to pay for on-site services for the same project for a day that is within three calendar days of the cancelled day. If the change request is submitted three or fewer business days prior to the filming day requested in the original application or the filming day requested in the change request, whichever is earlier, a rush on-site service fee shall be owed. (iii)  An on-site services fee is refundable if cancellation is required because of extraordinary circumstances for which the producer is not responsible and which are not within the producer's control. Inclement weather, except for declared states of emergency, and common illness shall not be deemed extraordinary circumstances. (4)  Scholarship program. The CAOE may establish a scholarship program that encourages development of local talent in the filming industry. If and when established, this program will be operated by the CAOE. The CAOE is authorized to award scholarships that waive some or all of the filming and on-site services fees associated with a filming project, contingent upon the following: a.  The producer is not a student; b.  The producer has not previously performed a filming project for commercial release; c.  The producer resides within the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta; d.  The filming is performed entirely in the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta; e.  The filming project budget is less than $200,000.00; f.  The end product of the filming is not animation; g.  The end product of the filming is not a music video; and h.  At least 50 percent of the total filming project crew are members of an Atlanta union. (5)  Traffic control plans. a.  Entertainment industry work performed at certain locations will require a traffic control plan. The CAOE is authorized but not required to offer the service of preparing traffic control plans associated with entertainment industry work. The cost of having the CAOE prepare a traffic control plan is as follows: (i)  For non-students: (A)  Traffic control plan for lane and/or sidewalk closure(s) only: $150.00 (B)  Traffic control plan for street closure(s) only: $250.00 (C)  Traffic control plan for street closure(s) plus lane and/or sidewalk closure(s) (where the lane and/or sidewalk is not part of or abutting the street being closed): $300.00 (ii)  For students: Any type of traffic control plan: $25.00 b.  The CAOE's preparation of a traffic control plan will include submitting the plan to the Atlanta Police Department for review and to the office of transportation for approval, and editing the plan as needed to meet the requirements of the two reviewing departments, all at no additional charge to the producer. c.  The producer is not required to have the CAOE prepare the traffic control plan, and there will be no penalty against or differential treatment of any producer who has the plan created by a person or entity other than the CAOE. (6)  Street closures permits—Minimum notice. A full street closure will not be permitted unless the application or change request is submitted at least five business days prior to the closure. Rush fees may not be utilized for full street closure requests. (Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Secs. 46-111—46-199. - Reserved. 
Article V. - Downtown Arts and Entertainment District Ordinance 
Sec. 46-200. - Purpose and intent.     The intent of the city in adopting this Downtown Arts and Entertainment District Ordinance is to: (1)  Define the boundaries of the downtown arts and entertainment district; (2)  Expand the economic base of the city, by providing additional employment opportunities and additional revenues to the city and the region by making the area of the district more attractive in ways that can increase tourism and conventions and assist in the development of specific plans that will allow for large scale sporting events, major conventions, and activities at major entertainment venues to consider the city when choosing their sites; (3)  Provide the basis for the continued and expanded support for initiatives that will cause the district to be considered as a destination for large scale sporting events, major conventions, and activities at major entertainment venues, in conformance with the goals and objectives of other city policies; (4)  Enhance the area encompassed by the district by through programs that will attract workers, residents and visitors to active public spaces and gathering places and create a pedestrian friendly environment; (5)  Develop programs to further enhance the pedestrian environment through the establishment of unique streetscape design guidelines providing additional signage opportunities. ( Ord. No. 2017-36(16-O-1608), § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-17 ) 
Sec. 46-201. - Creation of the district.     The Atlanta Arts and Entertainment District is established as an area of the city where it has been found that programs which will contribute to economic development through the development of a more active streetscape should be undertaken. The boundaries of the Atlanta Arts and Entertainment District shall be the area as shown upon the Atlanta Arts and Entertainment District map attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. ( Ord. No. 2017-36(16-O-1608), § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-17 ) 
Sec. 46-202. - Relationship to other parts of the code     The Atlanta Arts and Entertainment District created by this ordinance shall not define the boundaries of the Atlanta Arts and Entertainment Signage District created in the Zoning Code. ( Ord. No. 2017-36(16-O-1608), § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-17 ) 