Chapter 102 - LIBRARY[1]   Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1017), page 4174 as amended (compiled in pt. I, ch. 26 of the Fulton County Code) creates a Fulton County Library System, in which the city participates. The mayor of the City of Atlanta appoints members to the library board of trustees. Cross reference— Civic and cultural affairs, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 110. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; special constitutional grant of authority to provide libraries, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ (3)(a)(10); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; local and regional public libraries, O.C.G.A. § 20-5-20 et seq. 
Sec. 102-1. - Special district for library services. (a)  Created. The City of Atlanta/DeKalb County, Georgia, special district is created. (b)  Services. There shall be furnished to residents of the special district library services by either Fulton County or DeKalb County. The exact nature of such services shall be determined by contract between the city and the county providing the services. (c)  Financing of costs. The cost of furnishing library services in the special district shall be financed from ad valorem taxes levied upon taxable property located in the special district described in subsection (a) of this section. (Code 1977, § 10-3009) 
Chapter 106 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Additional emergency powers of mayor regarding offenses, § 2-181; noise control, § 74-131 et seq.; nuisances, § 74-160 et seq.; noise zone around hospitals and surgi-centers, § 86-4. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 106-1. - Swinging into trains.     It shall be unlawful to swing onto trains for the purpose of securing a free ride thereon. (Code 1977, § 14-10006; Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130), § 1, 3-29-17 ) 
Sec. 106-2. - Solicitation of defense of prisoners or legal business.     It shall be unlawful for any person to idle and loiter around the station house, municipal judge's courtroom or the entrance thereto for the purpose of soliciting the defense of prisoners in the municipal court or in any way soliciting legal practice from these prisoners, in person or as agent for another, whereby money is attempted to be secured or is secured from these prisoners. However, this shall not prohibit prisoners from summoning attorneys or from conferring with attorneys who have been employed by them or by their relatives for them, and the turnkey and other officers shall promptly telephone for attorneys desired by these prisoners. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the solicitation of legal business or representation either by these persons or their agents or employees in the manner stated in this section. (Code 1977, § 3-1085) 
Sec. 106-3. - Gathering near detention facility, jail or courthouse; furnishing items to incarcerated persons. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to gather in or about the station house, jail, detention facility, courthouse or other city-owned property in violation of the rules and policies of the facility or for the purpose of violating the law. (b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone other than persons duly authorized by the office of corrections to provide, transmit, deliver, give or furnish to anyone held or incarcerated as a defendant, prisoner, arrested person or one being interviewed in connection with a violation of the law at any city jail or detention facility any item, whatsoever, without first obtaining the approval of the person in charge at such facility. (Code 1977, § 3-1084(c), (d)) 
Sec. 106-4. - Impersonating or wearing uniform of police officer. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, not a police officer in the city, to act as a police officer or represent such person as a police officer. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a police officer, without authority, to wear the uniform or any distinctive part thereof or anything similar to a distinctive part thereof which has been designed and approved by the police chief or the chief's designee as a uniform for police officers of the City of Atlanta. (Code 1977, § 11-2051) State Law reference— Impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23. 
Sec. 106-5. - Furnishing identification containing reference to age.     It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish to any other person any identification material which contains or makes reference to age, with the intent that such material be used by any person for the purpose of falsely representing the age of such person, so as to violate or foster the violation of an ordinance of the city. (Code 1977, § 17-11001) State Law reference— False identification documents, O.C.G.A. § 16-9-4. 
Sec. 106-6. - Registering under assumed name.     No person shall register at any hotel, motel or other place of lodging requiring registration in the city under an assumed name, or any name other than that by which such person is commonly known. (Code 1977, § 17-11002) 
Sec. 106-7. - Passenger stations.     Any person entering any railroad, bus or rapid rail passenger station and violating its rules or obstructing the business of the authorities in charge thereof may be ordered out by the police officer in charge, and upon refusal to leave shall be arrested and tried for a violation of this section; however, those rules shall be reasonable and approved by the council. (Code 1977, § 17-3005) State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 106-8. - Smoking and drinking prohibited on MARTA buses, trains, rail cars.     It shall be unlawful for occupants on Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) buses, trains or rail cars to smoke tobacco or consume alcoholic beverages while such buses, trains or rail cars are transporting passengers within the corporate limits of the city. Charter bus service is excluded from these restrictions. (Code 1977, § 17-11003) Cross reference— Indoor air, § 86-31 et seq. 
Sec. 106-9. - Smoking in certain areas within city buildings and facilities. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Smoke and smoking mean and include the carrying or possession of any form of burning tobacco. (b)  Designation of smoking areas. All city-owned, city-operated or city-leased office space, buildings and facilities of the city shall be designated either smoking or nonsmoking in accordance with the following provisions: (1)  The mayor or the mayor's designee shall place signs in all open office areas, employee work areas, restrooms, reception areas, lobbies, conference rooms, elevators, stairwells and any indoor area accessible to the general public designating whether smoking is or is not permitted. (2)  No open office area, employee work area, restroom (unless designated as a smoking area), reception area, lobby, conference room, elevator, stairwell or other indoor area accessible to the general public shall be designated as a smoking area. (3)  Any area outlined in subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section not explicitly designated and signed in accordance with this section shall be a nonsmoking area. (4)  Council chambers and committee rooms shall be designated nonsmoking areas. (5)  Private offices, separated entirely from other space by floor-to-ceiling walls and standard doors, may be designated smoking areas. (6)  Certain sections of cafeterias may be designated smoking areas if: a.  No more than 30 percent of cafeteria seats are within the smoking area. b.  The smoking area is separated by at least ten feet from the nearest nonsmoking seat. Smoking is not permitted in the cafeteria line. (7)  Certain fully enclosed rooms other than private offices may be designated smoking lounges if such rooms are furnished with smokeless ashtrays or other devices which effectively prevent tobacco smoke from entering the general ventilation system, and if no other provision of this section is violated. (8)  All outdoor areas shall be designated smoking areas unless safety regulations require otherwise. (c)  Violation. It shall be a violation of this section to smoke in any area designated a nonsmoking area under the provisions of this section. (d)  Priority. The public health consideration for breathing smoke-free air shall take priority in situations of confusion or ambiguity. (e)  Application. The provisions of this section shall only apply to those areas of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International that are utilized as city offices. All other areas of the airport shall comply with the smoking policy as outlined in section 22-68. (Code 1977, § 17-11007; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04) Cross reference— Smoking at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International, § 22-68; indoor air, § 86-31 et seq. 
Sec. 106-10. - Distribution of free tobacco products in public places prohibited. (a)  Generally. In order to avoid obstruction and congestion of public ways and places, to protect pedestrians from annoyance and invasion of privacy, to avoid litter and to avoid facilitating the availability of cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products to minors, no person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products for commercial purposes, or any agent or employee of any such person, shall, in the course of such business, distribute any cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products free to any person on any public street or sidewalk, or in any park or playground, or any other public ground, or in areas open to the public in any publicly-owned or -operated building. (b)  Violation. Any person who violates the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $20.00 nor more than $50.00 for each violation. Every hour or part thereof in which a person engages in such conduct shall constitute a single and separate violation. (Code 1977, § 17-11008) 
Sec. 106-11. - Use of drinking water reservoir prohibited. (a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person not employed by, or authorized to act on behalf of, the city, to use any drinking water reservoir or water treatment structure operated or maintained by the city for swimming, bathing or otherwise immersing a person or such person's clothing. (b)  Violation. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the city jail or stockade for not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Code 1977, § 17-11011) 
Sec. 106-12. - Urban camping and improper use of public places. (a)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section 106-12, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     " Bridge " means a structure, including the approaches thereto, erected in order to afford passage over any obstruction in any public road, railroad, or other right-of-way; or to afford passage under or over existing public roads, railroads, or other rights-of-way. As used in this section the definition of "Bridge" shall include a controlled access highway overpass as defined herein.     " Camp " or " camping " means the use of a street, sidewalk, other right-of-way, and/or any area underneath a bridge, within the City of Atlanta for living accommodation purposes such as sleeping activities, or making preparations to sleep (including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping), or storing personal belongings, or making a fire, or carrying on cooking activities, or using a tent or other structure for habitation. These activities constitute camping if, in light of all the circumstances, it reasonably appears that in conducting one or more of these activities, the participant is in fact using the area as a living accommodation, regardless of the intent of the participant or the nature of any other activities in which s/he may also be engaging. For purposes of this section 106-12(a), the terms "camp" and "camping" do not include activity that occurs solely within city-owned parks.     " City " means the City of Atlanta.     " Controlled access highway overpass " means a crossing of two controlled access highways or of a controlled access highway and other public road, pedestrian path, railroad or public right-of-way at different levels where clearance to traffic on the lower level is obtained by elevating the higher level.     " Interference (or " interfere ") with ingress and egress" means standing, sitting, lying down, using personal property, or performing any other activity on public property and/or in a park, where such activity: a) materially interferes with the ingress into and egress from buildings, driveways, streets, alleys, or any other real property that has a limited number of entrances/exits, regardless of whether the property is owned by the city, a private owner or another public entity; b) reasonably appears, in light of all of the circumstances, to have the purpose of blocking ingress and egress; and c) occurs without the express written permission of the owner of the property at issue. Where written permission has been granted, the individuals interfering with ingress and egress must have possession of the permission at the time of the activity in question.     " Park " or " parks " means any city-owned park.     " Public property " means any street, sidewalk, and/or other right-of-way, within the City of Atlanta.     " Storing (or " store ") personal property" means leaving one's personal effects unattended on public property, in any area underneath a bridge, and/or in a park, such as but not limited to clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks. This term does not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to camp. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property. (d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with ingress and egress. (e)  No person may be arrested for violating this code section until s/he has received an oral or written warning from the Atlanta Police Department to cease the prohibited conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, s/he may be arrested for violation of this section. (f)  Where personal property is stored in violation of subsection (c) above, the Atlanta Police Department may deem the property to be abandoned and may confiscate it. No warning is required prior to the confiscation. The department shall retain the property in a manner consistent with the handling of other confiscated property. (g)  The prohibitions set forth in subsections (b) and (c) above shall not apply during a permitted outdoor event (as defined in City Code of Ordinances Chapter 142) on property where the outdoor event is located, as set forth in a city-issued outdoor event permit, unless the permit explicitly prohibits the activity. (h)  The prohibitions set forth in subsections (c) and (d) above shall not apply to activity permitted pursuant to Article III of City Code of Ordinances Chapter 138. (i)  The prohibitions set forth in this section 106-12 shall not apply to city, state, or county officials or employees acting in their official capacity, performing the activities as part of their official city duties. (j)  The prohibitions set forth in this section 106-12 shall not apply to city, state, or county contractors or subcontractors where said activities are associated and performed in conjunction with the scope of work set forth in the city contract. (Ord. No. 1996-82, §§ 1—6, 11-26-96; Ord. No. 1998-68, § 1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2012-10(12-O-0360), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2017-94(17-O-1837), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
Sec. 106-13. - Reserved. 
Sec. 106-14. - Security fencing of construction cranes. (a)  In order to guard against access to construction cranes by unauthorized persons, all fixed or tower cranes shall be enclosed by security chain link fencing which shall be at least eight feet in height, topped with barbed wire and containing a locked gate at all points of access to the crane. The specifications for such security fencing shall be a required submittal in the building permit process and shall be subject to the approval of the director of the bureau of buildings. For existing construction projects, the contractors shall have 60 days to comply with the fencing requirement. (b)  Violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the City Code. (Ord. No. 2007-72(07-O-2308), § 1, 11-27-07) 
Secs. 106-15—106-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY RIGHTS 
Sec. 106-51. - Theft by shoplifting. (a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of theft by shoplifting within the corporate limits of the city when the property which is the subject of the theft is $100.00 or less in value. (b)  Defined. A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to such person's own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: (1)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; (2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; (3)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; (4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or (5)  Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. (c)  Violation. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to the following penalties: (1)  First offense. A fine of not more than $250.00 or imprisonment in the city jail or stockade for not more than 30 days, or both. (2)  Second offense. A fine of not less than $250.00 or imprisonment in the city jail or stockade for not less than 30 days, or both. (3)  Third or subsequent offense. Any person charged with a third or subsequent offense under this section shall be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14 in the court having jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. Any defendant charged under this section shall be entitled upon request to have the case against such person transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. (Code 1977, § 17-11009) State Law reference— Theft by shoplifting, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14. 
Sec. 106-52. - Evading payment of fare for transportation service; conduct on city's streetcar transit system; penalties. (a)  It shall be unlawful, within the corporate limits of the city, for any person to evade or attempt to evade payment of the fare for transportation service upon a rapid rail system, public transit bus, or upon city's streetcar transit system. As used in this section, the "evasion of payment of the fare" shall include the following acts, activities or conduct: (1)  Entry into or upon a rapid rail car, public transit bus, or streetcar vehicle without payment of the fare charged for transportation service. (2)  Following fare payment, the refusal to exit the city streetcar vehicle after traveling two times around the full streetcar route. (3)  Following fare payment, the refusal to exit the city streetcar vehicle after: (A)  A single one-way trip; or (B)  The expiration of a multi-trip pass. (4)  Misuse of a transfer, TransCard, pass, ticket, token, Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) Breeze Card, MARTA University Pass Program Card or other evidence of payment of or prepayment of a fare issued by the city or MARTA with the intent to avoid or to assist another in avoiding payment of the fare charged for transportation service. (5)  Use or attempted use of a signed city or MARTA TransCard pass or ticket, MARTA Breeze Card or MARTA University Pass Program Card for the payment of the fare charged for transportation service by a person who is not the person whose signature appears on the TransCard who is not the owner of the city or MARTA pass or ticket or a MARTA Breeze Card. (b)  As applied to the city's streetcar transit system, fare payment shall be valid for use towards: (1)  A single one-way trip for two hours from the time of issuance/validation. A single one-way trip on the city streetcar is defined as the distance between a rider's point of entering the streetcar vehicle and the point of exiting the streetcar vehicle, but no more than two times around the full streetcar route. (2)  A multi-trip pass from the time of issuance / validation through the end of the pass's last consecutive service day. A multi-trip pass holder must exit the streetcar vehicle after traveling two consecutive times around the full streetcar route, but may re-enter the streetcar vehicle without payment of an additional fare prior to the expiration of the multi-trip pass. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit or to attempt to commit any of the following acts on a city streetcar vehicle or a city streetcar stop platform: (1)  Spit, defecate, or urinate. (2)  Discard litter, except into receptacles designated for that purpose. (3)  Smoke tobacco in any form, included by not limited to in the form of electronic cigarettes, personal vaporizers, or electronic nicotine delivery systems. (4)  Consume food or beverage or possess any open food or beverage container, provided that this paragraph shall not apply to resealable beverages in resealable plastic containers, to an operator of a city streetcar at an authorized layover point, or to a person providing food or beverage to any child under age five; provided, further, that nothing in this subsection shall apply to a city streetcar stop platform. (5)  Play any radio, cassette, cartridge, tape player, digital music player, or similar device, unless such device is connected to an earphone that limits the sound to the hearing of an individual user. (6)  Carry or possess any explosives, acids, other dangerous articles, or live animals, except for the following: (A)  A guide dog or service dog, provided that such guide dog or service dog is accompanied by a physically disabled person, blind person, person with visual disabilities, deaf person, or a person who is responsible for training a guide dog or service dog; or (B)  Small pets confined to rigid pet carriers with locks or latches. (7)  Obstruct, hinder, interfere with, or otherwise disrupt or disturb the operation, operator, or passengers of the city streetcar. (8)  Board any city streetcar vehicle through the rear exit door, unless so directed by an employee or agent of the city streetcar. (9)  Remain onboard a city streetcar vehicle after such vehicle has completed its scheduled route and passengers have been advised to exit the vehicle or remain aboard the city streetcar vehicle after having been warned and after such vehicle has entered a garage or other restricted area not open to the public. (10)  Enter, exit or pass through any emergency door of the city streetcar vehicle in the absence of a bona fide emergency. (11)  Enter the operator's cab or driver's seat of a city streetcar vehicle in absence of a bona fide emergency. (12)  Monetarily solicit or sell goods or services for a fee without the grant of a concession by the City of Atlanta. (13)  Deface, damage, displace, remove or destroy any advertisement, security sign, or notice on or in any city streetcar vehicle or city streetcar stop platform. (14)  Fail to exhibit proof of fare payment upon request of a Code Enforcement Agent or Atlanta Police Officer when entering or occupying a city streetcar vehicle. (15)  Possess or sell stolen or counterfeit proof of fare payment. (16)  Interfere with the operation of the city streetcar vehicle, city streetcar stop platform, or any city streetcar pay station. (17)  Remain at a city streetcar stop platform for more than two hours. (d)  The penalty imposed upon a conviction of subsection (a) of this section shall be a $100.00 fine. Upon a sentence of probation upon a conviction of subsection (a) of this section, the sentencing court may require as a special condition thereof, that the person be prohibited from riding the city streetcar during the probationary period. (e)  The penalty imposed upon a conviction of subsection (c) of this section shall be as provided in section 1-8. Upon a sentence of probation upon a conviction of subsection (c) of this section, the sentencing court may require as a special condition thereof, that the person be prohibited from riding the city streetcar during the probationary period. (f)  Employees of the city streetcar's system, or the Atlanta Police Department while performing the duties of their employment shall be exempted from the restrictions of paragraphs (8), (9), (10), and (11) of subsection (c) of this section. (Code 1977, § 17-11004; Ord. No. 2014-16(14-O-1170), § 1, 5-14-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-61(15-O-1517), § 1, 11-25-15 ) State Law reference— Theft of services, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5. 
Sec. 106-53. - Destruction of property. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage, destroy, mar or deface any property of the city, or of another. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tamper with, to open, or to paint any equipment of the departments and bureaus of the city, including fire hydrants and water mains. (Code 1977, § 17-1001) State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 et seq. 
Sec. 106-54. - Defacing buildings.     It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint or draw upon, to carve any letter, word or design upon or to mutilate or deface in any way any wall, fence, public building, private dwelling, place or institution of learning, place of worship, statue or monument, now or hereafter erected in the city. (Code 1977, § 17-1002) State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 et seq. 
Sec. 106-55. - Injuring or interfering with public service property. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to a company, or to the city, engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone or other public services, or intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of the service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the company or the city, intentionally to divert any services of the company or the city or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the company or the city, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the company or the city. (b)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts referred to in subsection (a) of this section and/or the person who with knowledge of the violation receives the benefit of the service without proper charge as a result of the improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the acts of tampering or diversion. (Code 1977, § 17-1005) State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 et seq. 
Sec. 106-56. - Unauthorized persons entering vacant buildings.     It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or to remain in a vacant or unoccupied building or on any portion of vacant land upon which such vacant building is located unless with the permission of an authorized agent of such property, provided such building or vacant property is prominently marked by a posted notice, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived as exhibit A, which is easily seen from a distance of at least 50 feet that informs the public such property is vacant or unoccupied and unauthorized persons are prohibited from entering. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to be on such property lines that are prominently marked by a fence, chain or other means and by a posted notice that communicates to the public that unauthorized persons are not allowed on such premises. Contemporaneously with the posting of such notice, a sworn authorization, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived as exhibit B, must be filed with the city police department, stating that persons without written permission on their person are not allowed on the property at a specified address; and any such trespasser will be prosecuted by the police as the property's own agent. (Code 1977, § 17-1006) State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 106-57. - Unauthorized interference or attempted interference with parked vehicles. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl on any property which is used to park vehicles, including parking lots for vehicles as set out in the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances, chapter 30, article XVII, division 3, section 30-1196, et seq., and public right-of-way, if said person has been observed: (1)  Attempting entry into vehicles, or (2)  Tampering with the vehicle of another, which shall mean any unauthorized interference with a vehicle or any part or accessory thereof or any contents therein, or (3)  Otherwise acting in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. (b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person opens or attempts to open the doors, trunk, windows or hood of the vehicle; takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer; manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object that may be utilized for entry into an automobile or is otherwise prohibited by law; removes or attempts to remove anything of value from the vehicle; or otherwise causes damage to the vehicle. (c)  A law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this code section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this code section: (1)  Unless the law enforcement officer complies with the foregoing procedure; and (2)  Unless the trier of fact determines beyond a reasonable doubt under all circumstances of the case that the explanation was not true or would not, if believed by the officer at the time, have dispelled the officer's alarm or immediate concern. (d)  Upon conviction of violation of this section, a person shall be sentenced to imprisonment or public work for six months, with a minimum of 60 days to serve in the city jail or working on the public streets or on the public works of the city, the remainder of the time to be probated. (Ord. No. 1996-16, § 1, 4-9-96) State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 106-58. - Transportation passes and nontransferable tickets.     It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, sell or otherwise acquire or deal in or solicit the purchase or sale of any pass or other evidence of transportation issued by any railroad, railway, steamship or steamboat line, or the person operating the same, which shows on its face that it was issued for free transportation. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to buy, sell or otherwise acquire or deal in the unused portions of nontransferable railroad, railway, steamship or steamboat passenger tickets whose use is restricted to the original purchasers thereof by the railroad, railway, steamship or steamboat company issuing them, or to act as vendor or broker of those partially used nontransferable passenger tickets, or to solicit personally, or by sign or advertisement, or in any manner to aid the sale or purchase of those partially used nontransferable passenger tickets within the limits of the city. (Code 1977, § 17-11005) 
Sec. 106-59. - Resale of entertainment tickets restricted. (a)  As used in this section, the terms:     Exhibition means, consistent with O.C.G.A. § 43-4B-1(5), a contest where the participants engage in the use of boxing skills and techniques and where the objective is to display such skills and techniques without striving to win.     Person means, consistent with O.C.G.A. § 43-4B-1(12), any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or combination of individuals of whatever form or character.     Ticket broker means, consistent with O.C.G.A. § 43-4B-1(19), (1) any person who is involved in the business of reselling tickets of admission to athletic contests, concerts, theater performances, amusements, exhibitions, or other entertainment events held in this state to which the general public is admitted and who charges a premium in excess of the price of the ticket; or (2) any person who has a permanent office or place of business in this state who is involved in the business of reselling tickets of admission to athletic contests, concerts, theater performances, amusements, exhibitions, or other entertainment events held inside or outside this state to which the general public is admitted and who charges a premium in excess of the price of the ticket.     The term ticket broker shall not include the owner, operator, lessee, or tenant of the property in which an athletic contest or entertainment event is being held or the sponsor of such a contest or event or the authorized ticket agent of such persons.     Original purchaser for personal use means a person who buys one or more tickets with the intention of using the ticket or tickets solely for the use of the purchaser or the purchaser's invitees, employees, and agents. An original purchaser who resells more than six tickets to the same athletic contest or entertainment event and who resells tickets to an athletic contest or entertainment event for more than 105 percent of their face value shall be presumed to be engaged in the business of a ticket broker. (b)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-4B-30, it shall be unlawful for any ticket broker or person who is the original purchaser for personal use of one or more tickets to resell or offer for resale one or more tickets to any athletic contest and entertainment event within 2,700 feet of a venue which seats or admits 15,000 or more persons. (c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the City Code. (d)  Reserved. (Code 1977, § 17-3017; Ord. No. 2001-53, § 1, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 2004-81, § 1, 11-05-04; Ord. No. 2005-49, § 1, 8-22-05) State Law reference— Resale of athletic or entertainment tickets, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-310. 
Secs. 106-60—106-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER 
Sec. 106-81. - Disorderly conduct.     It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to engage in any conduct described in the following subsections; provided, however, that no person shall be convicted of any of the following sections upon a showing that the predominant intent of such conduct was to exercise a constitutional right to: (1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of such person's life, limb or health; (2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; (3)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; (4)  Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of, or with the intent to, engage in gaming; (5)  Be in or about any place, alone or with another or others, with the purpose of or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable thing; or to aid or abet any person or persons in doing so; (6)  Direct fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace; (7)  Interfere, by acts of physical obstruction, another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; (8)  Congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear that public way after being ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority; (9)  Stand or remain in or about any street, sidewalk, overpass or public way so as to impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear such street, sidewalk, overpass or public way after being ordered to do so by a police officer or other lawful authority; (10)  Disrupt by actions which tend to incite a breach of the peace the undisturbed activities of any house of worship, hospital, surgi-center, or home for the elderly; or (11)  Throw bottles, paper, cans, glass, sticks, stones, missiles or any other debris on public property. (12)  Accost or force oneself upon the company of another; (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his/her person, or upon property in his/her immediate possession. Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request or solicit any item of value or an individual's company from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. (13)  Carry any item with the intention either to threaten, intimidate or provoke the apprehension of violence, or with the disregard for the rights and safety of others. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to prohibit the carrying of a firearm or weapon as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-173. (Code 1977, § 17-3001; Ord. No. 2000-53, § 1, 10-10-00; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 12, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2005-48, § 1, 8-24-05; Ord. No. 2007-20(07-O-0489), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2017-88(17-O-1795), § 1, 12-13-17 ) State Law reference— Riot, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-30; affray, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-32; obscene, vulgar or profane language, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39; obstructing public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Sec. 106-82. - Unauthorized persons entering school buildings.     No person shall enter or remain in any public, private or parochial school building between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on days that school is in session, or until 10:00 p.m. at those schools which have extended sessions, who is not a regularly-enrolled student, teacher or employee at that school, unless the person shall have first and immediately proceeded to the administrative offices and been identified to the principal or the principal's agent and received written permission to remain on the premises. (Code 1977, § 17-3002) 
Sec. 106-83. - Unauthorized persons not to remain in school buildings when requested to leave.     It shall be unlawful for any person to enter and remain in any public, private or parochial school or on surrounding school grounds after being directed to leave by the principal of the school or designated agent. (Code 1977, § 17-3003) State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 106-84. - Creating a disturbance at schools.     It shall be unlawful for any person to create a disturbance in any private, public or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds or on the fields or grounds lawfully used for school activities while such recreational areas are in use or other activities are in progress thereon. A disturbance shall be defined as any act which may be reasonably expected to substantially interfere with activities within the school or school activities on the school grounds or fields while such activities are in progress thereon. (Code 1977, § 17-3004) 
Sec. 106-85. - Monetary solicitation. (a)  "Monetary solicitation" defined: (1)  "Monetary solicitation" or to "monetarily solicit" is an act or action performed by an individual that meets the following three criteria: a.  Is an in-person request of another individual, either orally or by gesture; and b.  The request is for an immediate distribution of money or anything of monetary value; and c.  The request occurs on public property, including, without limitation, city streets, sidewalks, transit stations or platforms, and parks. (2)  "Monetary solicitation" and "monetarily solicit" shall not include: a.  Requests for signatures on a petition or other document; or b.  Distribution of written material that requests individuals to send contributions by mail or make donations in some other manner at a later time; or c.  Distribution of pre-addressed envelopes along with a verbal plea to contribute money, provided that no request for an immediate contribution is made; or d.  Sale of literature or other merchandise or food where payment occurs at a separate time and location, including through mail order; or e.  Public vending lawfully permitted in accordance with Atlanta City Code, Chapter 30, Article XXIII, Division 1, section 30-1400 et seq. (b)  Monetary solicitation in certain areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to monetarily solicit in any of the following places: (1)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility, which includes any temporary use site (port-a-toilet); (2)  Within 15 feet of an automated teller machine (ATM), provided that when an ATM is located within an ATM facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the ATM facility; (3)  Within 15 feet of any parking lot pay box, on-street parking pay station or kiosk; (4)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; (5)  In any public transportation vehicle; in or on any bus, rail, subway or Atlanta Streetcar platform or station or taxi stand, including without limitation entryways, exits, queuing areas and pay stations connected therewith; within 15 feet of any bus, rail, subway or Atlanta Streetcar platform or outdoor station or taxi stand; and within 15 feet of the entrance or exit of a station located in an enclosed building; (6)  Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit of a building, whether publicly or privately owned, including without limitation any residence, business, event venue or athletic facility. Nothing in this subsection (6) shall prohibit monetary solicitation within 15 feet of any other portion of a building other than its exit(s) and entrance(s); (7)  Within 15 feet of or within a line for entry to any building, whether the building is publicly or privately owned, including without limitation any residence, business, event venue or athletic facility; (8)  In a parking lot or garage owned or operated by the City of Atlanta, including entryways or exits and pay stations connected therewith; (9)  Within 15 feet of any public property "valid vendor location" where a "vendor" is operating, as defined in the Atlanta City Code, Chapter 30, Article XXIII, Division 1, Section 30-1401; or (10)  Within 15 feet of any private property "valid vendor location" where a "vending business" is in operation, as defined in the Atlanta City Code, Article XXIV, Division 1, Section 30-1461. (11)  Within the Restricted Monetary Solicitation Zone, defined as the area between the boundaries of the following named streets, including both sides of each named street and each corner of intersecting named streets: Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SW from Courtland Street SE to Peachtree Street SW; Peachtree Street SW from Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SW to Alabama Street SW; Alabama Street SW from Peachtree Street SW to Forsyth Street SW; Forsyth Street SW from Alabama Street SW to Marietta Street NW; Marietta Street NW from Forsyth Street NW to Ivan Allen Jr. Boulevard; Ivan Allen Jr. Boulevard from Marietta Street NW to Peachtree Street NE; Peachtree Street NE from Ivan Allen Jr. Boulevard to Peachtree Center Avenue NE; Peachtree Center Avenue NE from Peachtree Street NE to Baker Street NE; Baker Street NE from Peachtree Center Avenue NE to Piedmont Avenue NE; Piedmont Avenue NE from Baker Street NE to Edgewood Avenue NE; Edgewood Avenue NE from Piedmont Avenue NE to Courtland Street SE; Courtland Street SE from Edgewood Avenue NE to Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SW; and Piedmont Avenue NE from John Wesley Dobbs Avenue NE to Edgewood Avenue SE; Edgewood Avenue SE from Piedmont Avenue NE to Boulevard NE; Boulevard NE from Edgewood Avenue SE to Auburn Avenue NE; Auburn Avenue NE from Boulevard NE to Jackson Street NE; Jackson Street NE from Auburn Avenue NE to Irwin Street NE; Irwin Street NE from Jackson Street NE to Fort Street NE; John Wesley Dobbs Avenue NE from Fort Street NE to Piedmont Avenue NE. Auburn Avenue NE from Boulevard NE to Jackson Street NE; Jackson Street NE from Auburn Avenue NE to Irwin Street NE; Irwin Street NE from Jackson Street NE to Boulevard NE; Boulevard NE from Irwin Street NE to Auburn Avenue NE. (12)  Within the Midtown Theatre District Zone, defined as the area between the boundaries of the following named streets, including both sides of each named street and each corner of intersecting named streets: Spring Street NW from 3rd Street NW to Ponce de Leon Avenue NE; Ponce de Leon Avenue from Springs Street to W. Peachtree Street NW; W. Peachtree Street NW from Ponce de Leon Avenue NE to North Avenue NE; North Avenue NE from W. Peachtree Street NW to Piedmont Avenue NE; Piedmont Avenue NE from North Avenue NE to 4th Street NE; 4th Street NE from Piedmont Avenue NE to W. Peachtree Street NW; W. Peachtree Street NW from 4th Street NE to 3rd Street NW; 3rd Street NW from W. Peachtree Street NW to Spring Street NW. (c)  Aggressive monetary solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person to monetarily solicit in any of the following manners: (1)  Blocking the path or passage of the person solicited; (2)  Not allowing the person solicited to leave the presence of the solicitor, by following immediately behind or walking alongside the person solicited; (3)  Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following refusal; (4)  Continuing to monetarily solicit a person after that person has refused the solicitation verbally or by gesture; (5)  Continuing to monetarily solicit a person located in or on a motor vehicle after that person has refused the solicitation verbally or by gesture; (6)  Making any statement, gesture or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person solicited would perceive to be a threat that is intended to compel or force the person solicited to accede to the demands of the solicitor; and/or (7)  Touching the person solicited. (d)  Penalties. (1)  Upon conviction under section 106-85(b) above, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: the performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days. (2)  Upon the first conviction under section 106-85(c) above, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: the performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days. (3)  Upon the second conviction under section 106-85(c) above, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: the performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, provided that the sentence must include a minimum of 30 days imprisonment. (4)  Upon the third and future convictions under section 106-85(c) above, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: the performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, provided that the sentence must include a minimum of 90 days imprisonment. (Ord. No. 2012-44(12-O-1324), § 1, 10-8-12; Ord. No. 2013-31(13-O-1103), 7-10-13; Ord. No. 2015-20(15-O-1189), §§ 1, 2, 5-27-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-31(15-O-1267), § 1, 6-24-15 ) 
Sec. 106-86. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-43, § 1, approved June 9, 2006 repealed § 106-86 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to license to make music on streets; making such for purpose of begging; as enacted by Code 1977, § 17-3007. 
Sec. 106-87. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 2, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 106-87, which pertained to treasure hunts and derived from Code 1977, § 17-3009. 
Sec. 106-88. - Moving household goods at night.     It shall be unlawful for any person to move or transport household goods and furnishings from one place of residence to another between the hours of sunset and sunrise without first having obtained a permit to do so from the police chief. All applications for permits shall be filed more than 24 hours prior to the time of actual moving. (Code 1977, § 17-3014; Ord. No. 2001-27, § 1, 4-11-01) 
Sec. 106-89. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 3, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 106-89, which pertained to residential picketing and derived from Code 1977, § 17-3022. 
Sec. 106-90. - False representations to police or any city department.     It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly and willfully and with intent thereby to mislead, either in such person's own behalf or in behalf of others, as principal or as agent, to make or file orally or in writing any false representations of fact to any police officer of the city or to any department of the city government. (Code 1977, § 17-6002) 
Secs. 106-91—106-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 106-126. - House of ill fame. (a)  A person, having or exercising control over the use of any place or conveyance within the city which would offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution, commits the offense of keeping a place of prostitution when such person knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution. (b)  Those places or conveyances which have been adjudged to be places of prostitution as provided in this Code may be abated as also provided in this Code. (Code 1977, § 17-2001) State Law reference— Keeping a place of prostitution, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-10. 
Sec. 106-127. - Solicitation for an illicit sexual act. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while in any place open to the public and whether as a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, to offer or consent to perform any illicit sexual act for money. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person, while in any place open to the public and whether as a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, to attempt to induce, entice, solicit, pander, purchase or procure another to commit any illicit sexual act for money. An illicit sexual act is defined as one or more of the following: (1)  Prostitution; (2)  Sodomy for hire; or (3)  Masturbation for hire. Any person in violation of this Code section shall be guilty of the offense of idling and loitering for the purpose of committing an illicit sexual act. (b)  For the purpose of subsection (a) any person shall include solicitors of illicit sexual acts or panderers, who solicit, procure or purchase an other to perform any illicit sexual act in exchange for money, and who are commonly referred to as "johns" or "tricks". (c)  The following penalties shall be imposed upon the conviction of the offense of idling and loitering for the purpose of committing an illicit sexual act. (1)  First conviction. Punishment as provided in section 1-8. (2)  Second conviction. Sixty days incarceration in the city jail or stockade without a reduction in time. (3)  Third and subsequent convictions. Six months in the city jail or stockade without a reduction in time. (d)  The following penalties shall be imposed upon the conviction of subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section. (1)  First conviction. A mandatory minimum term of imprisonment of 15 days in the city jail and a minimum mandatory fine of $250.00. (2)  Second conviction. a.  A mandatory term of 180 days imprisonment with a minimum of 60 days of said sentence of imprisonment to be served in confinement in the city jail. The remaining 120 days may be served on probation as prescribed in subsection 2(b); b.  The sentencing court may, in its discretion, require any person convicted of a second violation of subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this Code section, as a special condition of probation, to leave the corporate limits of the city and not return during the probationary period; c.  Any person convicted of a second violation of subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this Code section shall also pay a fine of $1,000.00. (3)  Third and subsequent convictions. A mandatory term of six months of imprisonment in the city jail. (4)  None of the mandatory sentences referred to in this Code section shall be suspended, probated, deferred or withheld, except as provided herein. (5)  Nothing in this Code section shall affect the sentencing court's authority to impose any other condition of probation as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 42-8-5. (6)  The city solicitor may move the sentencing court to impose a reduced or suspended sentence upon any person who is convicted of a violation of this Code section and provides substantial assistance in the identification, arrest, or conviction of any of his accomplices, accessories, co-conspirators, or principals. Upon good cause shown, the motion may be filed and heard in camera. The judge hearing the motion may impose a reduced or suspended sentence if he finds that the defendant has rendered such substantial assistance. (7)  Diversion program a.  Upon a verdict or plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendre, but before an adjudication of guilt, the sentencing court may, in its discretion, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the defendant, defer further proceeding and enroll the defendant in an educational program administered by the City Solicitor's Office in accordance with Official Code of Georgia Annotated 15-18-80, and designed to address issues related to idling and loitering for the purpose of committing an illegal sexual act and/or prostitution. b.  Upon fulfillment of the terms of the educational program, including a showing that the defendant has not violated this Code Section for a period of one year, the defendant shall be discharged without court adjudication of guilt. c.  The City Solicitor's Office is authorized to assess and collect from each defendant who enters the program a fee as set forth in O.C.G.A. 15-18-80 for the administration of the program. Any such fee collected shall be deposited into the City of Atlanta General Fund. (8)  With the exception of those fees collected in accordance with 106-127(d)(7), all fines paid to and collected by the city's courts pursuant to conviction under this section shall be deposited to the Inmate Welfare Program Trust Fund, 3PO2494008121CL9999, to defray the cost of inmate programs and services in the department of corrections. (Code 1977, § 17-2004; Ord. No. 1996-76, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 1998-76, § 1, 10-22-98; Ord. No. 1998-89, § 1, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 13, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2008-81(08-O-1485), §§ 1, 2, 11-6-08) State Law reference— Keeping a place of prostitution, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-10. 
Sec. 106-128. - Criminal impersonation. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Intent to defraud means the use of deception with the intention to injure another's interest which has economic value. (b)  Intent. A person is guilty of criminal impersonation if such person: (1)  Assumes a false identity and does not act in such person's assumed character with the intent to defraud another; or (2)  Pretends to be a representative of some person or organization and does an act in such person's pretended capacity with the intent to defraud another. (Code 1977, § 17-2002) 
Sec. 106-129. - Indecency.     It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts in a public place: (1)  An act, or simulated act, of sexual intercourse; (2)  An exposure of one's genitals, or of one's breasts, if female; or (3)  The touching, caressing or fondling of the genitals, or the breast of a female. (Code 1977, § 17-2003) State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 106-130. - Defecating or urinating on public property or in areas.     It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks, or in the halls or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view in the city. (Code 1977, § 17-3011) State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 106-131. - Spitting.     It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon the sidewalks, or upon the floors of places of worship, buses, public halls, theaters or other public places. (Code 1977, § 17-3012) 
Sec. 106-132. - Hazing. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Haze means to subject a student to an activity which endangers the physical health of a student regardless of a student's willingness to participate in such activity.     School means any school, college or university in the city.     School organization means any club, society, fraternity, sorority or a group living together which has students as its principal members.     Student means any person enrolled in a school in the city. (b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to haze any student in connection with or as a condition or precondition of gaining acceptance, membership, office or other status in a school organization. (c)  Violation. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty and penalized as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1977, § 17-3021) State Law reference— Hazing, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-61. 
Secs. 106-133—106-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 4, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed Div. 2, §§ 106-151—106-164, which pertained to gambling and related offenses and derived from Code 1977, §§ 17-5001—17-5014. 
Secs. 106-151—106-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRUGS AND OTHER CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Drugs and other controlled substances, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq. 
Sec. 106-181. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 5, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 106-181, which pertained to model glue and derived from Code 1977, §§ 17-8001, 17-8002. 
Sec. 106-182. - Marijuana.     It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $75.00, and shall not be punished by imprisonment for any term; provided that any defendant charged with possession of one ounce or less of marijuana shall be entitled on request to have the case against such defendant transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county wherein the alleged offense occurred. (Code 1977, § 17-8003; Ord. No. 2017-55(17-O-1152), § 1, 10-2-17 ) Possession of marijuana, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30.1. 
Sec. 106-183. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 6, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 106-183, which pertained to aftershave lotion and derived from Code 1977, § 17-8004. 
Sec. 106-184. - Spray paint. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally smell or inhale spray paint containing halogenated hydrocarbons for the purpose of intoxication. (b)  Any person guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $250.00 or imprisonment for not more than 25 days for such violation. (Code 1977, § 17-8005) 
Secs. 106-185—106-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES BY AND AGAINST MINORS 
Sec. 106-226. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-57, § 2, adopted July 24, 2001, repealed § 106-226 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to frequenting of dancehalls as related to offenses by and against minors. The user of this Code is directed to ch. 14, art. IX, div. 1 and 2 for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 106-227. - Curfew—Authorized.     It is unlawful for any minor 16 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; however, on Fridays and Saturdays, the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: (1)  When a minor is accompanied by such minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor. (2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by such minor's parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor. (3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance. (4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places referenced in this section during the proscribed period of time. (5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion. (6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel, with interstate travel through the city, excepted in all cases from the curfew. (Code 1977, § 17-7002) 
Sec. 106-228. - Same—Responsibility of parents. (a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child 16 years of age or younger to permit or by insufficient control to allow such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places listed in section 106-227 within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except in circumstances set out in subsections (1) through (6) of section 106-227. (b)  Violation. Upon conviction of violation of this section for the first time, a person shall be given a warning citation. Upon further convictions, a person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs, or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days, or work on the public streets or work on the public works of the city for not more than 60 days, or be subject to any one or more of the punishments, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1977, § 17-7003; Ord. No. 2009-60(09-O-1560), § 1, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 106-229. - Child in need of supervision. (a)  Any minor age six through 15 years old who loiters, wanders, strolls or plays in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on any school day shall be considered a child in need of supervision. (b)  A minor shall not be considered a child in need of supervision under the circumstances set forth in items (1) through (6) of section 106-227 of this chapter, or in the following instances: (1)  When the minor is enrolled in a valid home study program as authorized by O.C.G.A. Section 20-2-690; (2)  When the minor has completed all course study requirements for high school graduation; (3)  When the minor is married in accordance with applicable law; (4)  When the minor has written proof from school authorities that he/she is excused from school attendance at that particular time; or (5)  When the minor is participating in an approved school or study activity which requires the minor to be off school property. (c)  A police officer shall transport any minor charged with being a child in need of Supervision, as defined in subsection (a), to a designated school district facility. A minor transported to the school district facility will be released to the custody of the school officials or to the custody of the minor's parent or legal guardian. (d)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, legal guardian or other person having custody or control of any minor, age six through 15 years old, to knowingly commit an act or knowingly fail to act when such an act or omission would cause the minor to be found to be a child in need of supervision as defined in subsection (a). (1)  It shall be an affirmative defense to this section if the parent or legal guardian has invoked the jurisdiction of the juvenile court with regard to the minor prior to the time that the minor was charged with being a child in need of supervision. (2)  It shall not be a defense to the offense provided for in subsection (b) that the minor has not been formally found to be a child in need of supervision. (3)  Any person who violates this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in the general penalty provision currently designated as section 1-8. (Ord. No. 2009-46(09-O-0824), § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 2012-02(12-O-0077), § 1, 2-15-12) 
Secs. 106-230—106-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WEAPON CONTROL[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Weapons in parks, § 110-66. State Law reference— Weapons, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-101. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 106-251. - Law enforcement.     Nothing in this article shall prohibit the acquisition, possession or disposition of weapons by police departments, sheriff's offices, marshal's offices, other local, state and federal law enforcement agencies, or the military and naval forces of this state or of the United States for use in the discharge of their official duties. ( Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130), § 7, 3-29-17 ) 
Secs. 106-252—106-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 8, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed Div. 2 §§ 106-266—106-273, which pertained to registration, sale and disposition and derived from Code 1977, §§ 17-4021—17-4027; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 23, 11-6-08. 
Secs. 106-266—106-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POSSESSION AND USE 
Sec. 106-301. - Discharging firearms.     Shooting any firearms in the city, unless in a licensed shooting gallery or by permission of the council on military parades, is prohibited. (Code 1977, § 17-4005) 
Sec. 106-302. - Firing of cannons, artillery.     It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to fire a cannon or other piece of artillery without special permission of the council. (Code 1977, § 17-4006) 
Sec. 106-303. - Air guns, slingshots, similar weapons.     It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any air gun, air pistol, slingshot or like instrument or weapon within the limits of the city. (Code 1977, § 17-4031) 
Sec. 106-304. - Arrows.     It shall be unlawful for any person, within the corporate limits of the city, to discharge any arrow of any kind or character from a bow; provided, however, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use of bows and arrows indoors on any established archery range under the personal and direct supervision of a person at least 18 years of age. (Code 1977, § 17-4032) 
Sec. 106-305. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 9, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 106-305, which pertained to sale or display in show windows visible from streets and derived from Code 1977, § 17-4033. 
Sec. 106-306. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 9, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 106-306, which pertained to knives, razors, similar weapons and derived from Code 1977, § 17-4034. 
Sec. 106-307. - City employees prohibited from carrying weapons. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of the city to have on such employee's person, either concealed or unconcealed, or in such employee's immediate possession, or to bring onto any premises of the city any of the following implements: (1)  Any firearms, guns, pistols or other instruments of like kind or similar character; (2)  Any sword or dirk, spear or sword-in-a-cane; (3)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches; (4)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches; (5)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three inches; this is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives or other knives which do not close; (6)  Any straight razor; (7)  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point; (8)  Any knucks; (9)  Any explosives; (10)  Any article or combination of articles likely to be made into so as to produce an explosive, including but not limited to gas, fire or water; (11)  Slingshots, bows and arrows, cannon, artillery or fireworks; (12)  Gas bombs, fire bombs, water bombs or similar type bomb or like in kind likely to produce harm either to the person or property of the city; or (13)  Any or all other instruments, implements, objects or devices that would or could produce harm or injury to any person or property of the city or of another. (b)  The following employees or special employees of the city are authorized to carry pistols or other weapons or equipment when such is lawfully issued to them: (1)  Police. (2)  Park police. (3)  Airport police. (4)  Security guards employed by the city. (5)  Court bailiffs. (6)  Probation officers. (7)  Specially deputized citizens or employees of the city. (8)  Personnel employed by the office of corrections. (c)  Any violation of this section or any subsection thereof shall be considered an offense and any person convicted of violating the terms of this section or any subsection thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. (Code 1977, § 17-4035; Ord. No. 2006-69, § 1, 10-11-06) State Law reference— Carrying deadly weapons to or at public gatherings, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-127; concealed revolver of pistol licenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-128 et seq. 
Secs. 106-308—106-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 10, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed Div. 4, §§ 106-326—106-330, which pertained to aliens and derived from Code 1977, §§ 17-4011—17-4015. 
Secs. 106-326—106-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 11, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed Div. 5, §§ 106-351—106-354, which pertained to pistols and derived from Code 1977, §§ 17-4001—17-4004. 
Secs. 106-351—106-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[8] Footnotes: --- (8) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 12, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed Div. 6, §§ 106-376—106-378, which pertained to assault weapons and derived from Code 1977, § 17-4036(a)—(f). 
Secs. 106-376—106-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DRUG-FREE ZONES 
DIVISION 1. - COMMERCIAL ZONES 
Sec. 106-401. - Title.     This article should be known as the "Drug-Free Commercial Zone" Code. (Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 3-9-98) 
Sec. 106-402. - Findings. (a)  The council finds that there is a high rate of drug related crime in certain commercial areas, as studied and determined by the Atlanta Police Department, as reported in Exhibit A, which is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth. (b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. 16-13-32.6, the City of Atlanta creates and designates drug-free commercial zones to be located in those areas more fully described in the attached Exhibit B, which is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth, consisting of previously zoned commercial property pursuant to the city's planning and zoning powers and residential property contiguous to such commercially zoned area extending not more than one-half mile from the external boundary of any portion of the commercially zoned area, as certified in Exhibit C. (c)  For purposes of this article, designation of commercial property and contiguous residential property shall be that as set forth in chapter 16 of this Code, as it shall be amended from time to time. (Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 3-9-98) 
Sec. 106-403. - Designation of drug-free commercial zones. (a)  Drug-free commercial zones are those areas of the city designated as follows:     Zone I, North Avenue: An area contained within a northern boundary of Bankhead Avenue; a southern boundary of Simpson Street: a western boundary of Ashby Street; an eastern boundary of Railroad Zone Boundary.     Zone I, Fair Street: An area contained within a northern boundary of M. L. King, Jr. Drive; a southern boundary of Westview Drive, extended to Ashby Street; a western boundary of Ashby Street; an eastern boundary of Northside Drive.     Zone I, M.L. King, Jr. Drive: An area contained within a northern boundary of Collier Road; a southern boundary of M.L. King, Jr. Drive; a western boundary of Old Gordon; an eastern boundary of Bolton Road.     Zone I, Bankhead Highway: An area contained N.W. from the intersection of Bankhead and Hollywood Road to the intersection of Bankhead and Commercial Avenue, N.W.     Zone I, Hollywood Road: An area contained N.W. from the intersection of Hollywood and Perry Blvd. to the intersection of Hollywood and Hightower Road, N.W.     Zone I, James Jackson Parkway: An area contained N.W. from the intersection of James Jackson and Browntown Road to the intersection of James Jackson and Hightower Road, N.W.     Zone III, Thomasville: An area contained within a northern boundary of Custer Avenue; a southern boundary of Isa Drive; a western boundary of Boulevard/Federal Prison Property Line; an eastern boundary of Moreland Avenue.     Police Zone III, McDaniel: An area contained within a northern boundary of I-20; a southern boundary of University Avenue; a western boundary of Northside Drive; and an eastern boundary of I-75.     Zone III, Jonesboro Road: An area contained within a northern boundary of McWilliams Avenue, S.E.; a southern boundary of Macedonia Road, S. E.; a western boundary of an imaginary line 300 yards westerly of the center line of Jonesboro Road; an eastern boundary of an imaginary line 200 yards easterly of the center line of Jonesboro Road.     Zone IV, Cascade Heights: An area contained within a northern boundary of Worthem Avenue, S.W.; a southern boundary of Belvedere Avenue, S.W.; a western boundary of Beecher Road, S.W. at its intersection with Belvedere Avenue, S.W. to Benjamin E. Mays Drive; thence with Benjamin E. Mays Drive to Herring Road, S.W.; an eastern boundary of Delowe Drive, S.W. at its intersection with Belvedere Drive and with Delowe Drive to Cascade Road, S.W., thence in a straight line following the same direction as Delowe Drive to Jackson Place, S.W. thence Jackson Place to Philadelphia, S.W. (Also to include that portion of Jackson Place, S.W. east of the aforementioned line on both sides of Jackson Place for a distance of 150 yards.)     Zone IV, Beecher: An area contained within a northern boundary of Donnelly Avenue; a southern boundary of Avon Avenue; a western boundary of Cascade Avenue, S.W and continuing as Cascade Road; and an eastern boundary of Lee Street, S.W.     Zone IV, Allison Court: An area contained within a northern boundary of Campbellton Road, S.W.; a southern boundary of the city limits; a western boundary of Delowe Drive, S.W., to include all buildings on the extension of Allison Court which extends west of Delowe and dead ends; an eastern boundary of the Fort McPherson property line.     Zone IV, M.L. King, Jr. Drive: An area contained within a northern boundary of the intersection of MLK, Jr. Drive, S.W. and Old Gordon Road, N.W. thence on MLK, Jr. Drive to Bolton Road, thence on Bolton Road to Fairlane Drive, N.W. thence on Fairlane Drive; a southern boundary starting at the intersection of MLK, Jr. Drive, S.W. and Interstate 285, and running a straight line, perpendicular to MLK, Jr. Drive, S.W., 500 yards, thence that line in a northerly direction with the midline of MLK, Jr. Drive; a western boundary starting at the intersection of Fairlane Drive, N.W. and Fedora Way, N.W. and running a line 500 yards perpendicular to the midline of MLK, Jr. Drive and with that line in a westerly direction to the eastern boundary of I-285.     Zone IV, Allen Temple: An area contained within a northern boundary of Oakcliff Road, N.W., thence a line connecting with Tribble Lane, N.W., thence Tribble Lane; a southern boundary from the intersection of Harlan Road, S.W. and Tee Road, S.W., and thence from that intersection, running a line, perpendicular to MLK, Jr. Drive 500 yards, thence that line in a southerly direction with the midline of MLK, Jr. Drive to Lynhurst Drive, S.W., thence with Lynhurst Drive to North Utoy Creek, thence with North Utoy Creek; a western boundary of I-285 to its crossing with Brownlee Road, S.W. thence with Brownlee Road; and an eastern boundary of Harlan Road, S.W. thence MLK, Jr. Drive, S.W. thence Linkwood Road, N . W.     Zone V, Fourth Ward: An area contained within a northern boundary of Ponce de Leon, N.E.; a southern boundary of Freedom Parkway, N.E., a western boundary of Argonne Avenue, N.E. continuing as Bedford Place, N.E. and continuing as Fort Street, N.E.; an eastern boundary of a straight line beginning at the intersection of Freedom Parkway where it intersects Corley Street, N.E. continuing along Corley Street to Highland Avenue, N.E thence a straight line to Florence Street, N.E. thence along Florence Street to East Avenue, N.E. thence a straight line to Wilmer Street, N.E. where it intersects Rankin Street, N.E. thence along Wilmer Street, N.E. and continuing in a straight line to Ponce de Leon Avenue, N.E.     Zone V, Midtown: An area contained within a northern boundary of 11th Street, N.E., a southern boundary of 4th Street, N.E.; a western boundary of West Peachtree Street, N.W.; an eastern boundary of Argonne Avenue, N.E., thence extending north along a straight line.     Zone V, Daniel Street: An area contained within a northern boundary of Auburn Avenue; a southern boundary of Decatur Street; a western boundary of Boulevard; an eastern boundary of Cornelia Street.     Zone VI, DeKalb Avenue: An area contained within a northern boundary of DeKalb Avenue; a southern boundary of Memorial Drive; a western Boundary of Moreland Avenue; an eastern boundary of Rogers Street.     Zone VI, Memorial Drive: An area contained within a northern boundary of Memorial Drive; a southern boundary of Portland Avenue and proceeding westerly along Portland Avenue to Glenwood Place, thence northerly along Glenwood Place to Glenwood Avenue, thence westerly on Glenwood Avenue; a western boundary of the Glenwood Memorial Connector; an eastern boundary of Flat Shoals Avenue.     Vine Street N.W., from the intersection of Vine and Magnolia Street to the intersection of Vine and Thurmond Street NW.     Police Beat 101: Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and Peters Street Commercial Corridor: The area bordered on the north by Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive; on the east by Northside Drive thence Northeasterly on Peters Street to Spring Street; on the south by Atlanta Student Movement Blvd.; and on the west by Joseph E. Lowery Blvd.     Police Beat 102: The area bounded on the north by Joseph E. Boone Blvd., on the east by Northside Drive, on the south by Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and on the west by Joseph E. Lowery Blvd.     Police Beat 104: The area bounded on the north by the MARTA rail line/Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, on the east by Joseph E. Lowery Blvd., on the south by I-20 and on the west by West Lake Avenue.     Police Beat 105: The area bounded on the north by Joseph E. Boone Blvd., on the east by Joseph E. Lowery Blvd., on the south by Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and on the west by West Lake Avenue.     Police Beat 106: The area bounded on the north by Johnson Road/West Marietta Street, on the east by Joseph E. Lowery Blvd., on the south by Joseph E. Boone Blvd., and on the west by West Lake Avenue/Grove Park Place.     Police Beat 301: The area bounded on the north by Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard; on the east by Metropolitan Parkway south to the Norfolk Southern rail line then east to the I-75/85 Downtown Connector then south along the I-75/85 Downtown Connector to an imaginary line coterminous with Casplan Street (north) then west back to Metropolitan Parkway; on the south by an imaginary line from east to west at the southern Boundary of Perkerson Park; and on the west by Lee Street.     Police Beat 303: The area bounded on the north by I-20, on the east by I-75/85, on the south by University Avenue and on the west by Metropolitan Parkway.     Police Beat 304: The area bounded on the north by Ralph David Abernathy Blvd., on the east by Metropolitan Parkway to 1-75/85, on the south by Langford Parkway and on the west by Lee Street.     Police Beat 306: The area bounded on the north by Dill Avenue, on the east by the I-75/85 Downtown Connector, on the south by Langford Parkway and on the west by Lee Street.     Police Bent 307: The area bounded on the north by Thirkeld Avenue, on the cast by Jonesboro Road, on the south by Lakewood Avenue and on the west the I-75/85 Downtown Connector.     Police Beat 310: The area bounded on the north by Langford Parkway, on the east by Jonesboro Road on the south by Cleveland Avenue and on the west by I-75/85.     Police Beat 311: The area hounded on the north by Cleveland Avenue, on the east by Hapeville Road, on the south by Mt. Zion Road and on the west by Sylvan Road.     Police Beat 401: Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard Commercial Corridor: The area bordered on the north by Interstate 20; on the east by West Whitehall Street; on the south by Ralph David Abernathy Blvd.; and on the west by Langhorn Street.     Police Beat 402: White Street Commercial Corridor: The area bordered on the north by Ralph David Abernathy Blvd.; on the east by Lawton Street to Hall Street to Donnelly Avenue to Lee Street; on the south by Arlington Avenue to Oakland Drive to Bridges Avenue; and on the west by Westmont Road to Cascade Avenue.     Police Beat 404: The area bounded on the north by I-20, on the east by Langhorn Street and Cascade Avenue, on the south by Cascade Avenue and Mays Drive, and on the west by Peyton Road.     Police Beat 509: The area bounded on the north by North Avenue, on the east by Piedmont Avenue, on the south by the 1-75/85 Downtown Connector and on the west by the 1-75/85 Downtown Connector.     Police Beat 510: The area bounded on the north by Harris Street, on the east by the I-75/85 Downtown Connector, on the south by Marietta Street and on the west by Peachtree Street.     Police Beat 511: Broad Street Commercial Corridor: The area bordered on the north by Decatur Street; on the east by Central Avenue; on the south by Mitchell Street; and on the west by Spring Street.     Police Beat 604: The area bounded on the north by Ralph McGill Blvd./Freedom Parkway, on the east by Moreland Avenue, on the south by Decatur Street/DeKalb Avenue and on the west by the I-75/85 Downtown Connector.     In APD Zones 5, beats 509 and 510.     In APD Zone 6, beat 604.     In APD Zone 3, beats 304, 306 and 307. (Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2001-23, § 1, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 2004-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2004-41, §§ 1—3, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2008-22(08-O-0557), § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 2012-08(12-O-0282), § 1, 3-14-12; Ord. No. 2013-11(13-O-0317), § 1, 3-13-13; Ord. No. 2013-12(13-O-0515), § 1, 3-27-13; Ord. No. 2013-19(13-O-1032), § 1, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2013-25(13-O-1033), § 1, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2013-26(13-O-1047), § 1, 6-12-13; Ord. No. 2013-31(13-O-1106), § 1, 7-1-13; Ord. No. 2013-59(13-O-1374), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Sec. 106-404. - Duration; revision; deletion. (a)  Designation of drug-free commercial zones shall expire five years from the date of the enactment of this ordinance, unless the Council after causing an appropriate study to be undertaken, decides to continue as or designate as a drug-free commercial zone by enacting an ordinance and the subsequent adoption thereof by the General Assembly in accordance with O.C.G.A. 16-13-32.6, et seq. (b)  The council may revise the maps and designations by ordinance in the event it deems that appropriate, however a revised map shall not become effective and the new area shall not be a drug-free commercial zone until the revised map has been filed with the Georgia Department of Community Affairs in accordance with O.C.G.A. 16-13-32.6, et seq. (c)  The council may remove the designation of drug-free commercial zone in the event it deems that appropriate. The removal of the designation also shall be by ordinance. (Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 106-405. - Prohibited acts. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the designated drug-free commercial zones of the City of Atlanta to engage in or be in or about any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcohol beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated, or for the purpose of or intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcoholic beverages. (b)  Any person violating this code section shall be punished pursuant to section 1-8 of this Code as it shall be amended from time to time. (c)  A person is subject to exclusion for a period of six months from the public streets, sidewalks, and other public ways in all designated drug-free commercial zones designated in article VII of chapter 106 of the Code if that person has been found guilty and convicted of violating sub-paragraph (a) of this section. (Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 106-406. - Issuance of exclusion notices. (a)  The judge of a court of the city shall issue exclusion notices to any person found in violation of this Code section as provided for in section 106-405(a). (b)  If a person excluded from designated drug-free commercial zones is found in any such zone during the exclusion period, that person is subject to immediate arrest for violation of this code section as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 14, 1-10-05) 
Secs. 106-407—106-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SCHOOL ZONES[9] Footnotes: --- (9) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-84, § 1, adopted July 29, 2003, has been renumbered at the editor's discretion to conform to the style of this Code. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Sec. 106-421. - Designation of drug free zones. (a)  Designated drug free school zones: Shall be defined as that area 1,000 feet within the locations described below: (1)  Booker T. Washington High School located at 45 Whitehouse Drive, SW, Atlanta, Georgia; (2)  John F. Kennedy Middle School located at 225 Griffin Street, NW, Atlanta, Georgia; (3)  Alonzo F. Herndon Elementary School located at 187 Wesley Avenue, NE, Atlanta, Georgia; and (4)  Mary McLeod Bethune Elementary School located at 220 Northside Drive, NW, Atlanta, Georgia. (b)  Designated drug free recreational zones: Shall be defined as that area 1,000 feet within the locations described below: (1)  John F. Kennedy Park located at 225 Orr Street, Atlanta, Georgia; (2)  Charles L. Harper Memorial Park located at Joseph E. Lowery Blvd. at Mayson Turner Road, NW. (c)  Designated drug free residential zones: Shall be defined as that area 1,000 feet within the locations described below: (d)  The commissioner of public works, in consultation with the Atlanta Police Department, shall erect appropriate signage at each location described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) above. (e)  The posting of signage at each location described in subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (b)(1), (b)(2) above shall be funded by the project safe neighborhood grant. (Ord. No. 2003-84, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 106-422. - Duration; revision; deletion. (a)  Designation of drug-free zones shall expire five years from the date of the enactment of this division, unless the council after causing an appropriate study to be undertaken, decides to continue as or designate as a drug-free zone by enacting an ordinance. (b)  The council may revise the designations by ordinance in the event it deems that appropriate. (c)  The council may remove the designation of drug-free zone in the event it deems that appropriate. The removal of the designation also shall be by ordinance. (Ord. No. 2003-84, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 106-423. - Prohibited acts. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the drug-free zones designated is section 106-421 of the City Code of Atlanta to manufacture, distribute, dispense or possess with intent to distribute a controlled substance or marijuana. (b)  Any person violating this code section shall be punished pursuant to section 1-8 of this Code as it shall be amended from time to time. (c)  A person is subject to exclusion for a period of six months from the public streets, sidewalks, and other public ways in all designated drug-free zones designated in article VII of chapter 106 of the Code if that person has been found guilty and convicted of violating sub-paragraph (a) of this section. (Ord. No. 2003-84, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 106-424. - Issuance of exclusion notices. (a)  The municipal court judge shall issue exclusion notices to any person found in violation of this Code section as provided for in section 106-423(a). (b)  If a person excluded from a designated drug-free zone is found in any such zone during the exclusion period, that person is subject to immediate arrest for violation of this code section as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (Ord. No. 2003-84, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 15, 1-10-05) 
Secs. 106-425—106-800. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED[10] Footnotes: --- (10) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-83(08-O-2136, § 2, approved November 24, 2008, repealed Art. VIII, §§ 106-801—106-809, which pertained to graffiti abatement. The user's attention is directed to section 74-174 for similar provisions. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 106-801—106-809. - Reserved. 
Chapter 110 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Naming of public facilities and streets in honor of persons, § 2-2; vending machines on city property and in city facilities, § 2-3; budgets for and rental of neighborhood centers, § 2-921; civic and cultural affairs, ch. 46; library, ch. 102. Land development code reference— Impact fee for parks and recreational services, § 19-1001 et seq. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific constitutional grant of authority relative to parks, recreational areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; municipal recreation generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 110-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commissioner means the Commissioner of parks, recreation and cultural affairs.     Department means the Department of Parks and Recreation.     Linear park means a single land segment or series of adjoining land segments, where the total depth of the linear park is at least 20 feet and the total length is at least 1/8 mile, and where the distance between each segment is no greater than 100 feet. All of the adjoining land segments shall be dedicated as city park. Each segment must meet one of the following descriptions: (1)  An area that is utilized primarily for park and/or recreation purposes; (2)  An area of land, walkway or trail adjacent to a public right-of-way as defined in section 138-1 of this Code; or (3)  An area of land, walkway or trail adjacent to a street as defined in section 138-1 of this Code, but excluding any public right-of-way.     Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power. (Code 1977, § 10-2001; Ord. No. 2012-37(12-O-0452), § 1, 8-29-12; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-2. - Parks council. (a)  There is established the parks council, membership in which shall be open to all residents of the city. The parks council shall be governed by a board of directors, of whom there will be 21. The members of the city council shall recommend to the mayor for appointment to the board of directors one person from each of the 12 districts, and the other nine members of the board of directors shall be nominated by the mayor. All members of the board of directors shall be subject to confirmation by the city council and shall serve one-year terms. The mayor shall designate seven members to serve on the executive committee. The Commissioner of parks and recreation and the directors of the bureau of parks and the bureau of recreation shall be ex officio members of the parks council. (b)  The parks council will be responsible for the following activities: (1)  Expressing the recreational needs and desires of the people of the city. (2)  Planning and developing innovative techniques and programs in the bureaus of parks and recreation. (3)  Soliciting philanthropic contributions to be used to improve the quality of the city's recreation system. (Code 1977, §§ 10-2023, 10-2024) Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 3-401. Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. _____
Sec. 110-3. - Fee schedule.     The following fee schedule is adopted for the department of parks and recreation for tax-exempt organizations and other organizations, for residents and non-residents. The Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation shall have the authority not to charge a fee at any given location over a period of time designated by the Commissioner, but not less than one month, provided that the decision is in writing and is applied uniformly to anyone utilizing said location during that time period. (a)  Reservation Fees: For purposes of this Section 110-3(a), "tax-exempt organization" shall mean any organization described in the Internal Revenue Service's list of organizations that qualify for 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4) status, regardless of whether the organization has actually applied for and/or received such 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4) designation. (1)  Showmobile rental (per 8 hour period) (a)  Tax exempt resident organizations ..... $350.00 (b)  All other resident organizations ..... $450.00 (c)  Tax exempt nonresident organizations ..... $600.00 (d)  All other nonresident organizations ..... $800.00 (2)  Playmobile rental (per hour) (a)  All (includes 2 Fun Experts) ..... $100.00 (3)  Batting Cage Rental (per hour) (a)  All ..... $25.00 (4)  P.A. System (per day) (a)  Tax exempt organizations ..... $70.00 (b)  All other organizations ..... $135.00 (5)  Athletic Fields (per hour) (a)  Unlighted ball fields 1.  Tax exempt resident organizations ..... $50.00 2.  All other resident organizations ..... $63.00 3.  Tax exempt Nonresident organizations ..... $55.00 4.  All other Nonresident organizations ..... $73.00 (b)  Lighted ball fields 1.  Tax exempt resident organizations ..... $63.00 2.  All other resident organizations ..... $83.00 3.  Tax exempt Nonresident organizations ..... $72.00 4.  All other Nonresident organizations ..... $101.00 (c)  Tournament ball fields (8 hour minimum) 1.  Tax exempt resident organizations ..... $65.00 2.  All other resident organizations ..... $80.00 3.  Tax exempt Nonresident organizations ..... $105.00 4.  All other Nonresident organizations ..... $120.00 (6)  Recreation Center Rooms. The City of Atlanta owns three different types of recreation centers. A Class 4 recreation center has a full gymnasium and a natatorium. A Class 3 recreation center has a full gymnasium but no natatorium. A Class 2 recreation center does not have a full gymnasium or a natatorium. The rates for recreation center rooms are set forth below. (a)  Recreation Center room hourly rates, per room. These rates apply to multipurpose, classroom, dance, art, and computer lab room rentals. 1.  Refundable security deposit ..... $100.00 2.  Resident Individuals ..... $30.00 3.  Non-resident Individuals ..... $43.00 4.  Resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $30.00 5.  Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $43.00 6.  All other Resident organizations ..... $75.00 7.  All other Non-resident organizations ..... $112.00 (b)  Auditorium hourly rates, per room. These rates apply to Auditorium rentals. In addition, rental of an Auditorium includes equipment such as floor tarps, microphones, podium, sound system, and kitchen equipment. 1.  Refundable security deposit ..... $100.00 2.  Resident Individuals ..... $85.00 i.  Adamsville Auditorium #2 ..... $100.00 3.  Non-resident Individuals ..... $150.00 4.  Resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $52.00 5.  Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $75.00 6.  All other Resident organizations ..... $122.00 7.  All other Non-resident organizations ..... $175.00 (c)  Conference room hourly rates, per room. These rates apply to conference rooms. Except tables and chairs, use of city equipment shall not be permitted with conference room rentals. 1.  Refundable security deposit ..... $100.00 2.  Resident Individuals ..... $42.00 3.  Non-resident Individuals ..... $60.00 4.  Resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $30.00 5.  Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $43.00 6.  All other Resident organizations ..... $70.00 7.  All other Non-resident organizations ..... $100.00 (d)  Gymnasium hourly rates, per room - These rates apply to gymnasium rentals. Use of city equipment, chairs and/or tables shall not be permitted with gymnasium rentals. 1.  Refundable security deposit ..... $100.00 2.  Resident Individuals ..... $90.00 3.  Non-resident Individuals ..... $210.00 4.  Resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $88.00 5.  Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $125.00 6.  All other Resident organizations ..... $157.00 7.  All other Non-resident organizations ..... $225.00 (e)  Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Associations. During regular operating hours, and pending availability, rooms will be made available, free of charge, to Booster Clubs that are registered with the Department of Parks and Recreation, NPU and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Associations, and NPU Sub-Committees that are registered as such with the Department of City Planning, and that are conducting organizational and community business meetings and activities. Additionally, pending availability, there shall be no charge for the use of city equipment (excluding office supplies) used in connection with said meetings. The charge for such meetings that occur outside of operating hours, pending availability, shall be the applicable rate for Resident tax-exempt organizations. The use of city equipment (excluding office supplies) shall remain free of charge. (f)  Event Packages. 1.  Weddings and wedding receptions. Any individual or organization wishing to hold a wedding or wedding reception at a Class 4 recreation center shall be charged $750.00 total for use of its' Auditoriums. This rental shall entitle the renter to seven hours of use, including a maximum of four hours for the event itself, two hours for set up, and one hour for break down. Any additional hours of use will be billed at $187.50 per hour. Weddings and wedding receptions may not be held in conference rooms or the gymnasiums. 2.  Events with admission fees/vending. Any individual or organization holding an event at a Class 4 Recreation Center where attendants are charged an admission fee, and/or where vending occurs, must pay: i.  The applicable facility rates set forth above, and ii.  20% of the gross revenue collected at the event or $500.00, whichever is greater. 3.  Birthday parties. Any individual or organization wishing to hold a birthday party at a Recreation Center shall be charged $110.00 total for use of its' Classroom and Gymnasium. This rental shall entitle the renter to two and a half hours of use, including one hour of classroom access, one hour of organized play in the gymnasium led by a Fun Expert, and 30 minutes for set-up prior to the event. Birthday parties cannot exceed 30 youth. (g)  Salary surcharge and security requirements . 1.  Salary surcharge. In addition to all of the rates set forth above in this subsection (a)(6), the renter of any recreation center or portion thereof shall be required to pay a salary surcharge for those times when the rental occurs outside of operating hours of the recreation center. The salary surcharge shall be applied to any and all renters using a facility, including without limitation Booster Clubs, NPU's, and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Association Sub-Committees. The salary surcharge shall be $25.00 per hour for each staff person required. One staff person shall be provided for every 100 persons whom the Department of Parks and Recreation reasonably expects to attend, such that 1—100 anticipated attendees shall require one staff person; 101—200 anticipated attendees shall require two staff people, etc. The number of expected attendees shall be based upon the number provided on the permit. The Department of Parks and Recreation may apply a different number where it has reasonably reliable information that more attendees will be present, where it provides that information and the decision to the applicant in writing, and where it gives the applicant an opportunity to refute the information. 2.  Security requirement. The renter of all or a portion of a recreation center must provide off-duty POST-certified law enforcement officers during the rental, regardless of whether the rental occurs during regular or non-regular operating hours if the Department of Parks and Recreation reasonably expects that the number of attendees will be greater than 75, the event is a party or other gathering for social purposes (i.e. not a meeting), where the Department of Parks and Recreation reasonably expects that the event will be attended primarily by persons under the age of 21 years, the event involves the serving of alcohol, or the Department of Parks and Recreation and the Atlanta Police Department both reasonably determine that security is required because of the nature of the event to protect the safety of persons and/or property. The number of security personnel required shall be one officer for every 75 anticipated attendees or less (1—75 anticipated attendees shall require one officer; 76—150 anticipated attendees shall require two officers, etc.), unless the Atlanta Police Department decides that a greater ratio of security personnel is required to protect the safety of persons and/or property. The Department of Parks and Recreation shall establish in writing the procedure for ascertaining that the renter has met the security requirements established by the Department of Parks and Recreation and/or the Atlanta Police Department for the rental. To the extent that this subsection (g)(2) requires that a discretionary decision be made by the Department of Parks and Recreation and/or the Atlanta Police Department, the decision must be made based upon reasonably reliable information, that information and decision must be provided to the applicant in writing, and the applicant must be given an opportunity to refute the information. In no event shall the basis of the discretionary decision be the applicant or attendees' race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, gender identity, or disability status. (b)  The following fees shall be charged for participants in certain Cultural Affairs programs and admission to certain Cultural Affairs venues:      Hourly Fee (1)  Chastain Arts Center and Gallery. Adult Classes: Drawing ..... $7.00 Painting ..... $7.00 Clay (wheel) ..... $10.00 Clay (hand building) ..... $10.00 Printmaking ..... $8.00 Metalwork ..... $8.00 Framemaking ..... $8.00 Jewelry ..... $8.00 Performance/lectures/tours ..... $6.00 Textiles ..... $7.00 Movement arts ..... $15.00 Open studio, per week ..... $20.00 Children Fees: Summer camp (ages 2 & 3) ..... $16.00 Summer camp (ages 4 & 5) ..... $12.00 Summer camp (ages 6—12) ..... $10.00 Summer camp (ages 12—17) ..... $11.00 Regular classes (ages 2—4) ..... $16.00 Regular classes (ages 5—17) ..... $16.00 Room Rental: Fee-based workshops, and meetings—20% of revenue or minimum of $ per hour (whichever is greater) ..... $30.00 per hour Art organizations and individual artists ..... $9.00 Social and special events—$ per hour (4-hour minimum); $ per hour per additional hour; Additional $ per hour for all off hour rentals Fees are $300 minimum for first four hours, $75 each additional hour. Off hours rental fee is $500 minimum for first four hours, plus $150/additional hour Refundable cleaning deposit ..... $100.00 Gallery Fees: Commissions on sales of art—Not to exceed 35% of total cost. Miscellaneous Fees: Non-resident fee—$ per session (Age 65+ exempt, Summer Camp students exempt) Material Fee—Not to exceed $ per class ..... $35.00 (2)  South Bend Center or Arts and Culture Hourly Fee Class Cost Adult Classes  Drawing 4.50 135.00  Painting 4.75 142.00  Clay (wheel) 5.60 140.00  Clay (hand building) 5.20 156.00  Open clay studio (10 weeks) N-A 100.00  Printmaking 4.00 120.00  Metalwork 4.85 145.00  Photography 4.85 145.00  Frame making 4.75 142.00  Stained glass 4.20 126.00  Performance/lectures/tours 4.00 40.00 Children Fees  Summer camp (ages 2 & 3) 17.00 85.00  Summer camp (ages 3 & 4) 10.00 100.00  Summer camp (ages 5—12) 6.00 155.00  Regular classes (ages 2—4) (10 weeks) 10.00 100.00  Regular classes (ages 5—17) (10 weeks)—pottery/drawing, etc. 8.50 106.00 Room Rental  Fee-based workshops, and meetings 20.00 800.00 weekly  Arts organizations (Working in studios) 5.00 200.00 (10 week session) South Bend Arts and Cultural Center Rental Fees Resident Individual /Organization Non-Resident Individual/Organization   4-hour minimum for all rentals  a. Meetings (no food), per hour, per room $45.00 $70.00  b. Monthly Meeting Discount (when annual reservation is made) per hour, per room $15.00 $10.00  c. Receptions, parties and weddings with food, per hour, per room $85.00 $150.00  d. Cleaning deposit $100.00 $100.00  e. Chair Rental, per chair $1.00 $1.00  f. Table Rental, per table $10.00 $10.00 Program Resident/ City Employee Non-Resident  After-School (per week, per child) $35.00 $110.00  Summer Camp (per week, per child) $35.00 $110.00  Cultural Programming Drop-In $5.00 $5.00  Salary Surcharge and Security Requirements for the South Bend Cultural Center shall follow the same guidelines as stated in section 110-3(a)(4), subsection (d) entitled "salary surcharge and security requirements. (c)  Atlanta Cyclorama Admissions: Patron Category: Adults (ages 13—64) ..... $10.00 Seniors (ages 65 and above) ..... $8.00 Children (ages 4—12) ..... $8.00 Children (under 4 yrs. old) ..... free Group rates (10 or more persons): Adult group (ages 13 and above), per person ..... $9.00 Children's group (ages 4—12), per person ..... $7.00 Seniors (ages 65 and above) ..... $7.00 Promotional Events: The Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs or her/his designee shall be permitted to hold up to six Cyclorama promotional event days per calendar year during which s/he may reduce all or some of the Cyclorama admission fees set forth above by no more than $2.00. The Director or her/his designee shall have the discretion of applying the promotional event reduced fee structure to City of Atlanta residents only, on any or all of the promotional event days. The promotional event days and the discounts associated therewith shall be advertised in advance on the Cyclorama website. Discounts: The Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs or her/his designee shall be permitted to offer a discount admission price for Cyclorama patrons who present an admission ticket for entrance to another tourist attraction, provided that: 1) the ticket for the other attraction is dated within 48 hours of the requested entrance to Cyclorama; and 2) the discount associated with the other attraction is explained in writing at the Cyclorama ticket booth, is set forth on the Cyclorama website, and is applied uniformly to all Cyclorama patrons. In addition, the Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs or her/his designee shall be permitted to have written coupons issued for discounted Cyclorama admission fees, provided that said coupons are available to the public and are not distributed anywhere within Grant Park other than on Zoo Atlanta property. The Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs or her/his designee shall have the discretion to determine the amount of any discount offered pursuant to this paragraph, but in no event shall the discount exceed $2.00. Only one discount may be utilized per admission. (d)  The following fees shall be charged for participants in certain programs of the office of recreation: (1)  Athletic fees: a.  Adult athletic team registration fees: i.  Basic registration (per season), per team ..... 375.00 ii.  Single elimination tournament fee, per team ..... 150.00 iii.  Double elimination tournament fee, per team ..... 200.00 b.  Youth athletic team registration fees: City of Atlanta Team (per season, per sport, per person) For Atlanta residents ..... 75.00 For non-residents ..... 150.00 Non-City of Atlanta Team (per season), per team ..... 300.00 Team Registration for City-hosted Tournaments, per team, per tournament ..... 150.00 c.  Protest fee. Applied only to protests regarding eligibility of a team, coach and/or player. Per protest: 100.00 100.00  In the event that the protest is upheld, the protest fee will be returned, (2)  Camp Best Friends user fees, per child: a.  City residents, and children and grandchildren of city employees residing with the city employee—Per week, per child ..... $35.00 b.  Non-city resident, per week, per child ..... $110.00 c.  Late fee—Per child, per hour or fraction of hour for campers left on site after 6:00 p.m., for residents and non-residents ..... $20.00 (3)  After-school tutorial fee: a.  City residents, and children and grandchildren of city employees residing with the city employee—Per week, per child ..... $35.00 b.  Non-city resident, per week, per child ..... $110.00 c.  Late fee—Per child, per hour or fraction of hour for child left on site after 6:00 p.m., for residents and non-residents ..... $20.00 (4)  Teen Club Fee: per year, per person ..... $5.00 (5)  Cultural Programming in Recreation Centers, per eight-class session ..... $30.00 (6)  Athletic; One-Time Usage fee, per person, per visit ..... $5.00 For use at City of Atlanta Natatorium or Recreation Center weight room during closed period only (7)  Non Athletic, City-sponsored Special Programs on City of Atlanta Recreation Center Property: a.  Adults and youth, per person, per program ..... $5.00 b.  Seniors, per person, per program ..... $2.00 (8)  Athletics Sports Camp Registration Fee, per person, per week ..... $65.00 (9)  Youth Fee: per year, per child (Monthly Payment: plan is allowable) ..... $1,200.00 Youth Fee provides a discounted rate for Afterschool, Camp Best Friends and all youth athletics registration (10)  Senior Program Fee: (a)  Resident, per person, per year ..... $25.00 (b)  Non-Resident, per person, per year ..... $45.00 (11)  Outdoor Court Fees: For purposes of this section regarding outdoor court fees. Primetime shall mean after 6:00 pm on Weekdays and all times on Weekends and Nationally-observed holidays. All other times shall be deemed Non-Primetime. a.  Outdoor Courts i.  Non-Primetime i.  City Residents ..... $3.00 per hour ii.  Non-City Residents ..... $3.50 per hour ii.  Primetime i.  City Residents ..... $5.00 per hour ii.  Non-City Residents ..... $5.50 per hour b.  Tennis Center Courts (additional package, instruction, and reservation rates for Tennis Centers only) i.  Soft (Clay) Courts i.  Non-Primetime a.  City Residents ..... $6.00 per hour b.  Non-City Residents ..... $6.50 per hour ii.  Primetime a.  City Residents ..... $6.50 per hour b.  Non-City Residents ..... $7.00 per hour ii.  Senior 75 years and Under ..... 50% off at time of play iii.  Seniors over 75 years ..... Free at time of play iv.  Youth Under 18 (Non-Primetime Only) ..... Free at time of play v.  Annual Passes (Non-Primetime Only) i.  Hard Courts a.  City Residents ..... $200.00 per year b.  Non-City Residents ..... $250.00 per year c.  Senior City Residents ..... $100.00 per year d.  Senior Non-City Residents ..... $125.00 per year ii.  Soft (Clay) Courts a.  City Residents ..... $350.00 per year b.  Non-City Residents ..... $450.00 per year c.  Senior City Residents ..... $225.00 per year d.  Senior Non-City Residents ..... $300.00 per year vi.  Lessons i.  Individual ..... $60.00 per hour ii.  Group (4 minimum) a.  Adult ..... $15.00 per hour b.  Youth ..... $12.00 per hour iii.  Team Coaching (2 minimum) ..... $80.00 per hour vii.  League Match Play (home matches only) i.  Hard Court ..... $80.00 per court ii.  Soft (Clay) Court ..... $110.00 per court viii.  Tournament Play (home matches only) i.  Hard Court ..... $6.00 per person, per match ii.  Soft (Clay) Court ..... $9.00 per person, per match ix.  Junior League Play (home matches only) ..... $40.00 per court x.  Ball Machines ..... $25.00 per hour (12)  Golf Course Fees: (Weekend rates are applicable for all National Holidays) a. Green Fees (18-Hole Course) : Mon. - Thur. Fri. - Sun.  i. Resident Regular $23.50 $26.50  ii. Non-Resident Regular $28.00 $32.00  iii. Resident Senior (55+) $9.40 $15.00  iv. Non-Resident Senior (55+) $11.00 $16.00  v. Resident Junior (18-) $13.50 $15.50  vi. Non-Resident Junior (18-) $14.50 $16.75  vii. Resident Twilight $10.00 $14.50  viii. Non-Resident Twilight $16.00 $18.00  ix. Super Twilight (includes cart) $19.25 $19.25  x. Reservation Fee $1.50 $1.50  xi. Power Cart Fee (per person) $13.50 $13.50 b. Green Fees (9-Hole Course): Mon. - Thur. Fri. - Sun.  i. Resident Regular $9.00 $11.00  ii. Non-Resident Regular $11.00 $13.00  iii. Resident Senior (55+) $6.25 $7.25  iv. Non-Resident Senior (55+) $7.25 $8.25  v. Resident Junior (18-)/Student $7.25 $7.75  vi. Non-Resident Junior (18-)/Student $8.25 $8.75  vii. Pull Cart Fee $4.00 $4.00  c.  Additional Course Fees: i.  Putting Green Fee (Applies to patrons using putting green only) ..... $3.00 per ½ hour ii.  Golf Equipment Storage Fee ..... $3.00 per day (Short/Long Term) d.  Annual Memberships (18-Hole Course): Annual Membership covers green fees only. Members must pay reservation fees & cart fees. Membership may not be used before 2:00 pm on Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays. Membership may be used at any of the City's 18-Hole golf courses. i.  Resident Regular ..... $775.00 ii.  Non-Resident Regular ..... $975.00 iii.  Resident Senior (55+) ..... $410.00 iv.  Non-Resident Senior (55+) ..... $775.00 v.  Junior (18-) ..... $475.00 e.  Annual Memberships (9-Hole Course): Annual Membership covers green fees only. Members must pay pull cart fees. Membership may not be used before 2:00 pm on Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays. Membership may be used at the City's 9-Hole golf course only. i.  Resident Regular ..... $400.00 ii.  Senior (55+)/Junior (18-) ..... $325.00 f.  Special Offers: From time-to-time and only with the prior written approval of the Commissioner, the operating entity at each golf course may offer special reduced promotional fees—for promotions of limited duration—that vary from fees set forth in the fee schedule. Promotional fees shall be limited as to duration and shall be specific in detail. A permanent log and file of approved promotional fees shall be kept as a public record in the Commissioner's Office. With regard to participants of visiting conventions, a special weekday tournament fee that is $1.00 higher than the regular fee and a special weekend tournament fee that is $2.00 higher than the regular fee may be charged. g.  Revenue Allocation: All revenues from course fees and retail will be deposited into the Department of Parks and Recreation's Golf Course Trust Fund. (13)  Candler Park Golf Course: Weekdays (Monday—Thursday): Residents ..... $7.00 Students and senior residents ..... 6.50 Nonresidents ..... 10.00 Nonresident seniors and students ..... 7.50 Weekends (Friday—Sunday): Residents ..... $9.00 Students and senior residents ..... 7.00 Nonresidents ..... 11.00 Nonresident seniors and students ..... 8.00 Annual Membership Fees (Not valid on weekends or holidays before 12:00 noon): Residents ..... $400.00 Resident students and seniors ..... 325.00 Nonresidents ..... 550.00 Nonresident seniors and students ..... 475.00 Tee time surcharge for a specific tee time ..... 3.00 Putting green fee—Usage fee for patrons not playing golf but who are using the facility as a putting green; per half hour ..... 3.00 Golf Equipment storage fee; short term and/or overnight storage, per day ..... 2.00 (e)  Fees for use of city picnic pavilions are as follows: (1)  The following reservation fees: a.  Small Pavilions 1.  City Residents ..... $100.00 per day 2.  Non-City Residents ..... $150.00 per day b.  Medium Pavilions 1.  City Residents ..... $150.00 per day 2.  Non-City Residents ..... $200.00 per day c.  Large Pavilions 1.  City Residents ..... $200.00 per day 2.  Non-City Residents ..... $300.00 per day d.  X-Large Pavilions 1.  City Residents ..... $300.00 per day 2.  Non-City Residents ..... $400.00 per day (2)  A refundable sanitation bond of $100.00 will be charged to reserve the referenced pavilions, payable two weeks prior to the date of the reservation date. The bond shall be forfeited to the city if reserving party fails to clean the pavilions and deposit trash in the trash receptacles provided by the city prior to leaving the site. (3)  City park users who reserve pavilions shall have the option of using park attendants at the rate of $10.50 per hour at all designated parks. The commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs shall have the authority to provide this option and charge this fee at other city parks at her discretion. (4)  Wedding fee: Where an outdoor wedding occurs inside a city park, in a location other than in a picnic pavilion, and where the wedding includes set-up or requires city services, the organizer shall be required to pay a fee of $50.00. (5)  City park users requesting a permit to utilize specific areas of park greenspace shall be required to pay a fee of $50.00. Large gathering permit holders shall be exempt from this permit fee. (6)  City park users who reserve the amphitheater at Historic Fourth Ward Park shall be required to pay an additional fee of $50.00 per hour if an electrical source is required. The fee is charged during set-up, the duration of the event and break down. (7)  City park users requesting permission to use amplified sound, portable toilets, banners, tents 10' x 10' or larger, or generators shall pay a Special Use Fee of $50.00. (f)  The fees to be paid to the city for aquatics programs, pool use and pool rentals shall be as follows: (1)  Red Cross Aquatics Training Fees: a.  Lifeguard Training ..... $350.00 b.  Lifeguard Training Review ..... $200.00 c.  Water Safety Instructor ..... $350.00 d.  Certified Pool Spa Operator ..... $350.00 e.  CPR for Professional Rescuer ..... $110.00 f.  CPRO Review ..... $90.00 g.  Lay Responder ..... $95.00 h.  CPR Certification ..... $25.00 i.  AED Certification ..... $25.00 j.  FA Certification ..... $25.00 k.  Online Lifeguard Training ..... $250.00 l.  Online CPR for Professional Rescuer ..... $60.00 (2)  Lessons: a.  Individual Swim Lessons (minimum 3 lessons Per hour) i.  Resident ..... $35.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $45.00 b.  Mixed Group; All Ages (For 12 swim lessons, per person) i.  Resident ..... $65.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $80.00 c.  Group lessons; All Ages (For 12 swim lessons, per person) i.  Resident ..... $35.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $65.00 d.  Aqua Aerobics, per 12 lessons i.  Resident ..... $55.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $70.00 e.  Hydrotherapy, per 12 lessons i.  Resident ..... $55.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $70.00 f.  Walk-ins (must receive instructor consent to attend as a walk-in) i.  Resident ..... $7.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $10.00 (3)  City of Atlanta Dolphins: a.  CAD — Novice i.  Resident ..... $135.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $165.00 b.  CAD — Advanced i.  Resident ..... $225.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $425.00 c.  CAD — Masters i.  Resident ..... $135.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $165.00 (4)  Pool Entrance Fees: The following entrance fees shall be implemented for all City-owned pools during those hours when City-operated pools are open to the public. For those City pools that are operated by a private entity, the private entity may establish its own entrance fees to be applied only when City-operated pools are closed to the public. The entity's entrance fees shall be approved through the entity's MOU with the City. a.  All Individuals ..... $5.00 b.  Splash Card i.  Adult 10 days ..... $37.50 ii.  Child/Senior 10 days ..... $17.50 iii.  Adult 20 days ..... $70.00 iv.  Child/Senior 20 days ..... $35.00 (5)  Yearly Membership Pass: The Yearly Pass may be utilized for entrance to both indoor and outdoor pools, as well as all fitness centers and weight rooms. Does not include enrollment in Programs or Activities. a.  Child/Senior i.  Resident ..... $65.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $85.00 b.  Adult i.  Resident ..... $110.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $150.00 c.  Family (for family of 4) i.  Resident ..... $245.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $345.00 d.  each add'l family member i.  Resident ..... $55.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $90.00 (6)  Summer Pass (8 weeks): The Summer Pass may be utilized for entrance to outdoor pools only. The Summer Pass is accepted at all City-owned outdoor pools during those hours when City-operated pools are open to the public. For those City pools that are operated by a private entity, the private entity may establish its own summer pass fees to be applied only when City-operated pools are closed to the public. The entity's summer pass fees shall be approved through the entity's MOU with the City. a.  Child/Senior i.  Resident ..... $40.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $60.00 b.  Adult i.  Resident ..... $50.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $70.00 c.  Family (for family of 4) i.  Resident ..... $120.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $140.00     d. Each add'l family member i.  Resident ..... $15.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $35.00 (7)  Hourly Pool, Room, and Amenity Rental Fees: a.  25 Yard Competition Pool i.  Resident ..... $110.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $220.00 b.  50 Yard Competition Pool i.  Resident ..... $220.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $440.00 c.  25 Yard Lane Rental i.  Resident ..... $25.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $50.00 d.  50 Yard Lane Rental i.  Resident ..... $50.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $100.00 e.  Therapy Pool i.  Resident ..... $60.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $120.00 f.  Meeting Room Space i.  Resident ..... $55.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $110.00 g.  Equipment PA Podium i.  Resident ..... $75.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $100.00 h.  Timing System Rental i.  Resident ..... $200.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $400.00 i.  Washington Natatorium Pavilion i.  Resident ..... $50.00 ii.  Non-resident ..... $75.00 (g)  Outdoor and Environmental Education Activities and Lake Allatoona. The following fees shall be paid to the city for the indicated activity or use of the indicated facility: (1)  Cost of camp. Lake Allatoona Resident Camp User Fee City Resident Per Week Non-City Resident Per Week (Per Child) 80.00 135.00  (2)  Cabin rentals. Lake Allatoona Cabin Rental refundable deposit (small cabin), per night ..... $150.00 Lake Allatoona Cabin Rental refundable deposit (large cabin), per night ..... 250.00 Lake Allatoona Cabin Rental fee (small cabin), per night ..... 150.00 Lake Allatoona Cabin Rental fee (large cabin), per night ..... 250.00 Lake Allatoona Grounds Rental Fee, per hour, three-hour minimum ..... 50.00 Use of kitchen is free with cabin rental (3)  Dining hall rentals. Conference Room 1, per day ..... $150.00 Conference Room 2, per day ..... 150.00 Combined conference rooms, per day ..... 300.00 Kitchen only, per day ..... 150.00 Kitchen cost with conference room rental, per day ..... 50.00 Entire building, per day ..... 450.00 Day = 8 hours (4)  Lake Allatoona Activity Fees, for Residents and Non-Residents. Canoe 101 ..... $15.00 Canoe trips ..... 20.00 Kayak 101 ..... 15.00 Kayaking trips ..... 20.00 Camping 101 ..... 10.00 Camping trips ..... 20.00 Mountain biking ..... 30.00 Rock climbing ..... 45.00 Bouldering ..... 45.00 Nature walks ..... 5.00 Hiking ..... 5.00 Introduction to tree climbing ..... 30.00 Introduction to backpacking ..... 15.00 Backpacking ..... 15.00 Fishing ..... 5.00 Plant and wildlife identification ..... 5.00 Bird watching ..... 5.00 Orienteering ..... 15.00 Geo-caching ..... 10.00 Outdoor photography ..... 10.00 Primitive skills ..... 15.00 (h)  Fees for therapeutics, for residents and non-residents: TR Youth Club Membership fee (bi-annual) ..... $15.00 Activity fee ..... $3.00 (i)  Vending and concessions: (1) Park vending fees. a. Monday through Friday, per month, any given park except Piedmont Park 2,000.00 b. Saturday and Sunday, per month (permit will be issued for four consecutive weekend days, any given park except Piedmont Park 2,000.00  (2) Concession permits.  a. Application fee N/A 10.00  b. Permit, per month N/A 75.00  (j)  Parking Fees. The following parking fee applies to the Southside Park Sports Complex (approximately 200 parking spaces) during adult softball tournaments only: $3.00 per vehicle.     The following parking fee applies to Grant Park (approximately 770 parking spaces): $2.00 per vehicle. (k)  Individuals or organizations ("businesses") utilizing a city park or parks ("park") for business purposes, conducting all or portions of the business' services or activities in a park, except where such services or activities do not include vending and are free of charge, shall be required to obtain a permit ("park business permit") from the Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation prior to providing such services or activities. The Commissioner shall have the right to deny or revoke a permit, provided that such denial or revocation is based upon written criteria that are applied uniformly, and provided that such criteria do not include consideration of the speech content of the business, or the business owner's, employees' or patrons' race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, age, disability status, or gender identity. The Commissioner shall also have the right to modify the requests of a permit applicant, for example as to location that the business may operate and/or times that the business may operate, as long as said modification is based upon uniformly-applied written criteria, and is not based on the considerations listed above. (1)  Details of park business permit: a.  The permit fee shall be $1,500.00 per year per business, per each park in which the business is operating. Should a business own more than one company that utilizes a park, the business will need to obtain a permit for each such company. b.  Permit requirements shall include: i) the business shall not exchange any money on city property, including inside of a park; ii) the business shall obtain general liability insurance in an amount determined by the city's office of risk management, but in no event less than $1,000,000.00, with the city listed as an additional insured; iii) the business shall agree to indemnify and defend the city for any damages arising from the operation of the services and/or activities on city property. c.  The Commissioner may include any other non-financial requirements s/he deems appropriate, as long as those requirements are set forth in writing and applied consistently to all park business permit applicants. d.  The park business fee shall be paid in addition to any other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3, including without limitation rental fees, and any other fees owed pursuant to the Atlanta Code of Ordinances or other applicable laws. (2)  Exemptions: a.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to events for which an outdoor event permit has been issued pursuant to City Code of Ordinances Chapter 142. b.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to 501(c)(3) organizations, but said organizations must pay all other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3, including without limitation rental fees, and any other fees owed pursuant to the Atlanta Code of Ordinances or other applicable laws. c.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to activities that are provided on recreation properties or amenities such as tennis centers, ball fields, or pools, even when those amenities are located inside of city parks. For businesses that conduct some activities on recreation property or amenities and some outside of recreation property but in a park, the business must obtain a park business permit for those activities that occur in the park. d.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to organizations that are mandated to perform complete or partial maintenance and/or improvement of a park and/or recreation facility for one year or greater at no cost to the city, pursuant to a written agreement with the city that is fully executed. e.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to businesses conducting photo or film shoots inside a city park. (3)  Penalties: Businesses in violation of this code provision shall be subject to the penalties set forth in City Code of Ordinances section 1-8. Each class or activity conducted without a permit may be deemed a separate violation. (l)  Individuals or organizations ("businesses") utilizing city recreation property, or a city recreation center, facility, or amenity, including without limitation ball fields, tennis courts, swimming pools ("recreation facility"), the Gilbert House, and South Bend Arts and Cultural Center for business purposes, conducting all or portions of the business services or activities in or on a recreation facility, except where such services or activities do not include vending and are free of charge, shall be required to pay a fee and enter a recreation business agreement with the city prior to providing such services or activities. The Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation shall determine at what recreation facilities a business may be offered, and shall not permit businesses to be offered at other locations. This list shall be in writing and shall be applied uniformly. The Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation or her/his designee may execute the recreation business agreement on behalf of the city without obtaining city council approval. S/he may allow a business to utilize a recreation facility only if the business is offering a recreation activity that is authorized by the Department of Parks and Recreation. Additionally, the Commissioner may determine which businesses to enter recreation business agreements with provided her/his criteria for such determination are established in writing and. applied uniformly, and provided that the criteria do not include any consideration of the business owner's, employees', or patrons' race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, age, disability status, or gender identity. (1)  Details of recreation business agreement: a.  The fee shall be 25 percent of the gross revenue obtained from all of the services, activities and/or programs performed by the business at the recreation facility. b.  Recreation business agreement requirements shall include: i) the business shall obtain general liability insurance in an amount determined by the city's office of risk management, but in no event less than $1,000,000.00, with the city listed as an additional insured; ii) the business shall agree to indemnify and defend the city for any damages arising from the operation of the services and/or activities at the city facility; iii) the term of the agreement shall be one year, and the city may terminate the agreement without cause with 60 days written notice. c.  Businesses who enter a recreation business agreement shall not be required to pay the other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3 for the business operation, including without limitation rental fees, but shall be required to pay other applicable fees imposed by the city or other jurisdictions. d.  The Commissioner may include any other non-financial requirements s/he deems appropriate. (2)  Exemptions: a.  Where a program or activity is being conducted in a portion of a recreation facility that is outdoors, and where the individual or organization has received an outdoor event permit pursuant to City Code of Ordinances Chapter 142 for the program or activity at issue, the requirements of this City Code section 110-3(1) shall not apply. b.  The recreation business fee requirement shall not apply to 501(c)(3) organizations, but said organizations must pay all other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3, including without limitation rental fees, and any other fees owed pursuant to the Atlanta Code of Ordinances or other applicable laws. c.  The recreation business fee requirement shall not apply to organizations that are mandated to perform complete or partial maintenance and/or improvement of a park and/or recreation facility for one year or greater at no cost to the city, pursuant to a written agreement with the city that is fully executed. d.  The amount of the recreation business fee for for-profit leagues shall be $1,500.00 plus any other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3, including without limitation rental fees, and any other fees owed pursuant to the Atlanta Code of Ordinances or other applicable laws. Accordingly, the requirements of subsection (1)a and (1)c of this section 110-3(1) shall not apply to for-profit leagues, but all other requirements of this section 110-3(1), including without limitation subsections (1)b and (1)d shall apply. e.  The requirements of this City Code section 110-3(1) shall not apply to individuals or organizations conducting photo or film shoots in a recreation facility. f.  The requirements of this City Code section 110-3(1) shall not apply to events with admission fees and/or vending that are held in class 4 recreation centers, as described earlier in this section 110-3. (3)  Penalties: Businesses in violation of this code provision shall be subject to the penalties set forth in City Code of Ordinances section 1-8. Each class or activity conducted without a permit may be deemed a separate violation. (m)  Park filming fees. (1)  For purposes of this subsection (m), a "filming event" means shooting a film or taking photographs, where such filming or photography occurs inside a city park, and results in an end product that will likely be submitted for copyright protection. Examples of filming events include without limitation movie shoots, video shoots, TV shoots, advertisement shoots. music video shoots, and still photography shoots. (2)  Where the mayor or her/his designee determines that one or more park rental coordinators and/or other city staff person(s) is required to attend all or a portion of a filming event, the organizer of the filming event must pay to the city an amount equivalent to the total of all hourly wages that the city will pay to each staff person present at the filming event. Said amount shall be provided to the organizer in writing, indicating a breakdown of each type of employee required to be in attendance, the number of hours that each employee will attend, and the city's standard hourly rate for each employee in attendance. (3)  In the event that the mayor or her/his designee requires police coverage and/or fire rescue coverage at a filming event, the mayor or her/his designee may require the organizer to hire off duty law enforcement officers, off duty fire inspectors, and/or off duty emergency medical services personnel, rather than paying the City for on-duty presence. (4)  A filming event may occur in a park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. And 6:00 a.m. provided that written authorization is received by the Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation, the Chief of the Atlanta Police Department, and the Chief of the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department. Should said night filming be permitted, the organizer will be required to pay for one or more park rental coordinators, and to provide off-duty public safety coverage in the amounts determined by the Commissioner and chiefs listed in this subsection. The Commissioner's and chiefs' determinations shall be based solely upon public safety factors and factors potentially impacting the physical integrity of the park. (n)  Active Net Online Convenience Fee. Individuals or Organizations utilizing The Active Network, Inc. online portal to register for any classes, make reservations of facilities, and sign up for memberships, offered by the Department of Parks and Recreation ("DPRCA") shall be assessed a convenience fee of 2.99% of the total transaction amount + $0.25. Individuals or Organizations wishing to avoid this convenience fee may still register in person at any DPRCA facility. (o)  Promotional Fee. The Commissioner, or his/her designee, may offer an initial promotional fee on any DPRCA programming fees up to 25% of the total cost for a maximum of three months. (Code 1977, § 10-2025; Ord. No. 1986-2, §§ 1, 2, 2-7-86; Ord. No. 1988-52, § 1, 11-8-88; Ord. No. 1991-11, § 1, 4-1-91; Ord. No. 1993-45, § 1, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 1993-73, § 1, 9-13-93; Ord. No. 1994-14, §§ 1, 4, 5, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 1994-23, § 1, 5-23-94; Ord. No. 1994-31, § 1, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 1995-13, § 1, 4-24-95; Ord. No. 1995-36, §§ 1, 2, 7, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1995-44, § 1, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 1995-45, §§ 1, 3, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 1995-46, § 1, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 1995-47, § 1, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 1995-73, §§ 1, 3, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 1996-24, § 1, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 1997-04, § 1, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 1998-15, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 1998-72, § 1, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 1999-7, §§ 1—9, 1-27-99; Ord. No. 1999-9, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-52, § 1, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 2000-51, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 2002-65, §§ 1—16, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 2003-01, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2003-58, § 1, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 2003-107, § 1, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 2004-33, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2005-26, § 1, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 2005-27, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 2006-78, § 1, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 2007-53(07-O-1007), § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2008-52(08-O-0885), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-53(08-O-0873), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-72(08-O-0877), § 1, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 2009-08(09-O-0097), § 1, 2-23-09; Ord. No. 2009-26(09-O-0673), §§ 1—10, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2009-33(09-O-0805), §§ 11, 12, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2010-14(10-O-0408), §§ 1, 2, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2010-39(10-O-1063), § 1, 7-15-10; Ord. No. 2010-40(10-O-0936), §§ 1—11, 7-15-10; Ord. No. 2011-08(11-O-0260), §§ 1, 2, 3-30-11; Ord. No. 2011-20(11-O-0793), §§ 1, 2, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 2011-24(11-O-0826), § 1(Exhs. A, B), 6-29-11; Ord. No. 2012-25(12-O-0779), § 1, 6-13-12; Ord. No. 2012-36(12-O-0713), §§ 1—10, 7-25-12; Ord. No. 2012-38(12-O-0999), §§ 1—5, 8-29-12; Ord. No. 2012-42(12-O-1068), §§ 1, 2, 9-26-12; Ord. No. 2013-01(12-O-1653), § 1, 1-16-13; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13; Ord. No. 2015-17(15-O-1099), § 1, 5-13-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-46(16-O-1605) , §§ 1—8, 12-14-16; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17; Ord. No. 2017-70(17-O-1216), § 1, 11-29-17 ) _____
Sec. 110-4. - Athletic fees. (a)  The mayor or the mayor's designee shall be authorized to obligate the city, to the extent of available appropriations, for the payment of entry and competition fees for individuals and teams representing the city parks and recreation program so that such individuals and teams may participate in organized athletic competition as representatives of the recreation program of the city. (b)  The director of recreation shall not make any obligation for payment of entry and competition fees until the chief financial officer shall have certified, after preaudit, that there is to the credit of the bureau of recreation a sufficient unencumbered balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such obligation. (Code 1977, § 10-2026) 
Sec. 110-5. - Acceptance of gifts of animals.     The Commissioner may accept gifts of animals on behalf of the city. (Code 1977, § 10-2017) Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
Sec. 110-6. - Use of city picnic pavilions.     All persons using or desiring to use city picnic pavilions shall comply with administrative and scheduling guidelines of the Department of Parks and Recreation which are on file in the office of the commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation. (Ord. No. 1995-36, § 4, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Secs. 110-7—110-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, approved June 26, 2013, renamed article II, department of parks, recreation and cultural affairs to department of parks and recreation. Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq. 
Sec. 110-31. - Additional qualifications of Commissioner of parks, recreation and cultural affairs. (a)  In addition to the general qualifications set forth in subsection (b), the Commissioner of parks, recreation and cultural affairs shall possess experience in either public or private employment at a senior supervisory level in at least one of the following fields for a minimum of two years; park management or planning, large-scale community recreation program management, and cultural program administration. (b)  In addition to the duties related to the administration of the department, the Commissioner of parks, recreation and cultural affairs shall also be responsible to: (1)  Operate and manage the city's neighborhood centers; and (2)  Supervise the operation and management of the Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center as a commercially viable asset to the cultural life of the City of Atlanta. (Code 1977, § 10-1001; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 72, 9-16-02) Charter reference— Similar provisions, app. IV, § 29. 
Sec. 110-32. - Bureaus.     The Department of Parks and Recreation shall consist of the following bureaus: (1)  Bureau of parks; (2)  Bureau of recreation; and (3)  Bureau of cultural affairs. (Code 1977, § 10-1002(a); Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) Charter reference— Similar provisions, app. IV, § 30. 
Sec. 110-33. - Qualifications of director, bureau of parks.     In addition to the general qualifications set out in Charter, appendix IV, section 3(a), the director, bureau of parks shall have the following qualifications: (1)  Graduation from an accredited college or university with a baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in business or public administration, industrial management, landscape architecture, park administration, turf management or a related field and three years of supervisory experience in building construction and grounds maintenance, park design and construction or a related area; (2)  Eight years of experience at a supervisory level which include five years in the areas specified in subsection (1) of this section; or (3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. (Code 1977, § 10-1002(b)) 
Sec. 110-34. - Functions and duties of bureau of parks.     The functions and duties of the bureau of parks shall include the following: (1)  Administering and maintaining all parks, park facilities, park property and the city cemetery; (2)  Administering and enforcing all ordinances for the protection of trees and shrubbery; and (3)  Maintaining all trees on city property and city rights-of-way. (Code 1977, § 10-1003) Charter reference— Similar provisions, app. IV, § 32. 
Sec. 110-35. - Qualifications of director, bureau of recreation.     In addition to the general qualifications set out in Charter, appendix IV, section 3(a), the director, bureau of recreation shall have the following qualifications: (1)  Graduation from an accredited college or university with a baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in recreation administration, business administration, public administration, physical education or a related field and three years of supervisory experience which include experience in recreation management involving the development of comprehensive athletics, general recreation or other related programs; (2)  Eight years of experience at a supervisory level which include five years in the areas specified in subsection (1) of this section; or (3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. (Code 1977, § 10-1002(c)) 
Sec. 110-36. - Functions and duties of bureau of recreation.     The functions and duties of the bureau of recreation shall include the following: (1)  Planning, promoting, organizing and supervising a comprehensive municipal program of recreation; and (2)  Supervising the recreational use of playgrounds, playfields, recreation centers, swimming pools, athletic fields and other park and recreation facilities. (Code 1977, § 10-1003) Charter reference— Similar provisions, app. IV, § 31. 
Sec. 110-37. - Qualifications of director, bureau of cultural affairs.     In addition to the general qualifications set out in Charter, appendix IV, section 3(a), the director, bureau of cultural affairs shall have the following qualifications: (1)  Graduation from an accredited college or university with a baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in business or public administration, liberal arts, fine arts, art history or a related field and three years of supervisory experience in program development, advocacy and administration; public relations; multifaceted cultural programs management; theater, convention center, auditorium or related facility management; grants program administration or related area; (2)  Five years of experience at a supervisory level in the areas specified in subsection (1) of this section; or (3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications set out in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. (Code 1977, § 10-1002(d)) 
Sec. 110-38. - Functions and duties of bureau of cultural affairs.     The functions and duties of the bureau of cultural affairs shall include: (1)  Operating and scheduling the use of the cyclorama and other special recreational and cultural facilities of the city; (2)  Developing, implementing and monitoring special cultural events programs; (3)  Administering a program of municipal support of the arts; (4)  Oversight responsibility of the contract for Zoo Atlanta; (5)  Establishing, organizing and maintaining a network and strategy to respond to the demand for the city's officials to support a variety of cultural community initiatives; and (6)  Developing policies and procedures to implement the public art master plan. (Code 1977, § 10-1005; Ord. No. 2001-55, § 2, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 73, 9-16-02) 
Secs. 110-39—110-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK RULES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 110-55. - Definitions.     As used in this Article III of Chapter 110: (a)  The term "park" or "parks" shall mean any property owned or leased by the City of Atlanta that is designated in writing by the city or by the department of parks and recreation to be a "city park", "city campground" or a "city multi-use trail", including any bodies of water and other amenities located thereon. (1)  City property may be available temporarily for park and recreational use without becoming dedicated in perpetuity as a park, as follows: (i)  The city explicitly dedicates the property for future use that is not a park; or (ii)  The city explicitly reserves the right to use the property in the future for non-park purposes and provides that park and recreation use may be temporary only. (2)  City property that meets the criteria of subsection (a)(1) above shall be treated as a "park" for the purpose of being subject to the provisions of Code Chapter 110 and all other Code provisions pertaining to city parks, including without limitation provisions setting forth park rules and fees. Such property shall be treated as a park until such time as the city, including without limitation any city department or contractor, closes the property to public recreational use. Such closure must include on-site public notice that the property may no longer be used for recreational purposes. (3)  Privately-owned portions of Oakland Cemetery shall not be deemed a "park". (b)  the term "smoking" shall mean inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted tobacco product including cigarettes, cigars, and pipe tobacco. (Ord. No. 2003-112, § 1, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2012-35(12-O-0966), § 1, 7-25-12; Ord. No. 2013-48(13-O-1275), 10-16-13 ) 
Sec. 110-56. - Violations. (a)  The violation of any rule and regulation governing the use of any park shall be deemed a violation of this Code of Ordinances and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 thereof. In addition to the section 1-8 sanctions, in the event that a person's violation of any park rule or regulation results in damage to a park, including but not limited to its infrastructure or plants, the person also shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for the cost of repairing the damage, or replacing the damaged item(s) if the city finds that replacement is necessary." (b)  Where a rule or regulation governing the use of any park permits an activity only if the activity is approved by the Mayor, or the Commissioner or her/his designee, it shall be the duty of the recipient to have the written permission in his/her possession at all times that she/he is engaged in the activity to which the written permission pertains. The procedure to be utilized to obtain written permission shall be set forth in the park reservations policies and procedures promulgated by the Department of Parks and Recreation, and provided to the public upon request. Any activity that is permitted only upon approval by the mayor, Commissioner or her/his designee, shall be deemed unauthorized and shall be deemed a violation of this Code of Ordinances if the person(s) performing the activity does not have possession of the written permission at the time of performing the activity. (c)  In any court hearing or other proceeding involving a rule or regulation governing the use of any park, where the rule or regulation permits an activity only if the activity is approved by the Mayor, or the Commissioner or her/his designee, it shall be the duty, responsibility and burden of the defendant to produce credible evidence of the written permission at the hearing or other proceeding. If the defendant fails to produce credible evidence of the written permission, the court shall find that the permission was not granted. (Code 1977, §§ 10-2022, 17-10001; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 3, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Sec. 110-57. - Authority to adopt.     The mayor or the mayor's designee may designate the use of any park or park facility and may adopt appropriate rules and regulations governing the use of park grounds and facilities, the issuance of permits when required and the general operation of all parks and park facilities. (Code 1977, § 10-2002) 
Sec. 110-58. - Provisions extended to parks.     All laws, provisions of this Code and other ordinances in force in the city for the promotion of the peace, good order and morals thereof are, whenever applicable, hereby extended to and shall embrace the territory included in the public parks; and any person violating any such ordinance shall be subject to the penalties therefor provided in this Code. (Code 1977, § 17-10002) 
Sec. 110-59. - Prohibited conduct. (a)  No person shall do any of the following in any park: (1)  Climb or lie upon any tree, shrub, fence, statue, monument or fountain. (2)  Enter or leave any park except through established entrances or exits and within established time periods. (3)  Gain or attempt to gain admittance to any park or facility in any park where a charge is made, without paying that charge. (4)  Use any area for changing clothing, other than an area designated for that purpose. (5)  Disregard the notices, prohibitions or directions on any park sign. (6)  Disobey the lawful order of a police officer. (7)  Place or display any sign or advertisement, except that this rule shall not apply to any signs or advertisements regarding any City sponsored or City authorized program, festival, or other event that occurs in the park. Signs or advertisements regarding City sponsored or City authorized programs, festivals or other events may be placed or displayed only with written permission by the Commissioner and her/his designee, and only at the locations and during the times authorized in writing by the Commissioner and her/his designee. (8)  Play, practice or otherwise participate in any game, sport or other recreational activity that is destructive to the lawn, plants, walls, road, or other infrastructure of a park, except at or upon places designated for that game, sport or recreational activity. By way of example, these activities shall include but not be limited to wearing sneakers with cleats, playing rugby or volleyball, or skateboarding off of park walls. (9)  Knowingly, or through reckless behavior, destroy or damage the lawn, plants, walls, road, or other infrastructure of a park, except by written permission from the Commissioner or her/his designee. (10)  Drive stakes, posts, poles or any other device or dig holes for the purpose of securing stakes, posts, poles or any other device for any reason, including to erect a tent, stage or other structure, except by written permission from the Commissioner or her/his designee. (11)  Bring in, erect, or permit a minor child in one's custody to bring in and/or erect any inflatable amusements, amusements requiring water, or any amusements requiring an independent power source, except during permitted special events and festivals. This rule shall not apply to city pools and lakes. For purposes of this subsection, inflatable amusements shall not include balls or balloons, and amusements requiring water shall not include water pistols. (12)  Erect a tent or canopy with a finished dimension greater than ten feet by ten feet, or be in possession of an erected tent or canopy with the same dimensions, without receiving the written permission of the Commissioner, as well as all other applicable permits required by this Code. This rule shall not apply to Camp Allatoona. (13)  Bring in, carry, possess, or permit a minor child one's custody to bring in, carry or possess, glass containers except for authorized vendors who shall retain and remove from the park all glass containers utilized in their activities. This rule shall not apply to the Chastain Park amphitheater when performances are being given therein. (14)  Bring in and abandon any animal in a park, including but not limited to cats, ducks, raccoons, opossums, and dogs, without the written permission of the Commissioner or her/his designee. (15)  Use a playscape or park bench for other than its intended use and/or purpose. (16)  Dispose of charcoals anywhere inside of a park other than in city-provided receptacles that are clearly marked for charcoal disposal. (17)  Hang any sign, banner, or any other item from a tree located in the park. (18)  Lay any of the following items on any permeable surface in a park: plywood, a non-permeable tarp, or any other item used as a ground covering that is made of a material that does not allow water to penetrate to the ground below. Chairs made of non-permeable material, coolers, and other items not utilized as ground covers do not violate this subsection. This subsection shall not apply where the activity is performed at the direction of the parks Commissioner or her/his designee by a city contractor, a city subcontractor, or a city official or employee acting in her/his official capacity, performing the activities as part of her/his official city duties. In addition, the subsection shall not apply to the host of a permitted outdoor festival, as defined in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances, during those times when the permit is in effect, provided that use of the items is associated with elements of the event that are authorized by the festival permit. (19)  Urinate or defecate in any park regardless of whether the location is in public view, including without limitation in or upon any park building, monument or structure, except in permanent restrooms or portable lavatories open to the public. This rule shall not apply to individuals wearing diapers or who accidentally soil themselves. Soiled diapers must be wrapped tightly so that no waste can escape, and must either be removed from the park or disposed of in a trash can. (20)  Spit or expectorate in or upon any park building, monument or structure. (21)  Use any water fountain, drinking fountain, pool, sprinklers, reservoir, lake or any other water contained in a park for the purpose of bathing, or cleaning clothing or other personal belongings, except in park bathrooms and showers. (22)  Use any athletic field or court for other than its intended purpose, including without limitation: baseball, football and soccer fields; volleyball courts; and tennis courts. Where a sports field is designated for a particular sport, this provision does not prohibit the field's use for a different sport provided that the alternative use is compatible with the type of field and unlikely to cause damage, and provided that no one is using or waiting to use the field to play the sport for which it is intended. This subsection shall not apply to use of athletic fields or courts during a permitted outdoor festival, as defined in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances, where the terms of use are established in the festival permit, and the use is consistent with those terms. (23)  Enter or attempt to enter to any portion of a park that is closed to the public, unless providing city services as a city employee, contractor or subcontractor acting at the direction of the parks Commissioner or his designee. (24)  Enter or attempt to enter any portion of a park that is reserved for private use without express permission from the reservation holder. Express permission may be provided in the form of a ticket. (25)  Enter or attempt to enter any portion of a park or a park facility when a charge is required for admission, without paying the charge or without receiving express permission from the entity requiring the payment. (26)  "Store personal property" as provided in City Code of Ordinances section 106-12. (27)  Bring in any collection of livestock, farm animals or docile wild animals to be fed and pet. (28)  Handle or launch any simple or complex device containing combustibles that liberate gases that on being ignited and/or whose action propels the device through the air, except as authorized by permit. Examples of such prohibited devices include, but are not limited to: bottle rockets, firecrackers, smoke balls, sparklers, roman candles, strobes, and snaps. (29)  Use metal detectors other than for surface metal detection. The user or party using detectors is prohibited from digging or otherwise damaging park grounds. (30)  Use of off road vehicles in the public parks, trails and greenspaces to include all terrain vehicles and motorcycles, except motorcycles that remain upon roadways laid out and maintained for vehicular travel as described in section 110-87 and 110-88. (b)  The Commissioner shall at all times have available in the office of the Commissioner, as a part of the rules and regulations of the department, a description of the designated uses of the various areas of each public park. A copy of these rules and regulations shall also be filed with the municipal clerk. (c)  No persons shall congregate or gather within 150 yards of any entrance to the Chastain Park amphitheater during the hours of 7:30 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. on nights when performances are being given in the Chastain Park amphitheater, unless each such person shall: (1)  Hold a valid ticket for the performances being given on such night; (2)  Be delivering goods or services to the Chastain Park amphitheater or to persons holding valid tickets for such performance; (3)  Be dropping off or picking up passengers who hold valid tickets for such performance; or (4)  Be situated on private property of which such person is the lawful occupant, family member of such lawful occupant or the expressly invited guest of such lawful occupant. (d)  The Andrew Young Monument and Tribute, located in Walton Spring Park, is City-owned public art. The following rules shall apply to Walton Spring Park, and to the large bronze disk portion of the tribute, consisting of the entire disk plus the surrounding granite bench and wall (collectively the "Art Installation"): (1)  No animals on the Art Installation, except for any guide dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a totally or partially blind person or a deaf person, or a service dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a physically disabled person, or a dog trained and licensed by and in the possession of the Atlanta Police Department or any other law enforcement agency, or a horse utilized by the city's mounted police patrol. (2)  No lying down on the Art Installation. (3)  No sitting anywhere on the Art Installation, except for on the benches. (4)  No skateboarding or biking on the Art Installation. (5)  No "Outdoor Events" (as defined in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances) of greater than 20 people in Walton Spring Park. (6)  All other rules set forth in this section 110-59, and all other City of Atlanta ordinances and applicable laws shall apply to Walton Spring Park. (e)  The Isamu Noguchi Playscape (the "art installation") located in Piedmont Park is city-owned public art. The art installation consists of the following: 1) The entire area located inside of and including the granite curve; 2) All installations located inside the granite curve, including the play dome, swing set, climbing cubes, jungle gym, spiral slide, triple slide, site play wall, see saw, and sand pit; and 3) the log seating and pavilion located outside of the granite curve and the property immediately surrounding them. The following rules shall apply to the art installation: (1)  No animals on the art installation, except for any guide dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a totally or partially blind person or a deaf person, or a service dog especially training for the purpose of accompanying a physically disabled person, or a dog trained and licensed by and in the possession of the Atlanta Police Department or any other law enforcement agency, or a horse utilized by the city's mounted police patrol. (2)  No lying down on the art installation (3)  No skateboarding or biking on the art installation (4)  No "outdoor events" (as defined in Chapter 142 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances) of greater than 20 people within the art installation. (5)  All other rules set forth in this section 110-59, and all other City of Atlanta ordinances and applicable laws shall apply to the art installation. (f)  Skate parks. For the purposes of this section, shall be defined as the hard surfaced area designed for the active pursuit of the intended activity - access pathways, or adjacent observation areas are not included. (1)  No bicycles in the skate park. (2)  No lying down in the skate park. (3)  No eating in the skate park. (4)  No glass containers permitted in the skate park. (g)  Tents. In addition to meeting the requirements of subsections 110-59(a)(10) and (a)(12) above and any other requirements established by the City Code of Ordinances and other applicable law, any tent or canopy erected in a park must meet the following criteria: (1)  The structure may have no more than two opaque sides. The non-opaque sides must remain visually unobstructed. Said sides may be made of netting or mesh, provided that said netting or mesh does not materially impede visibility into the structure from the outside. Tents with more than two opaque sides are acceptable provided that: a) the opaque sides (other than two) can be opened such that at least two-thirds of each side becomes non-opaque; and b) the opaque sides (other than two) are opened to the greatest extent possible and fastened in a manner that does not materially impede visibility into the structure from the outside. Tents located at the Outdoor Activity Center or Camp Allatoona shall be exempt from this regulation, and may be permitted to have all opaque sides. (2)  The structure may not have a floor, unless erected at the Outdoor Activity Center or Camp Allatoona. (3)  Tents must have a distance between them of no less than 12 feet. (4)  The following items may not be located inside of any tent or canopy absent all required permits and licenses, including without limitation a permit from the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department: (A)  Generators, heaters and/or stoves powered by gasoline, kerosene, propane, or other flammable substance; (B)  Flammable gases, liquids or accelerants of any kind, including but not limited to, gasoline, propane, and kerosene; (C)  A flame/flames from any source, whether open or enclosed, including but not limited to, candles, lanterns, and torches. (h)  Application to use by the city. The provisions of this section 110-59 shall not apply when the city uses livestock, farm animals or docile wild animals on property owned or leased by the city. (i)  Smoking prohibited in parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in outdoor parks and recreational facilities located within the City of Atlanta, including, but not limited to, the parks, athletic fields, aquatic areas, golf courses, tennis courses, hiking/walking/biking trails, playgrounds, off-leash areas, and spectator and concession areas. (j)  The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following city-owned properties, so long as the properties remain the subject of a lease with a private party: The Chastain Amphitheater; The Lakewood Amphitheater; the Park Tavern Restaurant located in Piedmont Park and designated smoking areas at golf club amenities. (k)  The requirements of this section shall not restrict the right of any private lessee to enact a smoking prohibition policy on any portion of the leased properties. (Code 1977, § 10-2003; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 4, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 3, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2008-75(08-O-1574), § 2, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 2009-65(09-O-1731), § 1, 11-6-09; Ord. No. 2010-46(10-O-1272), § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2012-12(12-O-0359), §§ 1, 2, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2012-27(12-O-0635), § 1, 6-27-12; Ord. No. 2012-35(12-O-0966), § 2, 7-25-12; Ord. No. 2013-45(13-O-1247), § 1, 9-25-13 ; Ord. No. 2016-41(16-O-1572) , § 1, 11-16-16) Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. 
Sec. 110-60. - Use of public parks at night. (a)  No person shall be in any park or upon any park lane or park drive between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily, except that the hours for use of the Chastain Park amphitheater are extended until 1:00 a.m. on nights when performances are being given in the Chastain Park amphitheater as provided in section 110-59(c), or except if the person has a festival or assembly permit for consecutive days and is performing duties not possible during the normal festival or assembly hours. (b)  This section shall not prevent the use at any time of thoroughfares that are part of the system of streets and highways of the city which traverse any part or portion of any public park. (c)  No person shall park any vehicle on any of the roads, drives, avenues or parking lots in any park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily. The chief of staff may provide a parking permit exempting a vehicle from this rule, to any person(s) involved with a legitimately permitted event occurring in any park, where the chief of staff finds that said person has a legitimate need to park her/his vehicle in said park between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Nothing in this section shall limit the Commissioner's authority to close portions of a park to traffic at other times, as is provided in Code section 110-61. (d)  The park hours established in subsection 110-60(a) above shall not apply to any person who is part of a permitted outdoor event, pursuant to Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances, that occurs at the Outdoor Activity Center located at 1442 Richland Road, S.W. Atlanta, Georgia. Outdoor events at the Outdoor Activity Center may occur past 11:00 p.m. and may be overnight events, provided that the applicable city-issued outdoor event permit is received by the host. (e)  The park hours established in subsection 110-60(a) above shall not apply to any person who has obtained a permit, pursuant to section 110-3(g) of this Code of Ordinances, to utilize the Lake Allatoona Property. Use of the Lake Allatoona property may occur past 11:00 p.m. and may extend overnight if the applicable city-issued permit is received. (f)  The park hours established in subsection 110-60(a) above shall not apply to overnight events as defined in and meeting the criteria of section 110-75(c) of this Code of Ordinances. (Code 1977, § 10-2008; Ord. No. 1997-41, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 1997-49, § 1, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 5, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2012-14(12-O-0361), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2013-62(13-O-1243), § 4, 11-27-13 ) 
Sec. 110-61. - Closing of drive or avenue in park. (a)  The Commissioner may close, temporarily or permanently, to vehicular traffic any road, drive or avenue within a public park that is not a part of the municipal street system of the city. (b)  The Commissioner shall seek the recommendations of the director, bureau of traffic and transportation whenever any action is to be taken under this section. (Code 1977, § 10-2009) 
Sec. 110-62. - Sale of goods, articles or services.     No person shall sell goods, articles or services of any nature in the city parks without first obtaining written permission from the mayor or the Commissioner; provided, however, that no person shall sell spirituous, vinous or malt liquors in the city parks, except as otherwise provided by ordinance. (Code 1977, § 10-2014) Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. 
Sec. 110-63. - Reserved. 
Sec. 110-64. - Sale of articles at community prices.     All goods, articles or services sold in the public parks shall be sold at or below the community prices for such goods, articles or services. (Code 1977, § 10-2016) Cross reference— Consumer protection, ch. 58. 
Sec. 110-65. - Boating and swimming.     No person shall engage in boating, swimming or any like activity on any lake, pond or waterway within any park owned or operated by the city. However, this section shall not apply to persons renting boats from the city or its authorized concessionaire and operating them in an area designated for boating or to any city employee while in the performance of assigned duties or to any person comprising part of a rescue squad assisting or carrying out rescue work. (Code 1977, § 10-2010) 
Sec. 110-66. - Weapons.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-11-127, it is unlawful to carry a firearm to or while at a public gathering, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-127. (Code 1977, § 10-2012; Ord. No. 2008-57(08-O-1256), § 2, 7-16-08) Cross reference— Weapon control, § 106-251 et seq. 
Sec. 110-67. - Hunting and fishing. (a)  No person shall hunt or shoot in any public park, except as expressly authorized by law or rule and regulation. (b)  Fishing is permitted in designated ponds and lakes in public parks and as authorized by state law, except where prohibited by the city. (Code 1977, § 10-2011; Ord. No. 2014-11(14-O-1124), § 1, 3-26-14 ) 
Sec. 110-68. - Approved lifeguard required at all swimming pools.     All swimming pools operated within the city parks shall have present at all hours and times during which the swimming pool is open to the public a lifeguard who is approved as a lifeguard by the American Red Cross. (Code 1977, § 10-2013) 
Sec. 110-69. - Protection of plants and animals. (a)  No person shall throw rocks or other objects, punch with sticks or other instruments or otherwise provoke or annoy any animal in any public park. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, injure or destroy foliage, plants, shrubs, flowers, trees, birds or bird nests, squirrels, or rabbits in or upon any public park, public property or the property of another, without the permission of the owner, as to private property, or the mayor or designee, as to the property of the city. (c)  Any person in violation of subsection (b) above, where said violation occurs on any public park, shall be subject to the provisions of Code section 110-56. Any person in violation of subsection (b) above, where said violation occurs on any other public property, other than a public park, shall be responsible for fully reimbursing the city for the cost of repairing or replacing the damaged plants, and shall be subject to the penalties of City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances section 1-8. (Code 1977, §§ 10-2018, 17-1005; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 6, 12-9-03) Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18; vegetation, ch. 158. 
Sec. 110-70. - Pets. (a)  No person shall walk any pet in any park except on a leash, unless the area of the park is explicitly designated as an off-leash dog area. (b)  It shall be the responsibility of any person bringing a pet into a public park to clean up any matter excreted by the pet. (c)  Leashed pets are not prohibited in public parks except in the following areas of any parks: (1)  Amphitheater. (2)  Swimming pools and pool areas. (3)  Tennis courts. (4)  Golf course. (5)  Within 15 feet of all fences and structures. (6)  Lakes. (7)  Zoo. (8)  Ball fields. (d)  Pets are prohibited in parks during permitted Class A, Class B, and Class C outdoor festivals, as defined in section 142-59(a) of this Code of Ordinances. Pets are permitted in parks during Class D and Class E outdoor festivals, as defined in section 142-59(a) of this Code of Ordinances. Any prohibition of pets pursuant to this section, or any similar prohibition of pets during any outdoor festival or outdoor event, shall not apply to those animals where the animal's owner can demonstrate that the animal is part of a performance, exhibit, or other activity conducted as part of the outdoor festival or other outdoor event. Nor shall said prohibition apply to those animals that are confined to a specific area of the park, where such park area is designated by the city as serving the purpose for which the animal is using it. (e)  Subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall not apply to any guide dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a totally or partially blind person or a deaf person, or a service dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a physically disabled person, or a dog trained and licensed by and in the possession of the Atlanta Police Department or any other law enforcement agency, or a horse utilized by the city's mounted police patrol. (f)  Certain defined areas of select parks shall be designated as off-leash dog areas. These areas must be completely fenced with a double-gated entrance and exit system. For any area of a park designated as an off-leash dog area, the rules set forth below shall apply. All of the rules below shall be posted on a sign at each entrance to the off-leash area. In the event that the rules are not posted, users of the area shall still be held responsible for knowing and following the rules, and may be fined or otherwise penalized for failure to abide by such rules. These rules may be augmented by the Commissioner or her/his designee should s/he determine that additional rules are needed. (1)  All users of the off-leash area shall assume all risk and liability associated with such an area. (2)  Owners are responsible for the action of their dogs. Each dog must be kept within sight of her/his owner and under voice control. (3)  Dog owners have responsibility for watching their dog's behavior. If a dog displays aggressive behavior or fights, the owner shall be responsible for immediately controlling or removing the dog from the off-leash area. (4)  No more than three dogs per owner shall be allowed in the area at one time. (5)  All dogs must wear a collar and ID tag. (6)  All dogs must be properly licensed, healthy, and have current vaccinations. (7)  No puppies under 16 weeks are allowed. (8)  No dogs in heat are allowed. (9)  No dogs are permitted to enter with pronged collars. (10)  Any dog that barks continually must be removed or muzzled by her/his owner. (11)  Owners must clean up after their dogs. (12)  The off-leash areas have double gated entrances. Owners must close and latch both gates after entering or exiting the area. (13)  No children under the age of 12 are allowed in the area without close adult supervision. (14)  The only food of any kind allowed is bite-size dog treats. (15)  Do not feed dogs without the owner's permission. (16)  Bicycling, skateboarding, rollerblading, jogging or strollers are not allowed. (17)  Dogs are not permitted on benches. (18)  The off-leash area may be closed in times of bad weather or for maintenance. (19)  Serious problems resulting in injury must be reported immediately to the bureau of parks. (Code 1977, § 10-2015; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 7, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-24-05; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 4, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2012-16(12-O-0411), § 1, 5-16-12) Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. State Law reference— Right to have guide dog in public place, O.C.G.A. § 30-4-1. 
Sec. 110-70.1. - Dogs permitted in certain areas of Grant Park. (a)  For the safety of dogs and zoo animals, dogs shall only be permitted in certain areas of Grant Park, provided the pet is on a leash and controlled by a competent person. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit such person's dog within the following areas of Grant Park: (1)  Twenty-one acres of the zoo area and buildings. (2)  Cyclorama building and area. (3)  Swimming pool and pool area. (4)  Tennis court area. (5)  Athletic field areas. (c)  It shall be the responsibility of any person bringing a dog into Grant Park to clean up any matter excreted by such pet. (Code 1977, § 17-10004) 
Sec. 110-70.2. - Dogs permitted in certain areas of Piedmont Park.     An off-leash pet area for dogs shall be established on a two and one-half acre parcel of specified parkland within Piedmont Park. Said area shall be operated, maintained and supervised with appropriate equipment, supplies, signage, and fencing by the Piedmont Park Conservancy, Inc., at no cost to the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2002-25, § 1, 4-5-02; Ord. No. 2003-78, § 1, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 3, 1-24-05) 
Sec. 110-70.3. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-15(12-O-0410), § 1, approved May 16, 2012, repealed § 110-70.3, which pertained to dogs permitted in certain areas of East Lake Park. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 110-70.4 - Dogs permitted in certain areas of Southbend Park.     An off-leash pet area for dogs shall be established on two (2) acres of undeveloped parkland within the Southbend Park. Said area shall be operated, maintained and supervised with the appropriate equipment, supplies, signage, and fencing by the Friends of Southbend Park at no cost to the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2009-52(09-O-1319), § 1, 9-11-09) 
Sec. 110-71. - Horseback riding and similar activities.     No person shall engage in horseback riding or shall bring any horse or fasten any horse to any tree or other object in any public park, except at or upon places designated therefor. However, this section shall not apply to law enforcement officers when engaged in their official duties. (Code 1977, § 10-2020) Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
Sec. 110-72. - Model airplane flying.     No person shall engage in model airplane flying in any public park, except at or upon places designated therefor; provided, however, that no person shall operate more than a 35 cc piston displacement motor. (Code 1977, § 10-2021) 
Sec. 110-73. - Copying cyclorama.     No person, except on written permission of the Commissioner, shall make or produce or aid or assist in the making or producing of any photograph, etching, painting or modeling of the cyclorama of the Battle of Atlanta, housed in the cyclorama building at Grant Park. (Code 1977, § 10-2019) 
Sec. 110-74. - Helicopters.     No person shall land a helicopter in any public park unless such helicopter is being used in an emergency situation by emergency personnel, including but not limited to police, fire, civil defense and medical personnel, or unless such authorization is granted by resolution by the city council. (Code 1977, § 10-2028) Cross reference— Aviation, ch. 22. 
Sec. 110-75. - Overnight and other outdoor events occurring in parks. (a)  Facility reservations. All rules regarding reservation of facilities located in city parks are located in chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances. (b)  Outdoor events generally. Definitions and permitting requirements of outdoor events that occur in city parks are set forth in chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional rules for outdoor events that occur in parks during night hours are set forth in subsection (c) below. (c)  Overnight events. Section 110-60 of this Code of Ordinances shall be waived for the limited purpose of allowing certain outdoor events, as defined in chapter 142, to occur in select city parks between 11:00 p.m. through 6:00 a.m. (for purposes of this section 110-75 only, "night hours" or "night") or some portion thereof, but only under the following circumstances: (1)  For purposes of this section 110-75, an "overnight event" is a permitted large gathering or outdoor festival (as defined in chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances), or any portion of a permitted large gathering or outdoor festival that occurs in a city park after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m. Where the outdoor festival or large gathering begins prior to 11:00 p.m. and/or continues after 6:00 a.m., the "overnight event" shall be only that portion of the festival or gathering that occurs during night hours. The term "overnight event" does not include outdoor festivals or large gatherings that occur during night hours at the Outdoor Activity Center or Lake Allatoona. (2)  An overnight event must meet the "large gathering" or "outdoor festival" permitting requirements, as applicable, set forth in chapter 142 of the Atlanta Code of Ordinances. (3)  Overnight events may occur only in the following parks: Woodruff Park and Gordon White Park. (4)  An overnight event must have one person who is responsible for the event during the night hours, and that person must be the applicant (or a co-applicant) for the outdoor festival or large gathering permit. The responsible party must be present throughout the night hours or must appoint a designee to be present and responsible. Where a designee is appointed, the responsible party shall notify the city of said designation in writing at least 24 hours prior to the start of the overnight event. (5)  The host of an overnight event in a park (either an individual or an organization as applicable) must wait at least ninety days after the end of the overnight event before beginning another overnight event of which she/he/it is the host in the same park. (6)  An overnight event may not be for the purpose of sleeping unless the sleeping is a material component of the host's message. (7)  Duration of an overnight event: a.  An overnight event may utilize the entire park for a maximum of two consecutive nights. The host's park use shall be non-exclusive when the park is open to the public (6:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m.). b.  If an overnight event occurs on more than two consecutive nights, the city will require the overnight event to utilize a smaller, contained area that is pre-designated for such use by the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation. The commissioner will include the description of the designated locations in the department's written policies, and will use these locations for every overnight event lasting longer than two consecutive nights. c.  An overnight event shall last for no longer than six consecutive nights. (8)  The following rules shall apply inside the park during overnight events: a.  Generators are permitted, but only if they are non-combustion generators and have received the requisite permits and permissions from the city and other applicable governmental entities. b.  Fire of any kind is prohibited except for hand-held candles. c.  Amplified sound is prohibited. d.  Sound arising from the overnight event must not be audible more than 100 feet from the park boundaries, including generator sounds, instruments and voices. e.  Where a park already has lighting, no additional lights may be used during the overnight event unless the lighting is integral to achieving the expressive purpose of the event. Where a park does not have lighting, lighting may be used at the overnight event provided that it does not require electricity, except that electricity may be used if the lighting is integral to achieving the expressive purpose of the event. If lighting is integral, the applicant shall work with the office of parks prior to the event to determine, and to memorialize in a lighting plan approved by the office, the location and direction of the necessary lighting that minimizes impact on the community surrounding the park. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit battery-operated flashlights which are expressly permitted during overnight events. f.  No alcohol is allowed at an overnight event. g.  The overnight event must have a sanitation and recycling plan approved by the city's office of sanitation. h.  All park rules apply to overnight events, including rules regarding tents. i.  Overnight events cannot be gated. j.  Anyone in a park during an overnight event must be participating in the event or a counter-demonstration thereto. An overnight event in a park does not open the park for general use. (9)  A security plan approved by the Atlanta Police Department is required for every overnight event. Where the overnight event is part of an outdoor festival or large gathering that begins prior to or continues after night hours, the security plan for the overnight event portion of the festival or gathering must be separate from the security plan for the remainder of the outdoor event, and the requirements of each security plan may be different. The overnight event security plan must include the hiring of off-duty law enforcement officers who are present throughout the overnight event in a quantity prescribed by the Atlanta Police Department pursuant to Atlanta Code of Ordinances section 142-55. The requirement of off-duty law enforcement officers at the overnight event shall not, in and of itself, create a requirement for off-duty law enforcement officers during daytime hours. (10)  Within two business days of the issuance of an overnight event permit, the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation shall send written notice of the event to the following individuals or their designees: the Clerk of the Atlanta City Council for distribution to the impacted councilmember; the Chair of the Atlanta Planning and Advisory Board; and the city coordinator of the NPU system for distribution to the neighborhood planning unit in which the overnight event will occur. (Code 1977, § 10-2029; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 8, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 5, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2013-62(13-O-1243), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Sec. 110-76. - Prohibited conduct in parks during outdoor events, assemblies. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person using a park during an outdoor festival or assembly, as defined in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances, to do, or permit a minor child in his/ her custody to do, any of the following acts: (1)  Ride, drive or operate bicycles, motorcycles, mopeds or any other motor vehicles, or ride skateboards or skates onto or in the festival production area, as defined in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances, or onto or in prohibited areas in the park. The prohibited areas, some of which may be inside of the festival production area, include the children's area, vending locations, craft demonstration area, performing arts venues, health and fitness expos, hot air balloon staging areas, roads, walks, courts, pools, and athletic fields. These items may be carried into or through the festival production area and prohibited areas if they are not ridden. This provision shall not apply to emergency medical personnel, nor to officials or employees of the City of Atlanta acting in their official capacity, nor to vendors restocking their merchandise, nor to vendors providing sanitation services for the outdoor festival. In addition, this provision shall not apply to any person working at the direction of the outdoor festival host, or her/his designee. Nothing in this provision shall waive the prohibitions set forth in section 110-87 of this chapter, though the Commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs shall have the sole discretion to allow the outdoor festival host to install temporary roadways in the park to be utilized for outdoor festival set-up and take-down only, provided that the Commissioner's permission is in writing and states the exact location where the temporary roadway may be created. (2)  Bring in, carry, or in any way possess, play or operate any radio, musical instrument or similar device which is producing or reproducing sound in the park in such a manner as to be plainly audible to other persons in the park, other than the operator of the device. This subsection shall not apply to persons performing in the outdoor festival or assembly. All radios and musical devices with earphones are permitted. (3)  Bring, carry or in any way possess charcoal-fired portable grills. This provision shall not prohibit the use of charcoal in city grills placed in the park for public use. (4)  Engage in outdoor cooking except in a city grill, or in an area designated in writing and defined by on-site signage by the Commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs or her/his designee. This provision shall not apply to authorized outdoor festival vendors. (5)  Alcohol consumption in a park is prohibited except during permitted outdoor festivals. Alcohol consumption is allowed in a park during a permitted outdoor festival, except that an outdoor festival host shall have the right to prohibit alcohol consumption at the outdoor festival. An outdoor festival host shall also have the right to require that alcohol consumed at the outdoor festival be purchased or obtained from an official outdoor festival vendor. Such limitations shall be noted on the outdoor festival permit application. (b)  City rules regarding whether pets shall be allowed in a park during an outdoor festival, as defined in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances, are set forth in Code section 110-70(d) and (e). (Code 1977, § 10-2030; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 9, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 6, 9-26-06) Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. 
Sec. 110-77. - Posting bills and notices.     Any person who, in any park, shall post bills or notices shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8; provided however, that the mayor or designee may allow bills and/or notice signs to be temporarily placed in any park when, in the discretion of the mayor or designee, such sign will be beneficial to any municipal or public endeavor, athletic or otherwise. (Code 1977, § 17-1003) 
Secs. 110-78—110-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 150. 
Sec. 110-86. - Use of drives and avenues.     The roads, drives and avenues in public parks shall be open only to the use of pedestrians and bicycle riders and the occupants of vehicles in use for pleasure drives. No vehicles engaged in hauling for traffic or commerce shall use such roads, drives or avenues, except for the delivery of materials or other supplies necessary for the maintenance of the parks or for persons conducting business within the limits of the parks or with the written permission of the Commissioner. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the policing of public parks by law enforcement officers. (Code 1977, § 10-2004) 
Sec. 110-87. - Driving across parks.     No person shall drive any vehicle upon or across any part of any public park, except upon roadways laid out and maintained for vehicular travel. This section shall not apply to city employees whose duties require them to drive on park property and who are authorized to do so by the Commissioner. (Code 1977, § 10-2005) 
Sec. 110-88. - Unauthorized parking of vehicles in parks.     No person shall park any vehicle upon any of the roads, drives, avenues or parking lots or at any other place within any park when the person is not using the park or any of its related facilities. This section shall not apply to city employees in the conduct of city business. (Code 1977, § 10-2007; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 10, 12-9-03) 
Chapter 114 - PERSONNEL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, approved March 27, 2007, amended Ch. 114, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 114 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. Charter reference— Civil service generally, § 3-501 et seq.; department of personnel and human resources, app. IV, §§ 1(i), 34 et seq. Cross reference— City council staff, § 2-151 et seq.; mayor, § 2-176 et seq.; executive branch offices, § 2-231 et seq.; municipal clerk, § 2-266 et seq.; chief financial officer, § 2-341 et seq.; department of personnel and human resources, § 2-441 et seq.; officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq.; employee benefits, § 2-841 et seq.; department of fire, § 78-26 et seq.; department of police, § 98-26 et seq.; correctional services, § 98-136 et seq. Related laws reference— Pensions, ch. 6. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 114-1. - Personnel records. (a)  With respect to both the unclassified and classified service, a record of all appointments and personnel actions shall be maintained by the commissioner of human resources, and such shall include current pertinent information as to the employee's name, address, social security number, date of employment, classification to which appointed, starting salary, salary advancements, date of separation and any other information deemed necessary by the department of human resources. (b)  When available, the commissioner shall, on a timely basis, furnish to departments such information as requested and as may be necessary for the departments to comply with local, state, regional and federal reporting requirements. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-2. - Standards of conduct prescribed; penalty for violation. (a)  Any employee offering for election to the office of mayor, president of the city council or member of the city council shall resign from the employee's position with the city, and such resignation shall be effective as of the date upon which such person files with the office of the municipal clerk, her/his "Declaration of Intention to Accept Campaign Contributions" as prescribed by the state ethics commission, or as of the date upon which such person files with the office of the municipal clerk, her/his "Notice of Candidacy and Affidavit", and pays the required qualifying fee, or files a pauper's affidavit in lieu thereof, as prescribed by O.C.G.A. Sec. 21-2-132, or,     If a write-in candidate, the date upon which such person files with the office of the municipal clerk, her/his "Notice of Intent of Write-In Candidacy", as prescribed by O.C.G.A. Sec. 21-2-133, whichever first occurs. (b)  If an employee of the city offers for an elective office, other than those indicated in subsection (a) of this section, and the employee desires a leave of absence or, in the opinion of the department head, the campaign for the office will conflict with the employee's duties or work hours, the employee shall take a leave of absence as provided by section 114-422. (c)  No employee shall offer for an elective office without having first filed a written notification, with such employee's department head, of the employee's intent to file as a candidate for elective office. Such notification shall state the office the employee intends to seek, the governmental jurisdiction of the office, the dates of filing for candidacy and the date of the election. (d)  Should such employee be elected to an office which the department head determines interferes with or affects the employee's duties or hours of city employment, a separation shall be required at a time to be determined by the department head. (e)  No employee, official or person shall knowingly solicit any assessments, contributions or services for any political party or candidate from any employee of the city. (f)  Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the employee to hold membership or office in or support a political party and to vote as the employee chooses. (g)  For the purposes of this section only, a public elected official of the city shall not be considered an employee except for subsection (e) of this section. However, if any member or officer of a commission, council or board created by the city or appointed or confirmed by an elected official or officials of the city, and is not then currently serving as an elected official of the city, or the chair or officer of any neighborhood planning unit or an elected neighborhood planning unit committee member, offers for election to the office of mayor, president of the city council or member of the city council, such member, officer or chair shall resign from such position with any such commission, council or board, or with the neighborhood planning unit. Such resignation shall be effective as of the date upon which such person files with the office of the municipal clerk, her/his "Declaration of Intention to Accept Campaign Contributions" as prescribed by the State Ethics Commission, or as of the date upon which such person files with the office of the municipal clerk, her/his "Notice of Candidacy and Affidavit", and pays the required qualifying fee, or files a pauper's affidavit in lieu thereof, as prescribed by O.C.G.A. Sec. 21-2-132, or, if a write-in candidate, the date upon which such person files with the office of the municipal clerk, her/his "Notice of Intent of Write-In Candidacy," as prescribed by O.C.G.A. Sec. 21-2-133, whichever first occurs. (h)  No person shall in any manner prevent or attempt to prevent the impartial execution of this chapter or policies or rules promulgated under this chapter. (i)  No person shall, directly or indirectly, give, render, pay, offer, solicit or accept any money, service or valuable consideration for any appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion or any advantage in any position with the city. (j)  No person shall defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in such person's right of application, eligibility, certification or appointment under this chapter or furnish to any person any special or secret information for the purpose of affecting the rights or prospects of any person with respect to employment in the classified service. (k)  Employees of the city shall be subject to the following rules and regulations concerning political activity: (1)  No officer or employee shall use official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of any election or the nomination for any office. (2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the right of an employee to express privately the employee's opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to maintain political neutrality and to attend political meetings after working hours. (3)  All employees shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Federal Hatch Political Activities Act as amended by the Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1974, and any subsequent amendments thereto. (l)  Any person who shall violate subsection (h), (i) or (j) of this section shall, for the period of five years, be ineligible for appointment to or employment in a position with the city, and any officer or employee who shall violate any such subsection shall be dismissed from any office or position held by such officer or employee. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2009-50(09-O-1311), § 1, 9-8-09) 
Secs. 114-3—114-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPENSATION, PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS AND CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 114-26. - Paymaster designated, duties. (a)  The chief financial officer is designated as paymaster of the city. (b)  The duties of paymaster shall be to keep a record of the entire payroll of the city, pay all salaries to city employees and perform such other duties as may be prescribed. Payrolls and time sheets of all departments shall be prepared by the departments, respectively. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-27. - Withholding tax; federal and state taxes. (a)  The chief financial officer is directed to make the proper deductions from the wages or salaries of employees in accordance with the income tax laws enacted by the United States. It shall be the duty and responsibility of each department to furnish the chief financial officer a signed withholding exemption certificate, in such form and containing such information as the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury by regulations prescribed, on each employee in the department and on each person subsequently employed. For a change of status, the employee, through the department head, is required to furnish the chief financial officer a new certificate not later than ten days after such change occurs. Failure to comply with this subsection shall subject the head of any department or any employee to removal from office by the mayor and council. (b)  The chief financial officer is directed to make the proper deductions from the wages and salaries of employees in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 7, art. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 48-7-100 et seq.), as amended. It shall be the duty and responsibility of each department head to furnish the chief financial officer with a signed withholding exemption certificate, in such form and containing such information as the state revenue commissioner prescribes, on each employee in the department and on each person subsequently employed. For change of status, the employee, through the department head, is required to furnish the chief financial officer a new certificate not later than ten days after such change occurs. Failure to comply with this subsection shall subject the head of any department or any employee to removal from office by the mayor and council. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-28. - Deduction of labor organization dues from salaries. (a)  The chief financial officer is authorized and directed to deduct from the salary or wages of employees, who are members of an appropriate community of interest as determined by the commissioner of the department of human resources, a specified sum of money as stated on the dues authorization card signed by each employee representing the monthly dues of the organization to which the employee belongs and such specified sum of money as may, from time to time, subsequently be certified by the financial secretary of the organization in accordance with the organization's bylaws. Each enrollment dues authorization card having a specified sum of money stated thereon which is in an amount less than that which is certified by the financial secretary shall remain valid for organizational certification so long as no withdrawal card has been filed with the commissioner of human resources. Enrollment dues authorization cards of employees becoming members of the organization shall be certified by the commissioner of human resources between the first and 15th days of the month subsequent to such employee becoming a member, by the president or secretary of the organization. No deduction shall be made until a written dues authorization card signed by the employee shall have been delivered to the commissioner of human resources. No such written dues authorization card shall be valid which has not been dated and which is not received by the commissioner of human resources within 60 calendar days after the date it was signed by the employee. All cards received by the commissioner of human resources shall be retained by the city. (b)  Notwithstanding the provision of 114-28(a), the following rules are applicable: (1)  Any employee who maintains membership in an employee organization as of October 27, 2010, shall be allowed dues deduction. Any employee who falls within this provision who subsequently voluntarily withdraws the dues authorization card is prohibited from further dues deduction pursuant to this rule and is limited to dues authorization for the community of interest as defined in 114-28(d); (A)  Any pending application for membership in an employee organization as defined by 114-28(d), submitted from January 1, 2010 through June 15, 2010, but not processed through the commissioner of human resources shall be processed for dues deduction for employee organizations as defined in 114-28(d); (B)  Any pending application for membership in an employee organization which was submitted from June 16, 2010 through October 27, 2010, but not processed through the commissioner of human resources shall be processed for dues deduction. (2)  Any application for membership in an employee organization as defined by 114-28(c) received by an employee organization after October 27, 2010 and submitted to the commissioner of human resources shall be processed for dues deduction for employee organizations as defined in section 114-28(d). (c)  The commissioner of human resources shall, after deducting the cost to the city to implement such deduction of dues, remit the balance previously so collected to the secretary or president of the employee organization, together with a list of names of those employees from whom the dues were collected on the last business day of each month. (d)  For the purpose of this section, the term "employee organization" means the following organizations previously recognized by the council and approved by the mayor by ordinance or by resolution: (1)  The International Brotherhood of Police Officers, representing sworn personnel within the department of police at the rank of police lieutenant and below; (2)  The International Association of Fire Fighters, representing sworn personnel within the department of fire at the rank of fire captain or below; (3)  The American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, representing non-sworn personnel employed at or below pay grade 18 with the exception of those personnel working in the classifications specifically reserved and/or enumerated by the commissioner of human resources for the Professional Association of City Employees as identified in Exhibit A of the 2005 Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Atlanta and the Professional Association of City Employees. When new positions are created, the commissioner of human resources shall confer with both communities of interests to determine where such positions are located. The final decision rests with the commissioner of human resources; and (4)  The Professional Association of City Employees, representing non-sworn personnel employed at or above pay grade 19 up to and including pay grade 30 and those personnel working in classifications specifically reserved and/or enumerated by the commissioner of human resources for the Professional Association of City Employees as identified in Exhibit A of the 2005 Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Atlanta and the Professional Association of City Employees. When new positions are created, the commissioner of human resources shall confer with both communities of interests to determine where such positions are located. The final decision rests with the commissioner of human resources.     Should any city employee who signed a valid enrollment dues authorization card wish to withdraw or terminate the deduction of dues from such employee's wages or salary, such employee may do so in the months of January or July of each year by submitting in writing to the office of the commissioner of human resources a statement to that effect. (e)  The deduction of dues authorized in this section is conditioned upon the fact that any organization representing any employee or group of employees, any shop steward or any official of an organization or any of its members, individually or collectively, will not strike and will not approve or take part in any strike, sit-down, slow-down or any interference with the operation of the city by picketing, patrolling, demonstrating or any stoppage of work or other similar activities. Further, the deduction of dues is conditioned upon there being no campaigning or soliciting of membership on city property during working hours. Upon the occurrence of any of such actions or activities and upon a written determination by the mayor or the mayor's designee that such actions or activities are occurring, the deduction of dues from the salary or wages of the employees belonging to any such organization shall be automatically terminated by the commissioner of human resources, and recognition of that employee's organization shall be terminated. (f)  The dues deduction of an employee shall not be made if the salary or wages of an employee at any pay period, after making all deductions required by law and previously authorized by the employee, should not equal the amount of such dues. Thereafter, such deductions shall commence, non-retroactive, upon there remaining after such deductions an amount of such employee's salary or wages equal to such dues. The dues deduction of an employee shall terminate when, for suspension, sickness or any leave of absence, such employee should receive in any dues deduction pay period an amount of money less than such employee's normal and regular salary. Such dues deduction shall thereafter commence, non-retroactive, upon such employee receiving in any dues deduction pay period such employee's normal and regular wages or salary. (g)  Any other employee organization not specified in paragraph (d) may petition to become a recognized organization under this section by providing a showing of interest by employees in any community of interest as defined in paragraph (d) that demonstrates that the organization has the support of 50 percent plus one of the employees within that community of interest. Such a petition shall be presented to the commissioner of human resources only during the first quarter of the calendar year for certification by the commissioner of human resources. Support of employees shall be demonstrated by signed and dated authorization cards as defined in paragraph (a). Should the commissioner of human resources verify the showing of interest, the organization submitting the showing of interest, upon approval by council, will become the recognized employee organization for the employees in the community of interest for which representation is sought at the beginning of the third quarter of the calendar year in which the showing of interest is submitted. At such time, any existing employee organization previously recognized for employees in the community of interest will no longer be recognized and authorization cards for the former employee organization will become null and void. No other petition for certification for the same community of interest will be accepted for a period of four years after the date of certification under this paragraph. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), §§ 5, 7, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2010-62(10-O-1757), § 1, 11-10-10) 
Sec. 114-29. - Authority to deduct from salaries of employees to cover pledge to the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc.     Subject to the policies, terms and conditions provided for in division 2 of this article, the chief financial officer is hereby authorized to deduct from the salaries or wages of each city employee such sums as may be authorized by such employee to cover a pledge made to the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc., and the chief financial officer is further authorized to pay such sums so deducted over to the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc.; provided, however, that such authority is expressly conditioned upon adherence by the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc., with the policies, terms and conditions set forth in division 2 of this article. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-30—114-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ANNUAL COMBINED CAMPAIGN FOR CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS 
Sec. 114-36. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Fundraising federation or federation means a local or statewide fundraising federation with offices in the state and disbursing funds to ten or more organizations providing health or human welfare services. Eligible fundraising federations shall be placed on a list of such organizations certified by the friendship club as being eligible to receive contributions from city employees through payroll deduction in accordance with this division. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-37. - Creation; objectives.     Beginning in March, 1995, and continuing in September, 1996, and each September thereafter, a single combined campaign for charitable contributions from city employees ("combined campaign") will be initiated by the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc. ("friendship club"). The combined campaign is a once-a-year drive allowing employees to give charitable contributions conveniently through payroll deduction to the friendship club, designating charitable organizations of their choice. The combined campaign guarantees maximum opportunity for fairness in the distribution of the donor's contributions and reinforces the donor's perception that needs in the community are being supported financially through a unified appeal. Specifically the combined campaign objectives will be to: (1)  Provide the best opportunity for city employees to contribute to the organizations of their choice. (2)  Create a fair and equitable opportunity for all approved organizations to solicit and receive support from employees, through the friendship club. (3)  Assure a means of access to city employees, through the friendship club, that will assist in maximizing employee participation and giving. (4)  Provide an effective campaign that encourages employees to make a generous contribution based upon free choice. (5)  Provide each employee with an appropriate pledge form and campaign brochure that will be simple and easy to use and will offer information on the campaign and all the participating organizations. (6)  Maintain the friendship club as the direct payroll deduction for employees, with the option of designating eligible organizations to which each employee wishes to make a contribution. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-38. - Eligibility requirements of fundraising federations.     To be eligible to receive payroll deduction pursuant to this division, a federation and its member organizations and all friendship club fund recipients (except the Atlanta Employees Fund) must: (1)  Be recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as a 501©(3) nonprofit organization; (2)  Have an IRS Form 990 and an audited financial statement if annual income exceeds $100,000.00; (3)  Have administrative and fundraising expenses that do not exceed 25 percent of total support and revenue, unless the organization can demonstrate that its actual expenses are reasonable under all the circumstances in its case; (4)  Be registered under the Georgia Charitable Solicitation Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; (5)  Be incorporated; (6)  Provide services or funding that impacts health or human welfare on a local or statewide basis; (7)  Present a proposal addressing funding priorities previously established in writing by the board of directors of the friendship club, which proposal must be approved by the board; (8)  Be in compliance with all federal, state and local laws and ordinances; and (9)  All recipients of payroll deduction funds under this division have a nondiscrimination policy consistent with the Charter and ordinances of the city. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-39. - Opportunity of fundraising federation to make presentation to board to demonstrate eligibility.     At any time prior to January 16, 1995, and prior to April 30, 1996, and April 30 of each year thereafter, any fundraising federation which is invited to do so in writing by a city employee shall have an opportunity to make a presentation to the board of the friendship club, demonstrating its eligibility based on the criteria specified in section 114-38, to have its name added to a list of organizations eligible for solicitation of funds in the annual combined campaign, to be held beginning in March, 1995, and September of the following years. Such list of eligible organizations, which shall be renewed annually based on the criteria set forth in this division, shall be circulated to city employees at least once a year at a time to be determined by the friendship club board and shall be available to city employees at other times upon their request. Receipt of any funds from the combined campaign is contingent on a federation receiving a minimum of ten designations from city employees each year. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-40. - Providing written documentation of eligibility.     A federation applying for participation in the city combined campaign must seek its eligibility by submitting written documentation for the criteria outlined in section 114-38 to the friendship club by November 30, 1995, and April 30 of each year thereafter. A federation need only submit one application on behalf of all its member groups each year but must include a signed, written statement certifying that its constituent organizations meet all of the eligibility requirements. An oral presentation shall also be made to the board of directors of the friendship club if required by the board. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-41. - Review of application by board.     The friendship club board shall review the applications based on the criteria outlined in section 114-38 and notify each federation in writing of the action taken on its application by January 30, 1995, and by June 15 of each year thereafter. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-42. - Determination of eligibility; notification; right to appeal.     The friendship club shall have the right to request any documentation needed from an applicant federation to certify its eligibility. If an applicant federation is deemed ineligible, the friendship club shall so notify the applicant federation and shall include in its notification reason for denial. Federations wishing to appeal a decision may, within 14 days from denial, submit to the board of directors of the friendship club a written appeal for eligibility reconsideration. The friendship club board shall have 14 days from receipt of an appeal letter to respond to the applicant federation. If a federation's appeal is denied, the federation may, within 20 days, appeal in writing to the city council, which may overrule the friendship club's denial by a majority vote of members present and voting, if the council determines that the applicant federation meets all of the criteria specified in section 114-38. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-43. - Duties of board of directors.     The board of the friendship club shall oversee the organization of the annual combined campaign. The administrative and organized aspects of the combined campaign shall include the following responsibilities at a minimum: (1)  Plan the combined campaign and provide clerical and administrative support. (2)  Recommend and approve a written campaign budget. (3)  Coordinate the production and distribution of all campaign materials and supplies. a.  Campaign materials shall include, but not be limited to, pledge cards, brochures, posters, and training materials. Participating federations shall be provided opportunity for input on all campaign promotional materials. b.  The logos of each participating federation will appear on all campaign materials. c.  The brochure will offer a detailed explanation of the combined campaign and will: 1.  Provide a brief description of each of the federations and an approximately 25-word description of each member agency/organization participating in the combined campaign. 2.  Define the friendship club and distinguish it from the federations. d.  The pledge card will provide an option to each city employee to pledge generally to the friendship club or to pledge to the friendship club and include a designation that such pledge will be passed on by the friendship club to an eligible fundraising federation. The pledge card shall also include a statement that administrative expenses are shared pro rata among the participating federations. (4)  Develop and provide campaign training and promotions. Prior to the commencement of the campaign, an orientation meeting shall be scheduled for those city employees acting as departmental coordinators and solicitors for the campaign. Each department or agency will have at least one coordinator responsible for all payroll deduction or direct funding solicitations. (5)  Reform the following financial duties: a.  Manage all campaign finances of cash and check contributions, payroll deduction, and distribution of undesignated and designated contributions. b.  Act as the central point for all campaign pledges. c.  Process all appropriate disbursements of campaign receipts in coordination with the city department of finance. 1.  Initial disbursement to federations will be distributed by April 15 of each year. 2.  All cash contributions will be included in the first payment. 3.  Quarterly remittance will thereafter be made on a pro rata share of actual collections. d.  Maintain the financial records regarding campaign receipts, deposits, distributions and expenses. e.  Prepare and distribute campaign reports in accordance with schedules and requirements as mutually agreed upon. (6)  Provide appropriate recognition to campaign contributors and workers. (7)  Perform post-campaign evaluations in cooperation with departmental coordinators and make appropriate recommendations for subsequent years. (8)  Other duties as required. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-44. - Administrative costs. (a)  The costs of the campaign and all other administrative costs will be shared by each participating federation pro rata with the friendship club measured by the proportion of total receipts from the combined campaign to total receipts by each participating federation, and such pro rata share of such costs may be deducted by the friendship club prior to distributing funds due to such federations pursuant to this division. (b)  Any campaign administrative costs which are incurred by any participating federation will be the sole responsibility of such federation. (c)  All costs of the campaign, including but not limited to materials, production and printing, pledge processing and employee time must be documented and accounted for in writing by the friendship club. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-45. - Authority of board to retain independent contractor and hire staff personnel; reimbursement.     The board of the friendship club may retain an independent contractor or hire staff personnel sufficient to accomplish and comply with all of the policies, terms and conditions set forth in this division, and to perform such other duties as may be required by the board or by the council during the time leading up to and including the March 1995 combined campaign only. The total cost of such tasks shall not exceed $50,000.00, and such costs shall be paid by the chief financial officer from an appropriate account. The friendship club shall reimburse the city for all payments made by the city pursuant to this section out of the proceeds of the payroll deductions made on behalf of the friendship club in 1995 and, if applicable, each year thereafter, and out of the pro rata cost deductions made by the friendship club pursuant to section 114-44(a) in 1995, and, if applicable, each year thereafter. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-46. - Compliance.     Within 60 days of the adoption and approval of this division, the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc., a private nonprofit corporation, shall agree in writing to comply with all of the policies, terms and conditions of this division and shall amend its charter and bylaws so as to provide one member of its board from each and every department (to include offices thereof) of the city government, including without limitation the office of the mayor and the city council, each such member to be elected by a majority of the employees in each such department. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-47. - Agreement to comply with state law.     Notwithstanding that the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc., may not be a public office or agency within the meaning of the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., or the Georgia Open Meetings Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq., or otherwise be subject to such acts, within 60 days of the adoption and approval of this division, the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc., shall agree in writing to voluntarily comply and abide by all of the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act and the Georgia Open Meetings Act, as they now exist or as they may be amended. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-48. - Employee's ability to serve on board without forfeiting leave.     Any city employee who is elected to the board of the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc., shall be afforded the opportunity by such employee's respective department to serve in such capacity without forfeiting any annual leave, sick leave or other leave, and such service shall be considered for all purposes as regular employee service. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-49, 114-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY 
Sec. 114-51. - Statement of policy.     It is the policy of the mayor and city council to provide equal employment opportunity in city government for all qualified persons; to prohibit discrimination in employment because of race, color, religion, age, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran's status or national origin; and to promote the full realization of equal employment opportunity through a positive, continuing program in each department and agency of the city government. The policy of equal opportunity applies to every aspect of city employment, policy and practice. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 5-A, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 114-52. - Equal employment opportunity program for city departments and agencies. (a)  Duties of heads of departments and agencies. The head of each executive department and agency shall establish and maintain a positive program of equal employment opportunity for all employees and applicants for employment. (b)  Duties of mayor. The mayor, upon the advice and guidance of the women's advisory council, civil service board and other individuals, groups or organizations as may be of assistance in realizing the objectives of this article, shall facilitate, supervise, monitor and evaluate achievement of a model program for equal employment opportunity in city government, including but not limited to the following objectives: (1)  Review job qualifications, specifications and descriptions to ensure that the requirements do not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran's status or national origin and are a factual reflection of the needs of each job classification in city government. (2)  Review current in-service training programs to assess their effectiveness in meeting the needs of incumbent employees. (3)  Design training and education programs to focus on upgrading incumbent personnel and to afford women and other minority employees the opportunity to develop new and improved skills. (4)  Hold special meetings with supervisory personnel at all levels in each city department and agency to explain the intent of the EEO policy in this article and each individual's responsibility for its implementation. (5)  Inform local recruiting sources, at least annually, of the EEO policy of the city in this article and request them to describe their ability to recruit actively and make referrals of women and other minorities for all positions. (6)  Communicate to employees the existence of the city's EEO policy and program and how they can avail themselves of its benefits. (c)  Report. The mayor shall, annually, at the last council meeting in December of each year, submit to the council a written report on the implementation of the program for equal employment opportunity in city government. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 5-B, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 114-53. - Definitions.     As used in this chapter the following terms have the following meanings: (1)  "Applicant" means any person considered or who requests to be considered for employment by the City of Atlanta. (2)  "City agency" means any office, department, agency, board or commission of the City of Atlanta. (3)  "Employee" means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member of owner's family, partner, associate, agent, manager, or representative, and any and all other persons engaged or employed in said business. (4)  "Employment" means any occupation, vocation, job, work for pay or employment, including temporary or seasonal work, contracted work, contingent work and work through the services of a temporary or other employment agency. "Employment" shall not, for the purposes of this chapter, include membership in any law enforcement agency. (5)  "Conviction" means any sentence arising from a verdict or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, including a sentence of incarceration, a suspended sentence, a sentence of probation or a sentence of unconditional discharge. (6)  "Inquiry" means any direct or indirect conduct intended to gather information, using any mode of communication. (7)  "Interview" means any direct contact by the employer with the applicant, whether in person or by telephone, to discuss the employment being sought or the applicant's qualifications. ( Ord. No. 2014-44(14-O-1399), § 3, 10-15-14 ) 
Sec. 114-54. - Ban-the-box.     In connection with printed and/or on-line employment application forms of the city, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for them to contain a "box" or inquiry regarding an applicant's prior criminal history. ( Ord. No. 2014-44(14-O-1399), § 3, 10-15-14 ) 
Sec. 114-55. - Unlawful discriminatory practice—Ex-offenders.     To prohibit unfair discrimination against persons previously convicted of one or more criminal offenses: (a)  In connection with the licensing or employment of any person, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for the city to make any inquiry regarding or to require any person to disclose or reveal any criminal conviction(s) during the application process. The application process shall begin when the applicant inquires about the employment being sought and shall end when an employer has accepted an employment application. (b)  It shall further be an unlawful discriminatory practice for the city to make any inquiry regarding, or to require any person to disclose or reveal any criminal convictions against such person before and during the second interview. (c)  Prior to an applicant being selected for hire with the city, a background check and drug test is required for consideration of employment. ( Ord. No. 2014-44(14-O-1399), § 3, 10-15-14 ) 
Sec. 114-56. - Adverse employment decision—-Ex-offenders.     Once the applicant has been deemed qualified for the position for which he/she applied, the city may then inquire into the applicant's criminal history. If the city makes an adverse employment decision, including, but not limited to, the refusal, rescission, or revocation of a conditional offer of employment, or termination of employment, after the criminal history inquiry is conducted, the city shall within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days: (a)  Notify the applicant of the adverse employment decision; and (b)  Provide the applicant with a photocopy of the results of the criminal inquiry, indicating the particular conviction(s) that relate(s) to the position's responsibilities. ( Ord. No. 2014-44(14-O-1399), § 3, 10-15-14 ) 
Sec. 114-57. - Dissemination of criminal history.     Any information obtained by the city that pertains to an applicant's criminal history: (a)  Shall remain confidential; (b)  Shall only be shared with individuals that have a need to know the contents for the purpose of evaluating candidates or employees in a manner consistent with this section, except as dictated by law; (c)  Shall not be used, distributed, or disseminated by the city for any use other than those permitted under this policy; and (d)  Shall not be used, distributed, or disseminated by the city to any other entity or individual, except as dictated by state or federal law. ( Ord. No. 2014-44(14-O-1399), § 3, 10-15-14 ) 
Sec. 114-58. - Exemptions.     The city hiring for positions where certain convictions or violations are a bar to employment in that position under state or federal law, including but not limited to positions that involve work with children and positions in law enforcement, shall not be constrained from asking questions about those convictions or violations. ( Ord. No. 2014-44(14-O-1399), § 3, 10-15-14 ) 
Secs. 114-59—114-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CIVIL SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 114-76. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Administrative leave means a paid leave of absence pending an investigation authorized by the appointing authority with concurrence of the commissioner of human resources.     Annual increase means a yearly progression from the minimum toward the maximum of the salary range and may be awarded subject to availability of funds and employee performance at a level of effective or better. The value of such annual increase shall be approved by the council every fiscal year.     Appointing authority means the officer, commission, board or body having the power of appointment, employment or election to or removal from subordinate positions in any office, department, commission, board or institution; or any person or group of persons having the power by virtue of the constitution, statute or lawfully delegated authority to make appointments or employment to the positions in the city employment service. For the purpose of taking any disciplinary action or of filing any charges against any person in the classified service, the designation "appointing authority" includes any acting department head or other person designated by the proper authority to be in charge of any department in the absence, for any cause, of the regular appointing authority or department head.     Appointing rule means the selection for employment of an individual from a referral list certified to the appointing authority by the commissioner of human resources.     Board means the civil service board of the city.     Bonus means a supplemental or additional amount of money added to an employee's pay for exceptional performance related to set guidelines resulting in a greater benefit to taxpayers.     Certify, certification means the act of the commissioner of human resources in supplying an appointing authority with the names of applicants who are eligible for appointment to the class and position for which certification is requested in the classified service.     Classification (Class) means: (1)  A position or group of positions which have similar duties and responsibilities, require similar qualifications, can be designated by a single title indicative of the kind and nature of work and for which the same schedule of pay can be applied with equity; or (2)  A group of positions sufficiently similar as to duties performed; scope of discretion and responsibility; minimum requirements of training, experience or skill; and such other characteristics that the same title and the same range of compensation may be applied to each position in the group.     Classification (class) specification means a written document, which generally describes a class and includes a general statement of duties, competencies, knowledge, skills, and abilities, as well as the qualifications and guidelines for entrance into the kind of work described.     Classification (class) title means the official title used for all personnel and payroll processes. Working titles may be used for other purposes.     Classified position means a position in the classified service.     Classified service/unclassified service means position in the civil service as provided for in the Civil Service Code, Section 114-84.     Commissioner means the commissioner of human resources.     Continuous service means employment in the civil service which is uninterrupted. Time lost due to leaves of absence without pay, suspension or layoff shall not be considered as continuous service, except as provided in this article. Time lost under authorized paid leaves of absence shall be considered as continuous service.     Demotion means a change of employment to a position in a class which has a lower maximum salary limit than the class from which the assignment was made.     Eligible means a person who meets requirements for a position and whose name is on an employment eligible list.     Eligible list means a certified list of the names of persons with respect to classes of employment for which such persons have competed and are qualified to be appointed.     Employee means any person holding a position or employment with the city.     Examinations means methods used to determine eligibility of applicants for employment. Examinations may include, but shall not be limited to, job-related written, oral, physical or performance tests; rating of training and experience; or any combination of these.     Filled out-of-class means an employee assigned to a classification title and job code different from the classification title and job code of the authorized position. An incumbent may only be assigned out-of-class at a pay grade equal to or lower than the pay grade of the authorized position.     Grade change means the reassignment of a class to a different salary grade upon approval by ordinance.     Incumbent means the person occupying a position.     Layoff means a separation of an employee from the employee's position which has been made necessary by lack of work or funds or for other reasons not related to fault, delinquency or misconduct on the part of the employee.     Level means the degree of responsibility, training, experience and ability required to fill specific positions in a series.     Minimum qualifications means the established requirements of education and experience, knowledge and skill needed to perform the duties and responsibilities of a position as established in the class specifications.     Overtime means time worked in excess of scheduled work periods as defined by the Fair Labor Standard Act (FLSA).     Part-time employee means an individual hired on a continuing basis, but who is scheduled to work less than the normal period for the position, or an individual hired on a continuing basis who is scheduled to work only a part of a workweek and to share the position with another individual hired for the same position to work the remaining part of the week.     Pay and class plan means the schedule of rates of pay assigned to each class title, the grouping of classes into appropriate categories and the assignment of special pay rules, approved by ordinance.     Pay grade means the range of pay assigned to a classification.     Performance evaluation means a periodic report prepared by the appointing authority relative to the work related conduct and performance of each employee.     Position means a group of current duties and responsibilities requiring the full-time employment of one person, the part-time employment of one person or the part-time employment of two or more persons.     Position of trust means authorized positions that require the incumbent or new hire who work with children, seniors, money or other financial transactions, public safety, or sensitive information of others.     Probationary employee means any employee appointed from an eligible list to a position in the classified service and who has not completed the six-month probationary period in a given class for appointment.     Promotion means a change of employment from a position of one class to a position of another class which has a higher maximum salary rate.     Promotional examination means an examination or a group of examinations for a certain class, admission to which is limited to regular employees in the classified service.     Promotional list means a list of persons who have been found qualified by a promotional examination for appointment to a particular class.     Provisional employee means an employee filling a position in the classified service without competition, pending the establishment of an eligible list. Provisional employees must be certified as meeting the established minimum qualifications for the position by the commissioner of human resources.     Reclassification means the reassignment of a position to a different class upon approval by ordinance.     Regular employee means a benefit earning employee who has been appointed to a permanent position in the civil service in accordance with this article and, if required, has satisfactorily completed a probationary period.     Reemployment means the reappointment of a person who was employed with the city, but voluntarily separated regular full- or part-time employment within three years.     Regular position means a full-time or part-time position which is adopted by ordinance.     Salary adjustment means an increase in salary within the same pay grade, based on additional duties or responsibilities and other qualifying factors.     Series means the designation of a number of classes related to each other in terms of ascending or descending difficulties and responsibilities of work within the same occupational field.     Special pay rule means a salary adjustment applied to designated classifications as compensation for shift differential (D), education (E), pilot on a flight crew (F), flight observer on a flight crew (O) and other qualifying factors.     Temporary employee means an employee appointed for a special project or other work of a temporary or transitory nature, and meets the minimum qualifications.     Transfer means a change by an employee from one position in a class to another position of the same class or to another class involving the performance of similar duties and requiring essentially the same basic qualifications and responsibilities and having the same schedule of pay.     Vacancy means a position duly created for which funds have been appropriated and which is unoccupied. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2019-14(18-O-1470), § 2, 2-12-19 ) 
Sec. 114-77. - General purpose.     The general purpose of this article is to establish a system of sound personnel administration for the city that provides for the recruitment, selection, development and retention of an effective work force of capable, diligent and honest career employees. This system shall include policies for employee hiring and advancement, training, career development and safety, position classification and salary administration, effective utilization of personnel and employee performance evaluation, employee relations and the disposition of employee grievances, discipline, discharge and related activities. It shall be the purpose of this article to establish a system in which all personnel matters shall be determined solely on the basis of merit and qualifications, without regard to race, color, sex, national origin, political affiliation, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 5-C, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 114-78. - Applicability of article.     This article shall apply to all positions in the classified civil service of the city and to all other positions of employment with the city where so indicated and where the context requires such interpretation. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-79. - Civil service board. (a)  There shall be a civil service board, which shall be the official protector of the civil service system. The civil service board shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council and shall hold office for a term of three years. These officers shall be compensated, by the case and not by the day, at a pay rate established by the human resources commissioner, not to exceed two cases per day per hearing officer. (b)  The Mayor, with the consent of council, shall be authorized to appoint up to three (3) ad hoc hearing officers who shall have the same power to conduct hearings and make final determinations and dispositions on appeals of adverse actions, and shall be compensated, by case and not by day, at the same rate as appointed civil service board members. (c)  Prior to commencement of service on the board and at least annually thereafter, each member will receive and attend training with the purpose of enhancing the board member's ability and consistency in performing the member's duties. Such training shall include applicable law and ordinances, procedural conduct of hearings, resolution of employment disputes, evidence and such other topics as may be deemed advisable. (d)  The civil service board shall be provided with administrative support by the city. Such staff shall be responsible to the civil service board and report to the administrative officer of the board. (e)  The board shall conduct its business in the manner provided in Appendix III and shall perform the following functions: (1)  Provide advice and counsel to the mayor, the council, the commissioner of human resources, concerning the development, implementation and improvement of the civil service system. (2)  Hold hearings when requested by an employee or an appointing authority on final demotions, suspensions, dismissals or other such adverse actions with reference to the classified service and have power to make final determinations and dispositions in such matters. Hearings may also be held for sworn officers who hold the position of lieutenant and any rank below that of lieutenant in of the department of police and sworn officers who hold the rank of captain and any rank below that of captain in the department of fire when such a hearing is requested. No officer or employee of the department of police or department of fire who is in a probationary status of initial employment with the department shall be entitled to a hearing. (3)  Hold name clearing hearings for unclassified employees with retained rights who are subject to an adverse action. Such hearings shall follow usual board procedures, but shall only be held for the purpose of protecting the reputation of the employee. The board may not reverse or modify the adverse action but may submit recommendation to chief operating officer. (4)  Keep minutes of its meetings and such other record as it may deem necessary. (5)  Make investigations pertaining to personnel and administration requested by the mayor or the council or on its own motion. (6)  Establish guidelines for hearing any matters referred thereto by the officials responsible for personnel administration, employees and employee organizations or appointing authorities. (7)  Receive recommendations from the department of human resources and communicate to the mayor its official position with respect thereto, as necessary. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 3, 6-30-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 114-80. - Administrative officer of civil service board.     The commissioner of human resources, shall serve as administrative officer of the civil service board, and shall be responsible for planning the general administration of the civil service system and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by the mayor. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-81. - Personnel problem or action not covered by article.     If any personnel problem or personnel action which is not specifically covered by this article occurs, the mayor or the mayor's designee shall be authorized to resolve such problem or action through the application of this article and in keeping with its intent and the Charter. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-82. - Administration and enforcement.     The commissioner of human resources shall administer and enforce this article, and shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article and the Charter for the administration and enforcement of this article. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-83. - Cooperation with other civil service systems.     In the interest of proper and efficient personnel administration, the facilitation of civil service employment mobility and the maximum utilization of available personnel, the department of human resources shall, where applicable, participate in cooperative, interjurisdictional recruiting, examining, certifying and training. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-84. - Unclassified and classified service. (a)  The civil service system shall be divided into the unclassified service and classified service. (b)  The unclassified service shall consist of the following: (1)  Officers elected by the people and persons appointed to fill vacancies in such elective offices. (2)  Officers and employees specifically exempted by law. (3)  Members of boards, councils or special commissions appointed by the mayor for special purposes; members of boards, councils or commissions created by the council pursuant to section 3-401 of the Charter; and employees of such boards, councils and commissions, unless the council shall provide otherwise for such employees. (4)  All assistants and employees in the department of law. (5)  Any employee in the mayor's/executive offices unless said employee holds a classified status as of March 1, 1998. (6)  Election officials. (7)  Heads of departments appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council, assistants reporting to such department heads, and heads of offices and agencies hired by the appointing authority. (8)  Sworn employees in the departments of police and fire. (9)  Employees of the judicial agencies and the offices of the internal auditor and ethics officer. (10)  All employees of the office of municipal clerk, the offices of councilmembers, the office of the council president, and office of council staff, including but not limited to personnel in the office of research and policy analysis, office of communications and all other administrative support employees reporting to the director of council staff. (11)  Any classified employee who accepts an unclassified position (12)  Any unclassified employee with retained rights who accepts an unclassified position. (13)  Any position funded by grant or other temporary funds. (c)  All positions in the classified service at pay grade 19 and above which are, or become, vacant on or after February 13, 1998, shall be transferred to the unclassified service. Any position in the classified service at pay grade 19 and above which is filled by a temporary employee shall be transferred to the unclassified service. (d)  The classified service shall include all other public officers and employees in the employment service. All appointments, employments, removals, promotions, transfers, layoffs, reinstatements, suspensions and changes in grade or title in the classified service shall be made and permitted only as prescribed by law or under this article and not otherwise. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-41(13-O-1217), § 1, 9-12-13 ; Ord. No. 2013-41(13-O-1217), § 1, 9-12-13 ) 
Sec. 114-85. - Rules and regulations. (a)  Civil service rules and regulations shall be proposed by the mayor and reviewed by the civil service board for the operation of the civil service system which shall provide for the following: (1)  The establishment of eligible registers for appointment and promotion; (2)  The certification, appointment and promotion of eligibles; (3)  A period of probation for appointment or promotion to be made permanent; (4)  Layoffs because of lack of funds or work or changes in duties or organization and the reemployment of persons who resign in good standing or are laid off without fault or delinquency on their part; (5)  The discharge, demotion or suspension of regular employees for cause and hearings and appeals in connection therewith; and (6)  Programs of employee training and development and safety and such other studies and programs as will be conducive to an efficient and successful operation of the civil service system. (b)  Such rules and regulations shall have the force and effect of law at such time as they are adopted by ordinance. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-86. - Extension of classified status. (a)  This section shall constitute an orderly procedure for extending classified status to regular unclassified employees. (b)  In order to acquire the protection, rights and privileges, as provided within the classified service, an unclassified employee transferred to a position in the classified service must be certified. Such status shall be obtained by such employee in the following manner: (1)  An employee with 90 days or more of service, prior to classified service coverage, must be recommended for retention by the appointing authority on the basis that such employee has satisfactorily performed the duties of the position for a period of not less than 90 days prior to the effective date of the classified service coverage and must either possess the minimum qualifications of the position occupied or pass the appropriate qualifying examination for the position occupied. (2)  An employee with less than 90 days of service prior to classified service coverage must compete for the position presently occupied by such employee through an appropriate examination on an open-competitive basis. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-87. - Pay and classification plan. (a)  For the purposes of this article, there shall be maintained at all times a formal system for classifying positions and compensating employees in the City of Atlanta Civil Service System known as the pay and classification plan. (b)  The pay and classification plan shall contain a listing of classifications and the salary structure. Each class of positions shall be assigned to an appropriate pay grade and may be eligible for special pay. (c)  Any amendment to the pay plan by changing a range of the pay grades or by moving a class of positions from one pay grade to another and any amendments to the position classification plan, including the reclassification, creation, abolishment or salary adjustment of a position(s) shall be accompanied by a written statement justifying the reason and need for the proposed action and approved by ordinance. (d)  All payrolls or other compensation for officers and employees in the classified service shall be checked periodically by the commissioner at such time as the commissioner deems appropriate for the proper administration of this article. (e)  No employee within the classified or unclassified service shall be placed on the payroll of the city until the employee has been properly certified by the commissioner. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-69(08-O-1455), § 1, 8-18-08) 
Secs. 114-88—114-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLASSIFICATION PLAN 
Sec. 114-101. - Objective and use. (a)  The classification plan shall constitute a systematic arrangement and inventory of positions in the civil service whereby positions shall be grouped into classes indicative of the range of duties, responsibilities and level of work performed. The plan shall be utilized in order to provide a systematic salary structure which shall be commensurate with the duties of the positions established while being consistent with the fiscal integrity of the city. The classification plan shall be based on job analysis and maintained on a current basis. (b)  Changes to the classification plan proposed in conjunction with and as a part of the mayors proposed annual budget shall be submitted to council for consideration at the same time that the proposed annual budget is submitted. (c)  In addition to the legislation, identified in Subsection (b), a copy of an organization chart for the city department(s) or unit(s) for which the changes are being proposed shall be included as an "Exhibit" to the legislation. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-38(10-O-1241), § 2, 7-15-10) 
Sec. 114-102. - Contents.     The classification plan in civil service shall consist of the following elements: (1)  A grouping of positions into classes so that each position in a class shall require basically the same training, competencies, experience and/or education and be of relative value deserving of the same salary range. (2)  A class title which shall be indicative of the work of the class and any special pay rules which may apply. Such title shall be used for administrative purposes in connection with payroll, budget and other financial and personnel forms and records. No person shall be appointed or promoted to any position in the civil service unless such position possesses a class title in the pay and classification plan. (3)  A written specification for each classification which shall contain a statement describing the nature of the work; the essential functions of the class; examples of typical tasks found in the class; requirements of the class with respect to the minimum necessary knowledge, skills, training, abilities and experience; and any special qualifications and competencies necessary for entrance into the class. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-103. - Administration of plan.     The commissioner of human resources shall have the primary responsibility for the administration and maintenance of the classification plan in civil service. The commissioner of human resources may request assistance from other officials and may delegate authority to staff members of department of human resources in carry out the responsibility. The commissioner of human resources shall periodically review the classification of positions by utilizing job analysis and as needed, recommend to the Chief Operating Officer appropriate amendments to the classification plan, such as new classes, the revisions of existing classes, the removal of existing classes from the plan that are no longer required, etc. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-69(08-O-1455), § 1, 8-18-08) 
Sec. 114-104. - Allocation of position; creation of classes.     Under the civil service classification plan, the commissioner of human resources, after consulting with the department head involved, shall recommend the assignment of a position to one of the classes in the classification plan. If a suitable class does not exist, the commissioner of human resources shall recommend the establishment of a new class and, after the adoption of the new class, shall recommend the assignment of the position to such classification. The establishment of a new position shall not be completed until the commissioner of human resources has approved the classification specification covering the duties, responsibilities and competencies of the proposed position. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-105. - Allocation reviews. (a)  If a department head or an employee has reason to believe that any position in such department head's department has been improperly allocated, such department head or employee may request in writing that the commissioner of human resources review the allocation of the position. (b)  The Commissioner of human resources shall review such position by having a position classification questionnaire completed by- the incumbent, by the supervisor of the position of by the department head. A field study or onsite job audit shall also be made if deemed appropriate. The Commissioner of human resources shall, after considering all of the information obtained, recommend the questioned position be placed in another class or remain in its present class. Recommended changes shall be reviewed by the department of finance for budgetary and financial implications and the recommendations shall be made to the Committee on Finance of the Council for approval. Changes requiring an increase in budget allocation must be adopted by ordinance. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-69(08-O-1455), § 1, 8-18-08) 
Sec. 114-106. - Reclassification of positions. (a)  Established positions in the civil service may be changed from one class to another where the following conditions are found to exist: (1)  Significant changes have occurred in the actual duties and responsibilities. (2)  Such changes in duties and responsibilities are of a permanent nature. (3)  There are new or added elements in the job, rather than changes in the performance of the individual. (b)  Reclassifications shall not be effected where the following conditions are found to exist: (1)  The added duties and responsibilities are minor in nature and would be a logical function of the class. (2)  The added duties and responsibilities are to be performed for a temporary period only. (3)  The primary purpose of the reclassification would be to raise the employee's salary. (c)  All such reclassifications shall be forwarded to the committee on finance of the Council for budgetary and financial implications. Reclassification requests should be accompanied by a written statement justifying the reason and need for the proposed action and approved by ordinance. If the action results in an increase in budget, approval is required by ordinance. (d)  If reclassification of a position should result in the creation of a position in a class possessing a higher grade than that of the original classification, such change of position shall be considered a promotion. The promotional vacancy shall be filled as provided in this article, and the incumbent shall be given the opportunity to compete for the position. Should the incumbent fail the competitive, promotional examination or for some other valid reason not be promoted to fill the vacancy, the commissioner of human resources, with the approval of the employee's department head, may allow the employee to remain in the original position until such employee can, after passing an appropriate examination, be transferred to the same or another class of employment in the same or another department in which a vacancy shall exist. If no such vacancy should exist or if such transfer cannot for good reason be effected, the commissioner of human resources, with the approval of the employee's department head in accordance with this article, may lay off such incumbent or invoke a non-disciplinary demotion to a lower existing vacancy. No examination shall be required if the demotion is made to a lower related classification. (e)  If reclassification of a position should result in the creation of a position in another class possessing the same pay grade as that of the original classification, the position, if vacant, shall be filled as provided in this article. Should there be an incumbent in the position, the incumbent employee shall receive a corresponding change in title without examination, provided that the reclassified position is in the same line and character of work and involves the same basic duties, responsibilities and skills. The incumbent employee of the position so reclassified, shall maintain the same pay grade and salary. Otherwise, the incumbent must pass an appropriate noncompetitive examination in order to continue employment in the reclassified position. If the incumbent employee fails to qualify for the reclassified position or for some other valid reason is not appointed to fill the vacancy, such employee receive a non-disciplinary demotion, as provided for in section 114-128. (f)  If reclassification of a position should result in the creation of a position of a lower class and pay, the incumbent of the position being reclassified shall be notified, and every effort shall be made to transfer the employee to another classified position, which would support the incumbent's classification and level and for which the incumbent would qualify. If such transfer or reassignment cannot be effected, the incumbent shall receive a non-disciplinary demotion, as provided for in section 114-128. (g)  In all cases where a layoff or reclassification downward occurs as a result of the reclassification of a position, the name of the employee affected by the layoff or demotion shall be entered on a priority placement register. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-69(08-O-1455), § 1, 8-18-08) 
Sec. 114-107. - Maintenance of plan. (a)  Under this division, to fill a vacancy, a position description shall be completed by the applicable department head and shall be submitted to the commissioner of human resources for a review of the allocation of the position. The commissioner of human resources may waive such requirement upon determination that no material changes have occurred. (b)  Each time a department or office of the department is permanently or substantially reorganized, the department head shall submit to the commissioner of human resources new class specifications for all affected positions and accompanying organizational chart. (c)  The commissioner of human resources may require department heads and office directors or other employees to submit position descriptions on a periodic basis or at any time the commissioner of human resources shall have reason to believe there has been a change in the duties and responsibilities of one or more positions. (d)  Upon a new class being established, a class specification shall be written and incorporated in the existing classification plan. The class title shall be added to the schematic list of titles. Any class which may be abolished shall be deleted from the classification plan by removing the class title from the schematic list of titles. (e)  Once during every year the commissioner of human resources shall conduct a general review of the classification plan. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-108. - Interpretation of class specifications.     Class specifications are descriptive and not necessarily inclusive of all duties performed. The use of a particular description with respect to duties, qualifications or other factors shall not be held to exclude others of similar kind or quality. Such specifications are intended to indicate the kinds of positions which shall be allocated to the classes established. In a series of classes, such as the police classes, the specifications for all classes should be reviewed as a unit. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-109. - Official copy of plan.     The commissioner of human resources and the municipal clerk shall maintain an official copy of the civil service classification plan. An official copy shall contain a schematic list of class titles with class codes, the salary schedules and all amendments thereto. A copy of the official plan shall be made available for inspection by the public during normal business hours. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-110—114-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PAY PLAN 
Sec. 114-120. - Compensation committee.     There shall be an administrative board known as the compensation committee comprised of the chief operating officer, chief financial officer, commissioner of human resources, president of council (or designee) and one member of council selected by the body. The committee shall review and act on requests for "above-entry" hiring authorizations as provided for herein. (Ord. No. 2010-04(10-O-0225), § 1, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 2012-05(12-O-0212), § 1, 2-29-12) 
Sec. 114-121. - Compensation philosophy.     The City of Atlanta shall establish and maintain a total rewards system, including wages, salaries, benefits, bonus and incentives to attract, retain, develop and value high quality employees at all levels of city government. Such compensation system shall include a pay plan that is published and is directly related to the classification plan. Said compensation system shall support the city's strategies, objectives, and shall be within fiscal limits of the city budget. The compensation program shall include the following principles: (a)  Compensation shall be applied in balance with fairness and equitable treatment of all employees regardless of race, age, gender, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity, and shall be in accordance with equal employment opportunity (EEO) regulations. (b)  Pay plans shall be as competitive as practicable with equity between internal and external peers in like job families, and shall reflect the specific labor markets from which the jobs compete for top talent. (c)  Minimum pay shall be set at a minimum wage to assure that regular employees will have the opportunity to earn an annual salary consistent with a minimum wage of $13.00 per hour beginning July 1, 2017. Beginning July 1, 2018, minimum pay shall be increased at a minimum wage that regular employees shall earn an annual salary consistent with a minimum wage of $14.00 per hour. Beginning July 1, 2019, minimum pay shall be increased at a minimum wage that regular employees shall earn an annual salary consistent with a minimum wage of $15.00 per hour. All pay plans may be adjusted for cost-of-living changes, as determined by the CPI-U-Atlanta, unless specifically waived or modified by council ordinance. The council will prepare and adopt specific standards under which the council will waive the 100 percent COLA as determined by CPI-U-Atlanta. (d)  Pay plans shall be as simple as practical to assure understanding by employees and candidates. (e)  Every five years, or more frequently when so determined, the commissioner of human resources shall assess the need to conduct a market study of benchmark positions to maintain a competitive posture; and shall propose a plan of action, if needed, to bring any positions or classifications into competitive alignment. (f)  Pay and incentives shall be based on performance, and no employee shall be guaranteed compensation just for adding another year to organizational service. (g)  Performance bonuses are discretionary and will only be paid in accordance with established specific guidelines that are set in advance of the intended payment. The criteria under which employees are eligible to receive a bonus; and the specific method in which employees will be selected to be awarded a bonus shall be included in the guidelines. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 5-D, 7-16-13; Ord. No. 2017-31(16-O-1719), § 1, 6-23-17 ; Ord. No. 2019-14(18-O-1470), § 3, 2-12-19 ) 
Sec. 114-122. - Composition.     The pay plan shall set forth the salaries or wages of all classes within the classification plan including minimum, midpoint, and maximum salaries. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-123. - Adoption and amendment of the pay plan. (a)  The mayor and council shall establish by ordinance a pay plan for all classes of positions. This plan shall consist of a series of pay grades with minimum, midpoint and maximum salaries and may be amended by ordinance, subject to the limitations contained in the charter relating to the period during which salary or wage increases may be granted. (b)  The commissioner of human resources shall recommend to the mayor and council the assignment of each class to a salary grade, consistent with the classification plan. (c)  Amendment to the pay plan by changing a grade or grades or by moving a class from one salary grade to another shall be recommended by the commissioner of human resources and approved by ordinance. The mayor and council may amend the plan notwithstanding the recommendations of the commissioner. Until the adoption of a new plan as required by this section, amendments or changes to the pay plans now in effect shall be accomplished in the manner prescribed above. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-124. - Application.     All persons employed by the city shall be paid the salaries or wages as established by the pay plan for the specific job classifications to which the employee is assigned. This may not be classification from which the position is allocated. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-125. - New appointments and starting rates. (a)  Except as hereinafter set forth, and except as may be otherwise provided in these rules and regulations, every person who shall be appointed or elected to any position of regular or part-time employment shall be employed at a salary or wage equal to the minimum amount set forth for the particular classification. Funding for positions must be within the existing budget allocations of the department employing the individual, or otherwise provided by ordinance. (b)  Any exception to the foregoing shall be requested by the appointing authority and approved as set forth below. (1)  Starting salaries of positions at a salary grade 22 and above may be approved by the department head, for new hires up to midpoint of the assigned pay grade, provided that prior budget funding is allocated. (2)  Departmental starting salary requests above the midpoint of the assigned pay shall be submitted to the commissioner of human resources for referral to the compensation committee for consideration as stipulated in section 114-120 of Atlanta City Code. (3)  The mayor shall have authority to hire executive officers, department heads, deputies and equivalent up to the maximum of the assigned pay grade provided that prior budget funding is allocated. (4)  Mayoral starting salary requests for executive officers, department heads, deputies and equivalent above the maximum of the assigned pay grade shall be referred to the compensation committee for consideration as stipulated in section 114-120 of the Atlanta City Code. (5)  The president of city council and city council shall have the authority to hire their respective agency heads up to the maximum of the assigned pay grade provided that prior budget funding is allocated. (6)  Should the mayor, President of Atlanta City Council governing board of the city desire to hire an appointee above the midpoint of the assigned pay grade, an appropriate request should be forwarded to the compensation committee as stipulated in section 114-120 of the Atlanta City Code. (7)  The president of the city council and city council starting salary requests for their respective agency heads above the midpoint of the assigned pay grade shall be referred to the full council in the form of an ordinance for consideration and approval. (8)  The governing boards of the city including the city internal auditor, ethics officer and citizens' review board shall have the authority to hire up to the midpoint of the assigned pay grade provided that prior budget funding is allocated. (9)  Starting salary requests from governing boards of the city above the midpoint of the assigned pay grade shall be referred to the commissioner of human resources for submission to the compensation committee for consideration as stipulated in section 114-120 of the Atlanta City Code. (10)  All starting salary requests from the midpoint and above the assigned pay grade must be accompanied by a written explanation giving justification for the request submitted to the compensation committee for its approval. (11)  Approved action by the compensation committee shall be reported to the city council within five business days. Report should include; 1) a copy of the justification, 2) certification from the finance department that funded has been budgeted and is available for the above entry hiring request and 3) subject position(s) classification title, salary range (including highlighted minimum mid-grade and maximum steps), above entry salary requested and the percentage and numerical difference of the increase above the minimum and mid-point of the salary range. (c)  Any person who shall be appointed to a position of police officer, firefighter or corrections officer shall be employed at a salary or wage equal to the minimum amount set forth for the particular classification, except a newly appointed police officer, firefighter or corrections officer with prior experience as a police officer, firefighter or corrections officer with another nonmilitary governmental entity may be eligible for additional pay for each year of experience as a police officer, firefighter or corrections officer, up to five years of experience. Eligibility under this section shall be conditioned on experience with a governmental entity with equivalent employment standards and practices as the department of police, fire, or corrections. This determination shall be made by the chief of the respective department. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-69(08-O-1455), § 1, 8-18-08; Ord. No. 2010-04(10-O-0225), § 2, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 2012-05(12-O-0212), § 2, 2-29-12) 
Sec. 114-126. - Annual increases. (a)  Each regular employee may receive a salary increase, which shall be based upon performance, and paid once annually for all employees on an effective date authorized by the chief financial officer in conjunction with the commissioner of human resources. To receive such an increase, an employee must attain an evaluation rating of effective or better. If such employee receives a rating of "needs improvement", such employee shall become ineligible for the annual increase and shall remain ineligible for the period in which the "needs improvement" remains. An employee who earns an "effective" performance rating at the end of the improvement period shall be eligible for the annual increase, which shall not be retroactive for the period of "needs improvement" rating. Any employee who receives "unacceptable" rating shall be ineligible for the annual increase until after the next evaluation period, provided an effective performance rating is received. (b)  Newly hired employees may be eligible for a partial salary increase equal to half the value of the effective level if they meet all of the following three conditions by the end of the annual evaluation period: 1) completion of 6 months paid service, 2) successful completion of probation, if subject to a probationary period, and 3) achievement of effective or higher performance evaluation rating. Thereafter, once an employee completes each calendar year of paid service and receives an effective or better rating, such employee may receive a salary increase on the authorized effective date until the employee advances to the maximum salary of the assigned pay grade. Authorized leave with pay shall be credited toward such service. If all or any portion of the annual increase will result in said employee exceeding the maximum of the pay grade, the portion of the increase which exceeds the maximum pay grade may be paid to the employee as a lump sum, one time payment and will not increase the employee's base salary. (c)  Employees may receive an increase in pay based on changes in duties or responsibilities and other qualifying factors which shall not exceed ten percent of their current salary in a given 12-month period. (d)  No salary increase shall be awarded to an eligible employee in any year until after the annual operating budget, containing funds for such increases, is adopted by ordinance. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-127. - Increase in compensation. (a)  Upon promotion. Upon an employee being promoted to a position in a higher class, such employee's salary or wage shall be increased no less than five percent of the current salary or the minimum of the new grade, whichever is greater, or one step if applicable. If such increase exceeds the maximum of the new grade, the employee shall receive the maximum salary of the new grade. No new salary shall exceed the maximum of the new salary grade. Upon promotion, a new probationary period shall commence for employees subject to a probationary period. (b)  Non-disciplinary demotion. Upon an employee's demotion to a position in a lower class for non-disciplinary purposes, the employee shall be compensated in the lower grade at the same salary, or, when applicable, the step that is closest to but not more than the former salary, provided that the employee has been in the position for one year. In the event that such salary does not exist, the employee shall be compensated at a salary or step if applicable, closest to but more than the employee's current salary. If the employee's salary is above the maximum of the pay grade for the lower class, then the employee will receive the maximum salary of the lower grade. An employee demoted to a previously held grade or lower, shall not have a salary reduction below the highest pay rate earned in a lower grade. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2007-46(07-O-1617), § 1, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 114-128. - Compensation on demotion. (a)  Disciplinary demotion. Upon an employee's demotion to a position in a lower class for disciplinary purposes, the employee shall be compensated in the lower grade at the same percentage of midpoint in the current grade applied to the lower grade or step if applicable. In no case shall the salary of the lower grade exceed the maximum. An employee demoted to a lower or previously held grade, shall not have a salary reduction below the highest pay rate earned in a lower grade. (b)  Non-disciplinary demotion. Upon an employee's demotion to a position in a lower class for non-disciplinary purposes, the employee shall be compensated in the lower grade at the same salary, provided that the employee has been in the position for one year. In the event that such salary does not exist, the employee shall be compensated at a salary closest to but more than the employee's current salary. If the employee's salary is above the maximum of the pay grade for the lower class, then the employee will receive the maximum salary of the lower grade. An employee demoted to a previously held grade or lower, shall not have a salary reduction below the highest pay rate earned in a lower grade. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-129. - Compensation on reclassification. (a)  Reclassification upward. An employee in a position that is reclassified to a class in a higher grade shall be compensated as prescribed in section 114-127, compensation upon promotion. (b)  Reclassification downward. Upon an employee's position being reclassified to a class in a lower pay grade, such employee shall be compensated in accordance with section 114-128(b), non-disciplinary demotion and shall be eligible to receive salary increases up to the maximum salary of the lower grade. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-130. - Compensation upon reemployment.     A former employee reemployed under the Civil Service Code, Section 114-363, reemployment, to a position in the civil service may be credited with all former service, for purposes of establishing the employee's starting salary, seniority, and annual (vacation) leave accrual rate, at the recommendation of the appointing authority, and approval of the commissioner of human resources. The appointing authority may compensate a reemployed employee in the same classification or grade at the salary at time of separation, or higher if authorization is provided. If reemployed in a classification higher than that held at separation, the salary is established by the appointing authority, within the authorized level. If reemployed in a lower classification, compensation may be at the salary last held prior to separation provided it does not exceed the maximum of the lower grade. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-131. - Compensation for part-time employment.     Upon the employment of a person on a part-time basis, such person shall receive a salary or wage based upon the time actually employed as related to the regular work period for salary or wage purposes. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-132. - Transfers.     Upon an employee's transfer to another department while retaining the same job classification, such transfer shall not change or affect the salary or wage being received by the employee. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-133. - Overtime. (a)  The head of the finance department shall pay employees for overtime work in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) and other applicable rules and regulation. (b)  Employees within each department who normally perform the same type of work shall receive equal opportunity for overtime work. (c)  The chief financial officer shall provide a report of all overtime paid on a monthly basis to the finance/executive committee. The report shall include the number of overtime hours worked and amount of overtime paid by every city department for each month during the current fiscal year and for the same month in the two prior fiscal years. In addition, the report shall list any employee receiving more than 40 hours per month in overtime from the departments of aviation, corrections, fire rescue, parks, police, public works, and watershed management. A final report of all overtime paid during the current fiscal year shall be provided as part of the department of finance's fiscal condition of the city presentation to begin the annual departmental budget briefings. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2018-38(18-O-1373), § 1, 9-13-18 ) 
Sec. 114-134. - Compensation for temporary work at a higher classification.     An employee shall not receive an increase in salary or wages upon being required to work in a higher position on a temporary, incidental, or emergency basis, for a period of time of 30 work days or less. Upon an employee being required to perform the duties of a higher position for a period of time in excess of 30 work days, such employee shall be given an emergency appointment to the higher position and shall receive the appropriate salary or wages of the higher classification. At the conclusion of such assignment, the wages or salary of the employee shall revert to that which such employee was receiving prior to the employee performing the duties in the higher classification.     The service of an employee in a higher classification, as above provided, shall not affect the eligibility of the employee for normal increases. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-135. - Pay periods.     All employees of the city shall be paid by check or direct deposit on a regular pay period basis, as adopted by ordinance. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-136. - Compensation upon grade change for a classification. (a)  Upon the salary grade for a given class being increased to a higher grade, each employee in the class shall be compensated as set forth in section 114-127, increase in compensation upon promotion. (b)  Upon the salary grade for a given class being decreased to a lower grade, each employee in the class shall be compensated as set forth in section 114-128(b), compensation on demotion, non-disciplinary demotion. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-137. - Compensation upon reduction in force.     Upon an employee's reassignment to a position in a lower pay grade as a result of a reduction in force, such employee shall be compensated in accordance with section 114-128(b), compensation on non-disciplinary demotion. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-138. - Payment of relocation expenses.     A department head may request authorization to pay a newly hired executive or managerial employee's relocation expenses associated with a move from another state, in an amount not to exceed ten percent of the maximum salary authorized for the position. The chief operation officer, the chief financial officer and the commissioner of human resources must approve such relocation expense reimbursement. Relocation expenses as provided herein shall only be paid to newly hired persons who establish domicile within the corporate boundaries of the city. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-139. - Retention bonus.     Sworn police officers are eligible for a $3,000.00 retention incentive payment on their fifth anniversary as a sworn police officer with the city. Officers who have attained five or more years of service prior to the effective date of this subsection [March 27, 2007] shall not be eligible to receive this payment. (1)  Officers who apply for the retention incentive payment must be in good standing, have a current "satisfactory", "effective" or higher evaluation and must execute an agreement to remain with the city's police department for an additional three years. (2)  An officer who has received a retention incentive payment and voluntarily or involuntarily leaves the employment of the police department prior to completion of three years following such agreement shall be responsible for repayment as outlined below: a.  Leaves within the first year after the date of the agreement; repay $3,000.00 b.  Leaves after the first year but prior to the end of the second year after the date of the agreement; repay $2,000.00 c.  Leaves after the second year but prior to the end of the third year after the date of the agreement; repay $1,000.00 (3)  Should the officer fail or refuse to remit the payment as set forth in "(2)" above, such funds may be withheld or deducted from the officer's pension refund as provided in section 6-222(s) of the Related Laws section of the Charter and Code of the city. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-140. - Bilingual incentive pay.     Employees in the classifications listed in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) below may be eligible to receive bilingual incentive pay upon passing an authorized and approved Spanish proficiency exam. The commissioner of human resources, or designee, shall be responsible for the authorization and approval of the Spanish Proficiency assessment. Employees certified as proficient in Spanish must retest biennially to maintain the incentive pay. If an employee does not pass the biennial assessment, the employee shall return to the salary held prior to being certified as proficient in Spanish; and such employee shall not lose any other merit pay, COLAs or any increase realized during the bilingual certification period. The percentage of increase shall be calculated or determined as follows: (a)  Sworn public safety personnel in the Atlanta Police Department may receive a two percent increase in salary for the ranks of P1. to P6. (b)  Sworn public safety personnel in Atlanta Fire and Rescue Department may receive a two percent increase in salary for the ranks of F12; F14; F17; F21 and F24. (c)  Sworn public safety personnel in the department of corrections may receive a two percent increase in salary for the ranks of PS12; PS14; PS17; and PS21. (d)  Employees in the classifications of 911 operator; communications dispatcher; communications dispatcher, senior; communications dispatcher supervisors and E911 shift managers may receive a two percent increase in salary.     The bilingual incentive pay shall terminate if the employee leaves the authorized classifications listed in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d). (Ord. No. 2013-13(13-O-0643), § 1, 5-15-13; Ord. No. 2015-46(15-O-1384), §§ 1, 2, 9-30-15 ) 
Sec. 114-141. - Compensation upon recognized special certification. (1)  Upon obtaining a recognized specialized certification, a sworn member of police or fire shall be entitled to receive a salary increase of three percent. The chief of police, the chief of fire and the chief of corrections shall have discretion to determine which specialized certifications are recognized for each respective department. The chief of police and the chief of fire will submit a list of all professional certifications that will have a pay implication to the commissioner of human resources for approval at the beginning of each fiscal year. (2)  Upon obtaining a promotion to a higher rank, a sworn member of police or fire shall be entitled to receive a salary increase of at least five percent, with a maximum of ten percent. ( Ord. No. 2015-28(15-O-1196), § 1, 6-24-15 ) 
Sec. 114-142. - Longevity incentive bonus. (1)  A longevity bonus is an incentive used to recognize and reward long-term service of employees to the city. All eligible employees of the city shall be eligible for an annual lump sum longevity bonus the month after their anniversary month of employment. (2)  Employees that have been employed with the city for less than ten years shall not be eligible for any longevity payment. Any person that is reemployed with the city shall surrender any eligibility as it relates to a longevity bonus, and their length of service shall commence with the date of rehire. (3)  The pay rate provided to employees shall read as follows: Years of Total Service LongevityPay Rate 10 but less than 15 years $200.00 15 but less than 20 years $350.00 20 but less than 25 years $500.00 25 or more years $750.00  ( Ord. No. 2015-25(15-O-1195), § 1, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 114-143. - Performance bonus. (a)  The mayor, city council, and president of council are granted the authority to pay their respective employees an annual performance bonus as follows: (1)  The payment of bonuses shall be paid from any excess funds in the operating budget allocated to that department and shall be prospective. (2)  The mayor or designee, council members, and council president shall establish specific guidelines and eligibility criteria to govern the award of bonuses to their respective employees that is based upon a defined benefit to the public for which the bonuses may be awarded. Once the guidelines are established, the mayor or designee, each council member, and the council president shall have the discretion to determine the actual awarding of bonuses and shall disseminate such guidelines to their respective employees in advance of the time frame that any yearly performance or compensation review for such employees takes place. a.  The guidelines should include, but are not limited to, the following: (1) the criteria under which employees are eligible to receive a bonus; and (2) the specific method in which employees will be selected to be awarded a bonus. b.  With respect to the employees of the executive branch, performance bonuses may only be awarded to regular full-time city employees. (3)  No bonus may be awarded to an employee for merely satisfactorily performing the assigned duties that are expected in return for the employee's regular salary. Rather, bonuses may be awarded for exceptional or exemplary service rendered by an employee for service that is outside of and in addition to the normal duties and responsibilities of his or her position. (4)  The performance bonus shall not be considered in determining an employee's rate of pay or award of overtime. (5)  No employee may receive more than one performance bonus per year, and no employee may receive a performance bonus payment in a gross amount above ten percent of the employee's annual base salary. Such performance bonuses shall be paid in accordance with normal payroll practices, including appropriate payroll deductions. (6)  Prior to the award of performance bonuses in a specific department, the chief financial officer shall certify that sufficient funds are available for that department. (7)  The chief financial officer shall prepare an annual report of all bonus payments. (8)  This performance bonus shall not be considered in computing an employee's pension entitlement. (9)  This section is intended to govern the payment of performance bonuses and shall not impact other bonuses otherwise expressly authorized. ( Ord. No. 2019-14(18-O-1470), § 1, 2-12-19 ) 
Secs. 114-144—114-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CERTIFICATION OF PAYROLLS 
Sec. 114-151. - Payroll changes.     No payroll change in the civil service shall take effect until appropriate documentation and approval is received by commissioner of human resources. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-152. - Review of payrolls. (a)  The commissioner of human resources shall be supplied with the necessary payroll data and any other information necessary in order to examine names, salaries, dates of appointment, etc., so as to enable the commissioner of human resources to determine that each employee on a given payroll has been properly appointed and that all actions listed have been taken in accordance with this article. (b)  The chief financial officer shall strike from the payroll the name of any person upon detection of an irregularity with respect to such person and shall notify the disbursing officer and the department head involved. (c)  After the chief financial officer has examined a given payroll, corrected irregularities and determined that all employees contained thereon have been appointed in accordance with this article, the payroll data shall be transmitted to the department of finance. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-153. - Recovery of salaries improperly paid.     Any person, officer or employee not appointed in accordance with this article or with pertinent ordinances of the city and who shall receive the payment of salary shall be liable to the city for the repayment of such amounts received. The salary of any employee which has been incorrectly computed shall be recomputed to the correct amount, and any overpayment from such incorrect computation shall be repaid by the employee over a period of time determined by the chief financial officer and any underpayment from such incorrect computation shall be paid to such employee on the next regular pay period following such correct computation. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-154—114-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND NONDISCRIMINATION 
Sec. 114-166. - Policy. (a)  It shall be the policy of the city to guarantee equal opportunity to all applicants and to all employees. Discrimination against any person in recruitment, examination, appointment, training, promotion, retention, discipline or any other aspect of personnel administration because of political or religious opinions or affiliations or because of race, color, religion, age, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, or other nonmerit factors shall be prohibited. Discrimination on the basis of age, sex or disability shall be prohibited, except where specific age, sex or physical requirements constitute a bona fide occupational qualification necessary to proper and efficient administration. (b)  The personnel operations, this article and other civil service rules and regulations shall be administered in such manner as to comply fully with title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended the Equal Opportunity Act of 1972 and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967. (c)  All city departments, agencies and offices shall make reasonable accommodations to facilitate the gainful employment of otherwise qualified persons with disabilities pursuant to federal statutes, and other city regulations. (d)  It shall further be the policy of the city, when disabled applicants are available for employment, to review the vacant positions in conjunction with the department of human resources to determine the feasibility of restructuring those jobs to accommodate disabled job prospects. Persons with authority to hire shall be responsible for providing reasonable accommodations to employ the disabled, including job altering, if necessary, reassigning duties and responsibilities and making physical modifications to facilities, equipment and the job station. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 5-E, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 114-167. - Publicity.     The city personnel policy shall make available information about job opportunities and a continuing program shall be conducted to make the equal employment practices of the city well known. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-168. - Affirmative action.     Equal employment opportunity shall be ensured through affirmative action initiatives. The diversity manager shall be responsible for overall administration of affirmative action initiatives and shall report to the commissioner of human resources. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-169. - Appeals based on alleged discrimination.     Any applicant or employee alleging discrimination in any personnel action shall have the right to consult with the equal employment opportunity coordinator of such employee's department or of the applicant's proposed department and with the diversity manager. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-170—114-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RECRUITMENT AND JOB APPLICATIONS 
Sec. 114-181. - Recruitment. (a)  Recruitment of candidates for positions in the civil service shall be carried out through appropriate media on a timely basis so as to ensure that all segments of the public have the opportunity to apply and be considered for such positions. (b)  Announcements of vacant positions and vacancy lists may be provided to media outlets, including those known to reach minority groups, with a request for publicity based on public service. Vacancy lists and announcements may also be furnished to the state employment services. (c)  Applicants shall be recruited on the basis of the training and experience requirements as set forth in the class specifications. (d)  All publicity shall indicate that the city is an equal opportunity employer. (e)  Individuals shall be recruited from a geographic area as wide as is necessary to ensure obtaining the best qualified candidates for the various types of positions. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-182. - Announcement of vacant positions. (a)  All vacancies in the classified service not being filled by transfer or reemployment shall be publicized by posting announcements in the department of human resources, on official department bulletin boards and in other places and by such other means as the commissioner of human resources may deem advisable. Such announcements shall specify the following: (1)  Class title and salary of the position to be filled; (2)  Qualification requirements; (3)  Manner of making application; (4)  Opening and closing date for receipt of application; (5)  Notice of written or oral examinations if required for the positions; and (6)  Such other pertinent information as the commissioner of human resources may determine. (b)  When there is an urgent need for eligible candidates and past experience or knowledge of labor market conditions indicates a probable scarcity of eligible candidates, applicants may be examined and certified as received, provided that all qualified persons applying have the opportunity for consideration for appointment. Notice of continuous announcements shall be posted on the appropriate bulletin boards and advertised periodically. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-183. - Filing application. (a)  All applications for positions in the civil service shall be made in a standard format prescribed by the commissioner of human resources and within the time limit established in the announcement. Such format may detail training, experience and other pertinent information. As a result of a single application, a candidate may be considered for all classes of positions for which such candidate is qualified. (b)  All applicants shall attest to the truth of all statements contained in the application form. (c)  No individual shall be denied the right of filing an application for employment in the city civil service. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-184. - Employment requirements. (a)  All persons hired into positions in the civil service shall meet the minimum qualification requirements as listed in the classification specification or otherwise determined by the commissioner of human resources. Such requirements may include but shall not be limited to the following factors: experience, education and physical condition where physical requirements constitute a bona fide occupational qualification. (b)  For education to be considered, accreditation must be recognized by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, American Council on Education or other governmental accrediting agency. (c)  Applicants appointed to sworn public safety positions shall be required, as a condition of employment, to sign a wavier that allows criminal background checks every two years without reasonable suspicion. (d)  For positions of trust a criminal background check and credit history may be required. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-185. - Fingerprinting and physical examination required of prospective officers and employees.     No person shall be eligible to become an officer or employee of the city, other than a temporary employee, until such person has, if requested by the city, submitted to fingerprinting and has been examined as to physical fitness. This section, however, shall not apply to elected officials and members of various boards and commissions. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-186. - Rejection of applications. (a)  The commissioner of human resources may reject any application or applicant for the civil service, upon determining that any one or more of the following conditions exist: (1)  The application was not received on or before the closing date established for receiving applications. (2)  The application was incomplete or not filed in the prescribed format. (3)  The applicant did not possess one or more of the requirements as specified in the public announcement. (4)  The applicant is physically or mentally unfit to perform the required duties of the positions to which the applicant seeks employment. (5)  The applicant tested positive for illegal substances or otherwise demonstrates excessive current use of alcohol. (6)  The applicant has made a false statement of a material fact, perpetrated a fraud or attempted to deceive in the application of the applicant or in attempting to secure appointment. (7)  The applicant was previously employed by the city and was dismissed for cause, resigned not in good standing, resigned while under investigation for city, state or federal law violations, or is not otherwise eligible for reemployment by the city. (8)  The applicant failed to meet the hiring criteria of applicable employment laws, other such regulations. (b)  Whenever an application or an applicant is rejected, notice of such rejection and the reason therefore shall be, upon request, furnished to the applicant by the commissioner of human resources. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-187. - Postponement or cancellation of examinations.     Any examination may be postponed or canceled at the direction of the commissioner of human resources. Notification of the postponement or cancellation and the reasons for the action shall be provided. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-188. - Preemployment inquiries. (a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Arrest records means records of arrest for a crime not followed by a conviction.     Conviction means a conviction for a felony or two or more misdemeanors for which a jail sentence may be imposed.     Crime means a felony or two or more misdemeanors for which a jail sentence may be imposed.     Criminal records means records of a conviction for a felony or two or more misdemeanors for which a jail sentence may be imposed.     Employment history means a chronological listing of work history that is verifiable and shall include employer, dates of employment, job title, duties and responsibilities.     Job related and job relatedness mean that relationship which reasonably can be inferred to exist between a specific crime and a particular job because of: (1)  The nature and seriousness of the crime for which the individual was convicted; (2)  The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity and fitness reasonably required to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the job; (3)  The increased opportunity which such a job will afford for commission of the same or similar criminal behavior; (4)  The age of the applicant at the commission of the crime, along with the length of time between conviction and job application; and (5)  Recent employment records and other evidence of rehabilitation. (b)  A fingerprint record may be required of applicants for the civil service in order to determine whether an applicant possesses a criminal record. (c)  Past arrest records shall not constitute the sole basis for a refusal to employ an applicant. (d)  Criminal records of conviction may be used as a basis for refusal to employ where there exists a manifest job relatedness between a crime and a position sought. (e)  Applicants for the employment within the departments of police, fire and corrections shall be excluded from subsections (c) and (d) of this section. (f)  The commissioner of human resources may reject any application or applicant where such applicant has been convicted of a crime which is job related to the position of employment sought. Applicants having been convicted of other crimes will be considered on an individual basis, taking into consideration the position involved, the crime for which convicted and evidence of rehabilitation. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-189. - Physical examinations. (a)  Any prospective employee for the civil service shall be required to undergo a physical examination, which shall include a test for illegal drugs, by an examining physician to be approved by the commissioner of human resources. Temporary employees may be required to undergo such physical examination at the discretion of the appointing authority. (b)  Prospective employees hired in a temporary position shall be required to undergo a test for illegal drugs by an examining physician to be approved by the commissioner of human resources. If the initial results are positive, a second test, using other test procedures with a higher incidence of reliability, will be conducted. A test result will not be considered positive for the purposes of this section unless both types of tests result in positive readings for drug use. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-190. - Supervision of or by family member (nepotism).     No person shall be employed in a position in the civil service in which such person directly supervises or is directly supervised by a member of such person's immediate family. The term "immediate family" includes father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, spouse, in-laws or domestic partner. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-191—114-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - EXAMINATIONS 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 
Sec. 114-201. - Policy.     Selection for entrance to the classified service through open competition shall be the policy of the city. The selection process will maximize reliability, objectivity and validity through a practical assessment of applicant attributes necessary for successful job performance and career development. To facilitate employment of disadvantaged and disabled persons in aide or similar positions, competition may be limited to such individuals. Appointments to the classified service shall be made on the basis of merit by selection from among the highest available eligibles on appropriate registers. When, in the best interest of the city, it is determined to fill a position by promotion, consideration will be given to the eligible regular employees in the department or in the classified service, and the selection will be based upon demonstrated capacity, quality and length of service. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-202. - Open competitive examinations.     Open competitive examinations for initial appointments to the classified service shall be prepared and conducted by or under the direction of the commissioner of human resources. Examinations may be assembled or unassembled and may include but shall not be limited to rating of training and experience; written, oral, physical or performance tests; or any combination of these, as determined by the commissioner of human resources after consultation with the department head. The examination process may take into consideration such factors as education, experience, knowledge, skill or any other qualifications which are job related and may be applied equitably and which in the judgment of the commissioner of human resources after consultation with the department head may enter into the determination of relative fitness of applicants. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-203. - Rating system     Civil service applicants who meet the announced minimum and/or an acceptable score on a job related skills test are deemed qualified. If the applicants have outstanding training and experience, they are assigned to the highest category. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-204. - Fraudulent conduct or false statements by applicant.     Fraudulent conduct or false statements by an applicant or by others with such applicant's knowledge in any application or examination shall be cause for the exclusion of such applicant from an examination, for the removal of such applicant's name from all eligible registers or for the discharge from the service after certification of such applicant. Applicants or employees coming under any of such categories or employees who have resigned while not in good standing with their department or employees under suspension shall be disqualified from taking any further examination. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-205. - Restriction of participation in the evaluation process.     No employee of the department of human resources may directly participate in the rating of an examination of a relative, either by blood or marriage, of a roommate or of anyone in the employee's household. Such participation in the rating of such an individual shall constitute grounds for dismissal of that employee. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-206. - Method of rating. (a)  Under this division, appropriate scientific techniques and procedures, based on merit principles, shall be used in rating the results of examinations and in determining the relative ratings of the competitors. Applications shall be rated and grouped accordingly: highly qualified and qualified. The rating criteria shall be developed by the department of human resources in consultation with the requesting department. The examination shall represent a proper balance between the specialized knowledge of the position requirements possessed by the requesting department and the specialized knowledge of regulatory requirements and testing methods possessed by the department of human resources. (b)  For all examinations, whether by written test or by evaluation of training and experience or by both, the minimum performance or requirements, by which eligibility is achieved, shall be established by the department of human resources. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-207. - Veteran's preference. (a)  Any veteran who has served on active duty as a member of the armed forces of the United States for a period of more than 180 days, not counting service under an initial period of active duty for training under the six months reserve or National Guard program, any portion of which service occurred during a period of armed conflict in which any branch of the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise, and who was honorably discharged there from shall, upon submitting documentary proof of such discharge, be entitled to have added to such person's minimum qualifying score on an open competitive examination veteran's preference points, noncumulative, as set forth in this section. (b)  For purposes of this section, the term "armed conflict" includes any military intervention beyond the limits of the United States as well as any confrontation of the armed forces of the United States with foreign nationals in which actual hostilities erupt. (c)  The rank order of such veteran among other eligibles shall be determined on the basis of their augmented rating. Such preference shall be allowed on entrance examinations and in reinstatement, reemployment or retention, but shall not be allowed on promotional examinations. Points shall be allowed as follows: (1)  Such veteran shall be entitled to have five points added to the earned rating of such veteran. (2)  Such veteran who has at least ten percent service-connected disability, as rated and certified by the Veterans' Administration, shall be entitled to have ten points added to the earned rating of such veteran. (3)  The unmarried spouse of any deceased veteran shall be entitled to have ten points added to the earned ratings of such unmarried spouse. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-208. - Inspection of papers. (a)  Under this division, any applicant, during a period of 30 days subsequent to the establishment of the eligible list, shall be permitted to make one inspection of such applicant's examination papers and other pertinent documents. Such examination papers shall not be subject to inspection by the general public. A manifest error in rating a test or in test procedure shall be corrected if called to the attention of the commissioner of human resources within the inspection period. Such corrections shall not invalidate any appointment previously made from such a list. (b)  The applicant, when making the inspection as provided in subsection (a) of this section, shall make such inspection at the department of human resources during regular business hours and under conditions to ensure that the applicant has no opportunity to make any changes on the examination or answer sheets, that no opportunity is afforded to copy any test material or answers and that there is no exposure of the examination material beyond that which normally would occur when the examination was administered to the applicant. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-209. - Review or appeal of ratings. (a)  Policy. Original examination ratings by the department of human resources shall be subject to review or appeal upon an examinee presenting in writing to the commissioner of human resources sufficient facts to justify the contention that the examinee's examination was incorrectly rated. (b)  Basis of review or appeal. The examinee, desiring such review or appeal, shall indicate generally the manner in which the original decision was improper, the factors which were not credited or not given proper credit and any other pertinent information which would support the review or appeal and which would enable a reevaluation of the rating. (c)  Review process. (1)  Review of a rating shall not be made by the person making the original rating decision. The commissioner of human resources shall also review the rating prior to notifying the examinee of the decision by the department of human resources concerning the review. (2)  Requests for review of eligible ratings may be made at any time during the life of the register (list of eligibles). Request for review of ineligible ratings shall be made within six months from the date of registration or ineligibility. (3)  Should the review reveal that the original rating was correct, the applicant shall be informed in writing that such rating has been reviewed and that the rating remains unchanged. (4)  Examinees, requesting review of the results of examinations other than written examinations, may have explained to them the reasons why various blocks of their experience have been considered not to qualify or why they were assigned a specific rating. (5)  If, after review by the commissioner of human resources, an examinee remains dissatisfied with the assigned rating, such examinee may appeal in writing to the civil service board within 30 days of the date of the review by the commissioner of human resources. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-210. - Confidentiality of examination material.     Under this division, all application, examination and test material shall be regarded as privileged and confidential and shall not be available for public inspection. Such material shall be made available to the civil service board when pertinent in a hearing on appeal. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-211. - Retention of examination records.     Under this division, all examination records shall be retained for a period of two years or for the length of time required by federal, state or city regulations, whichever is greater. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-212. - Promotional examinations. (a)  Promotions in the civil service may be made on a competitive, limited competitive or noncompetitive basis. (b)  Promotions may be made when qualified eligibles are available and when it is determined that it is in the best interest of the city to fill vacancies by internal promotions. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as prohibiting the filling of any position by open competition. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-213—114-225. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Police, Fire and Corrections Promotions 
Sec. 114-226. - Short title.     This subdivision shall be known and may be cited as the Police, Fire and Corrections Promotional Rules and Regulations. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-227. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Appointing authority means, for all positions in the department of police, the police chief; for all positions in the department of fire, the fire chief; and for all positions in the department of corrections, the corrections chief.     Appointing rule means the selection for promotion of an individual from among a group with the highest possible rating for the rank.     Atlanta Police Leadership Institute means a program of the Atlanta Police Department focused on developing an Atlanta Police Department sworn employee's leadership skills through the provision of advanced law enforcement leadership training and employee development opportunities throughout a sworn employee's progression through the ranks of the Atlanta Police Department.     Commissioner means the commissioner of human resources.     Discretionary ranks means ranks to which appointments are not controlled by this subdivision and to which appointments can be made at the discretion of the police chief, fire chief and corrections chief, respectively.     Eligible means a sworn employee who meets requirements for a rank and whose name is on an eligible list.     Eligible list means a list of the names of employees who have competed for a rank of employment and are qualified to be appointed, listed in order according to the results of the examination process.     Examination means selection procedures used to determine the relative qualifications of applicants for promotion.     Minimum qualifications means the requirements established in the rank specification for experience and demonstration of the necessary proficiencies in a lower rank in order to compete for promotion.     Probationary employee means an employee who has been appointed to a rank from an eligible list but has not successfully completed a 12-month probationary period in the rank.     Probationary period means a period of 12 months following a promotional appointment during which the appointing authority, in consultation with designated subordinate commanders, determines whether or not the probationary employee has the requisite knowledge, skills and abilities necessary to perform the work behaviors of the rank at an acceptable level. The probationary period is considered a noncompetitive part of the examination for the rank.     Rank means a group of positions which have similar duties and responsibilities, require similar qualifications, can be designated by a single title indicative of the level of responsibility of the positions and for which the same schedule of pay is applicable.     Rank specification means a written document based upon an applicable job analysis which shall include but not be limited to descriptions of the responsibilities and work of the rank; a description of the critical work behaviors of the rank and the knowledge, skills and abilities necessary for the performance of such work behaviors; and the minimum qualifications necessary in order to compete for the rank.     Status means the condition of a sworn member who has acquired a right to a rank in the manner established by this subdivision and by the overall provision of the labor relations ordinances and this article, which condition is retained by a probationary employee in such employee's lower rank unless the probationary period for the new rank is completed successfully and status in the new rank is gained. Sworn employees who fail their probationary period shall be returned to a position in their rank in which they have continued to have status during the probationary evaluation portion of the examination.     Sworn member means an employee in the department of police or department of fire, as established by the definition of the unclassified service contained in section 114-84, or an employee in the department of corrections who is certified as a detention officer by the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Council (POST) and occupies a designated sworn position. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2015-19(15-O-1172), § 3, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 114-228. - Purpose.     This subdivision sets forth the rules and procedures to be followed in making promotional decisions within the departments of police, fire, and corrections. The rules and procedures are designed to establish a promotional system for the departments that provides for the selection of superior officers based solely upon merit and fitness for promotion, as ascertained by job related and valid selection procedures developed in accordance with the governing legal guidelines and appropriate professional standards. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-229. - Applicability.     This subdivision shall apply to promotions to the supervisory and mid-management ranks of sergeant and lieutenant in the department of police, lieutenant and captain in the department of fire, and lieutenant in the department of corrections. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 4, 6-30-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 2011-09(11-O-0316), § 2, 3-30-11) 
Sec. 114-230. - Status of present sworn members. (a)  Sworn members in the nondiscretionary ranks of police officer, sergeant, lieutenant and captain in the department of police and firefighter, lieutenant and captain in the department of fire, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subdivision derives [March 27, 2007] and sworn members in the nondiscretionary ranks of corrections officer, lieutenant and captain in the department of corrections on the amended date of the ordinance from which this subdivision derives [June 15, 1999] shall be given status in the nondiscretionary rank they hold as of that date. Sworn members of the department holding discretionary ranks on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subdivision derives, or the amended date as applicable, shall be given status in the non-discretionary rank they held at the time they were appointed to their first discretionary rank. (b)  Effective July 1, 2010, the rank of police captain was reclassified as a discretionary rank. (c)  Effective January 20, 2011, the rank of corrections captain was reclassified as a discretionary rank. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 5, 6-30-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 2011-09(11-O-0316), § 3, 3-30-11) 
Sec. 114-231. - Amendments.     Amendments to this subdivision may be recommended to the council by the commissioner of human resources, police chief, fire chief or corrections chief or initiated by the council. In determining these recommendations, hearings may be held, at which time both proponents and opponents of proposed amendments can be heard. Notice of any hearing shall be posted by the police chief, fire chief, and corrections chief at least two weeks in advance of such hearing at all permanent installations of the department of police, department of fire, and department of corrections in such a manner as to ensure that notice is readily accessible to everyone in the respective departments. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-232. - Creation of the rank specification.     The commissioner of human resources, in conjunction with the appointing authority, shall create a separate document for each rank covered by this subdivision. The document shall be known as the rank specification and shall be approved by the respective appointing authority. A rank specification shall not be inconsistent with the written class specification developed by the commissioner of human resources in compliance with division 2 of this article; however, the rank specification shall go beyond the written class specification in defining the work behaviors of the rank and the knowledge, skills and abilities required to perform those work behaviors as may be required in the development of the content of valid examinations, in that the written class specification is primarily a classification and pay document, while the rank specification is primarily an examination document. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-233. - Amendments to the rank specification.     Under this subdivision, prior to the announcement of an examination process for a rank, the commissioner of human resources, in conjunction with the appointing authority, shall thoroughly review the rank specification and make any amendments to the rank specification deemed appropriate. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-234. - Examination announcement.     The commissioner of human resources, in conjunction with the applicable appointing authority under this subdivision, will determine all eligible candidates for each examination. The commissioner shall give notice of each examination at least 120 days in advance of the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination. The appointing authority shall post a notice thereof in all permanent facilities of the applicable department. The announcement shall state the rank for which the examination is being held, the official announcement posting date, the last date and manner for making application for admission to the examination, the examination parts to be used in the competition and the weights for each part, the study lists and any other information considered pertinent and useful. The rank specification in effect at the time an examination procedure is announced shall be provided to all eligible candidates along with the examination announcement. A copy of the current rank specification shall also be posted with the announcement in each permanent facility of the applicable departments. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-235. - Filing of applications.     All sworn members who wish to apply for a promotional examination under this subdivision must file a written application on the form prescribed by the commissioner of human resources within 30 days of the date the announcement is officially posted. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-236. - Minimum qualifications to compete. (a)  The rank specifications defined in section 114-227 shall designate the lower rank from which promotions can be made, provided that: (1)  To be eligible to compete for the rank of fire lieutenant, an applicant must have had at least five years' continuous service as a sworn member with the fire department immediately prior to the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination. To be eligible to compete for the rank of corrections lieutenant, an applicant must have had at least five years' continuous service as a sworn member with the corrections department immediately prior to the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination. To be eligible to compete for the rank of police sergeant, an applicant must have had at least five years' continuous service as a sworn member with the department of police immediately prior to the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination. (2)  To be eligible to compete for all nondiscretionary ranks above police sergeant, fire lieutenant, the sworn member must have had at least two years' continuous service in the appropriate city department, immediately prior to the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination, in a lower rank from which promotions can be made, as set forth in the rank specifications. (b)  The years of continuous service needed to be eligible to compete can be achieved by service either in the nondiscretionary ranks, as set forth in the rank specification or in a discretionary rank, as long as the total service equals or exceeds the requisite minimum number of years to compete and the time in the discretionary rank is being served immediately prior to the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination. (c)  A sworn member holding a discretionary rank who wishes to compete in an examination shall be eligible to take an examination only for the next highest rank above the nondiscretionary rank in which such sworn member holds status. (d)  In addition to the requirements contained in this section, a sworn member of the department of police holding either a discretionary or non-discretionary rank, who wishes to compete in an examination, must successfully complete the Atlanta Police Leadership Institute's leadership development program prior to the application period for an examination process. It shall be the duty of the police chief to issue administrative regulations governing the Atlanta Police Leadership Institute. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2007-46(07-O-1617), § 2 8-28-07; Ord. No. 2011-09(11-O-0316), § 4, 3-30-11; Ord. No. 2011-23(11-O-0939), § 2, 6-29-11; Ord. No. 2011-36(11-O-1141), § 1, 8-24-11; Ord. No. 2012-07(12-O-0279), § 1, 3-14-12; Ord. No. 2015-19(15-O-1172), § 4, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 114-237. - Disqualification from examination process.     The commissioner of human resources shall disqualify a sworn member from an examination process under this subdivision when the commissioner has determined that: (1)  The application was not filed within the period specified by the examination announcement; (2)  The sworn member lacks the required length of continuous service at a lower rank necessary to be eligible to compete; (3)  The sworn member, after sufficient and proper notification, did not properly appear at the time and place designated for each part of the examination; (4)  The sworn member has been suspended five or more days, whether consecutive or not, for violation of the rules and regulations of the department of police, fire, or corrections within 24 months of the last date for filing applications, and all administrative appeals relating to such suspension have been adjudicated. Should the commissioner of human resources disqualify a sworn member, written notification of the reasons for that action shall be given to the sworn member by the commissioner no later than 30 days before the first competitive part is scheduled or five days before the next competitive part is scheduled in the case of disqualification under subsection (3) of this section. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-238. - Examinations.     All promotions to ranks covered by this subdivision shall be made in accordance with the relative merit and fitness of the sworn members competing. Merit and fitness shall be ascertained by competitive examinations. All examinations and examination parts shall be fair, impartial and developed in accordance with professional standards and legal guidelines and shall relate to those matters which will test fairly the relative capacities and fitness of the sworn members to discharge efficiently the duties of the rank to be filled. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-239. - Concealment of identity.     The identity of every sworn member taking a written test under this subdivision shall be concealed by the use of a numbered identification system. The identity of any candidate shall not be revealed until all written test papers have been scored and the minimum passing score set in accordance with this subdivision. Any sworn member whose written test paper bears the member's name or any other identifying mark or any sworn member who reveals an identification number to the appointing authority or to any employee of the department of police, fire or corrections shall be disqualified from further competition and shall be so notified. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-240. - Rating of examination parts.     Under this subdivision, appropriate scientific techniques, developed in accordance with professional testing standards, shall be used in rating the results of all examination parts and interpreting the relative ratings of the competitors. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-241. - Minimum passing score.     Under this subdivision, in order for the name of a sworn member to appear on an eligible list, the sworn member must pass each part of the examination. Each sworn member who fails to attain the minimum passing score on any part of the examination shall be considered to have failed the examination and shall not be eligible to compete in any further part of the examination or to attain a rank on the eligible list. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-242. - Determining minimum passing score.     A professional in test development shall determine the minimum passing score on any written multiple-choice test used as part of an examination under this subdivision. The determination will be based on appropriate scientific and professional procedures and will be reported to the commissioner of human resources. The commissioner of human resources, in conjunction with the appropriate appointing authority, shall approve the minimum passing score and shall do so before the identity of any competitor is known. The minimum passing score on formal, structured, oral interviews or other separately scored assessment exercises shall be defined by the rating scale used. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-243. - Weights of examination parts.     If the examination process under this subdivision has more than one competitive part, the official announcement shall state the weight to be assigned to each part. The weights shall be stated as percentages and the total weight of all parts of an examination process shall equal 100 percent. Every candidate passing all parts of the examination process shall have the final score computed in accordance with these weights and in accordance with appropriate scientific procedures so that the stated weights are accurately reflected. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-244. - Rank order on the eligible list.     The order of names of passing candidates on the eligible list shall be determined by the final examination score computed as set forth in section 114-241. Final examination scores will be rounded off to three decimal points. If, thereafter, a tie still exists it will remain unbroken. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-245. - Notification of results.     A sworn member who competes in any part of an examination under this subdivision shall be given written notice of the results of each part of the entire examination. The notice shall include the sworn member's score for each part, and, if the member passes, the member's rank on the eligible list shall be given after the eligible list is established. Sworn members who fail an examination part shall be notified of that fact, along with their score, before the next examination part is administered. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-246. - Eligible list.     The fire, police and corrections chiefs shall maintain an active eligible list for all ranks covered by this subdivision. Each list shall contain the names of those candidates who passed the entire examination process and each candidate's final examination score and rank on the eligible list. Eligible lists become effective on the date approved by the commissioner of human resources. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-247. - Duration of eligible list.     Eligible lists, unless earlier exhausted, shall be in effect for 24 months from the date the list was approved by the commissioner of human resources in accordance with section 114-246. Eligible lists shall not be extended beyond their expiration date, and all vacancies existing on the expiration date shall be filled from the eligible list; however, section 114-249(b) shall still apply. A new examination announcement, as provided for in section 114-234, will be published as determined by the commissioner of human resources 180 days before the expiration of a list or after a list is exhausted, which ever shall be earlier. When a new examination announcement has not been published following the expiration of a list, a written notice explaining the reasons for such failure to publish a new announcement shall be given to all sworn members of the affected department, the mayor and the appropriate legislative oversight committee within 30 days after a list has expired. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2011-36(11-O-1141), § 2, 8-24-11) 
Sec. 114-248. - Review of examination paper. (a)  A sworn member who competes in a written multiple-choice test, as provided by this subdivision, shall have the right to review a photocopy of the member's answer sheet, along with a copy of the written test booklet and a copy of the correct answer to each written test question. The review shall be held under the direct supervision of a professional in test development used by the commissioner of human resources to administer the written test, and it shall be held as soon as practicable after the written test administration date; but, in any case, it shall occur within no more than 30 days after the written test has been administered. (b)  Sworn members will be allowed to appeal to the test developer, in writing, any answer to a written test question other than the one specified as being the correct answer. The professional developing the test shall consider all such appeals and, if it is deemed justified, make such necessary corrections to the scoring key before reporting the final written test scores to the commissioner of human resources. The testing professional shall be required to document the reasons for recommending any changes to the original scoring key as well as the reasons for rejecting any appeal submitted by a sworn member. (c)  The commissioner of human resources may approve or disapprove the recommendations of the testing professional. If the action of the commissioner of human resources requires that the answer sheets be rescored, such rescoring will be done for all candidates by the professional test developer and reported back to the commissioner of human resources before the identity of any candidate is made known to anyone. The commissioner of human resources shall notify all candidates of both the professional test developer's decisions regarding all appeals and the determination of the commissioner of human resources. (d)  Because of the need to use written tests which have been professionally developed and validated in accordance with both professional standards and legal guidelines, all sworn members reviewing test papers are expressly forbidden from taking any test material, review material or any written notes from the review room. To the extent practicable, reference material used in developing the written test will be made available to members during the review period. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-249. - Appointing rule. (a)  Upon completion of a register, the commissioner of human resources shall provide the fire chief, police chief and corrections chief with a copy.     The fire chief, police chief and corrections chief shall certify the names of the five members who stand highest on the eligible list. The names of all members who, after seniority (based on date of employment as corrections officer, firefighter or police officer) is applied, still remain in an unbroken tie with the five highest members certified shall also be certified. If more than one vacancy exists, the commissioner of human resources shall certify one additional sworn member for each additional vacancy, including all members in unbroken ties with the last additional member to be certified. Each respective chief may appoint any of the certified members as the chief deems to be in the best interest of the affected department. (b)  When the number of names remaining on an eligible list is less than five, the chief of the affected department may decline to make an appointment and may request that a new examination procedure be administered. At such time, the eligible list shall be considered exhausted in accordance with section 114-247, notwithstanding the fact that there are still vacancies in existence. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-250. - Removal from eligible list. (a)  The fire, corrections and police chiefs shall remove the name of a sworn member from an eligible list under this subdivision due to any of the following reasons: (1)  Receipt of a written request from the sworn member. (2)  Refusal to accept a promotional appointment. (3)  Termination of the sworn member's employment with the applicable department. (4)  Suspension of five or more days, whether it is consecutive or not, for a violation of the rules and regulations of the applicable department. (5)  The discovery, after the eligible list has been established, that the sworn member would have been rejected under other sections of this subdivision had the information so discovered been known before the eligible list was promulgated. (6)  Failure to complete the probationary period, as provided in section 114-251. (b)  Whenever a sworn member's name is removed from an eligible list, written notice of such action and the reason for that action shall be given to the sworn member by the fire, corrections and police chiefs within five days of the date the action is taken. (c)  Removal from eligible lists established under this subdivision is not appealable through the civil service board under section 14-502. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-251. - Probationary period. (a)  Every promoted sworn member shall serve a 12-month probationary period to be regarded as an integral noncompetitive part of the examination process under this subdivision. (b)  Sworn members filling discretionary ranks at the time of their promotion to a nondiscretionary rank in accordance with this subdivision shall have the time successfully served in the discretionary rank count toward the required 12-month probationary period, provided such service was immediately prior to promotion to the nondiscretionary rank. Time successfully served in the discretionary rank after the date of promotion to the nondiscretionary rank shall also be credited as part of the 12-month probationary period required to attain status in the nondiscretionary rank. (c)  The probationary period shall be utilized for closely observing how well a probationary employee performs the work and responsibility of the higher level rank and for securing the most accurate judgments as to whether or not the probationary employee's performance meets required work standards at the higher level rank. It shall be the duty of the chiefs of the respective departments to issue administrative regulations governing the probationary evaluation process. (d)  Prior to the completion of the 12-month probationary period, the chief of the department shall decide whether or not the probationary employee will receive status in the higher rank. If the probationary employee is deemed to have passed the probationary period and is to be given status in the rank, the employee shall be notified of such decision no later than 15 days before the expiration of the 12-month probationary period. (e)  At any time during the probationary period, the chief of the applicable department may remove a promoted sworn member whose performance does not meet the required work standards and return that member to the rank in which the member has retained status. In such event, the chief of the department shall notify the member in writing that the probationary evaluation part of the examination has been failed and the reason for such failure. Such notification shall be given at least 15 days in advance of the date the action is to be official and not later than 15 days before the 12-month probationary period is to expire. Thereafter, the name of a sworn member who failed the probationary evaluation part of the examination shall be removed from the eligible list. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-252. - Administration.     The commissioner of human resources, in conjunction with the police chief, fire chief and corrections chief, shall be responsible for the administration of this subdivision. Issues that arise that are not specifically addressed by the rules and regulations will be resolved by the commissioner of human resources in conjunction with the fire chief, police chief and corrections chief in a matter consistent with the intent of this subdivision. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-253—114-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - CERTIFICATION AND APPOINTMENT 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 
Secs. 114-266—114-275. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Eligible Lists 
Sec. 114-276. - Statement of policy.     Vacancies in the classified service shall normally be filled from eligible lists resulting from open competitive examinations, unless the department head should determine that such vacancies should be filled by transfer, promotion, demotion, reassignment or through any other authorized and established noncompetitive process. Decisions not to use open competitive examinations shall be approved by the commissioner of human resources, except that if the department head and commissioner of human resources disagree, the mayor shall make the final decision. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-277. - Establishment of lists. (a)  The commissioner of human resources shall establish and maintain eligible lists for the various classes of positions as may be necessary to meet the needs of the classified service. (b)  Each list shall contain the names of those eligibles who have been determined to be qualified through the examination process. (c)  Names of eligibles shall be placed on eligible lists in the order of their adjectival rating. The names of eligibles with veteran's preference shall be entered in accordance with their respective augmented ratings, if appropriate. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-278. - Types of lists and durations.     The commissioner of human resources shall maintain the following eligible lists: (1)  Open competitive. A listing of persons in rating order as a result of an open-competitive examination process to be used in making an appointment to the civil service. Persons separated in good standing and eligible for reemployment may request placement on the current open competitive list for which they qualify. The duration of the list shall be for a period of six months, and may be up to an additional six months. (2)  Promotional. A listing of persons in rating order as a result of a citywide competitive examination or a departmental competitive examination (limited competition). The duration of the list shall be for a period of six months, and may be up to an additional six months. (3)  Reduction-in-force (RIF). A listing of persons who have been separated from the classified service in good standing as a result of a reduction in force. The duration of the list shall be two (2) years. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-279. - Methods of filling vacancies. (a)  The appointing authority, in consultation with the commissioner of human resources, may elect to fill any vacancy under the appointing authority's jurisdiction by any one of the following methods: (1)  Promotion. (2)  Reemployment. (3)  Open competition. (4)  Transfer. (5)  Demotion. (b)  The appointing authority may elect to make a temporary appointment only when the work is of a temporary duration of less than six months or when the commissioner of human resources indicates that no register of eligibles is available. Unless the appointing authority requests otherwise, the commissioner shall certify qualified eligibles on a RIF list; promotional list; or open competitive list. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-280. - Availability of eligibles.     An eligible shall notify the commissioner of human resources in writing of any change of address or other change affecting availability for employment under this article. Whenever an eligible, either by application or by submitting a written statement, restricts the conditions under which such eligible will be available for employment, the name of such eligible may be withheld from all certification which does not meet the conditions specified. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-281. - Removal of name from lists.     Names may be removed from eligible lists under this division by the commissioner of human resources for any of the following reasons: (1)  At the written request of the eligible. (2)  The refusal of an offer of appointment under conditions previously listed by the eligible as acceptable. (3)  Appointment through certification from such lists to fill a regular position. (4)  Appointment through certification from the eligible list for another class at the same or higher compensation. In such case, at the request of the appointee, the appointee's name may be continued on any or all lists, other than the one from which the appointment was made, for the remainder of the period of eligibility on such lists. (5)  The failure to report for an interview or to respond, within the time specified in the notice, to any inquiry of the commissioner of human resources or department head. (6)  Notice by postal authorities of the inability to locate an eligible at the last known address of such eligible. (7)  The death of eligible. (8)  The discovery, upon review of eligibility that the eligible would be subject to rejection under other sections of this article. (9)  Dismissal for cause from the civil service. (10)  The separation from the services of the city, other than by layoff, of an eligible whose name is on a promotional list. (11)  The discovery that the eligible has willfully provided erroneous information, withheld information, evaded questions or otherwise misrepresented the qualifications of the eligible in order to qualify for appointment and/or promotion. (12)  Any cause or condition specified in this article for the rejection of an application. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-282. - Restoration of names to eligible lists.     Upon any person's name being removed from an eligible list, such person shall immediately be notified in writing, addressed to such person's last known address. Such person may, at any time during the life of that eligible list, make written request to the commissioner of human resources for restoration to such list. The request shall set forth the reasons for the conduct or conditions resulting in the removal of the name from the list and the reasons advanced for restoration of the name. The commissioner of human resources, after determining whether or not such reasons are justifiable, may order the restoration of such name or refuse such request and shall notify such person of the action taken. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-283—114-295. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Certification 
Sec. 114-296. - Request for certification.     All requisitions for the filling of vacancies in the classified service shall be made on forms designated by the commissioner of human resources. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-297. - Number of names to be certified.     Upon receipt of a requisition, the commissioner of human resources shall certify a sufficient number of names rated highest on the appropriate eligible register that will allow the appointing authority a reasonable choice of applicants, as determined by the commissioner of human resources, to fill the vacancy. If more than one vacancy is to be filled, additional names will be certified for the additional vacancies. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-298. - Incomplete certification.     If there are too few persons in the highest rated groups to allow the appointing authority a reasonable choice of eligibles, as determined by the commissioner of human resources, additional names from lower rated groups may be certified and given equal consideration by the appointing authority. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-299. - Establishment of the new register.     When the commissioner of human resources determines that the number of names on an eligible register is too few to allow a reasonable choice for appointing authorities, at the discretion of the commissioner, a new register may be established. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-300. - Selective certification.     If a particular position to be filled requires some very specific skill or training, upon request by the appointing authority, the commissioner of human resources may restrict referrals to those eligibles who possess the specific skill or training. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-301—114-310. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Appointment 
Sec. 114-311. - Certification of eligibles.     Upon receipt of a referral list certified by the commissioner of human resources, the appointing authority may select from among any of the eligibles on the certified list. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-312. - Types of appointments. (a)  Original appointments (probationary). The original employment of a person to fill a position in the classified service on a regular or part-time basis, as a result of selection from an appropriate list of eligibles, shall constitute a probationary appointment. (b)  Regular appointment. A probationary employee shall receive a regular appointment and shall acquire regular status within the classified service upon satisfactory completion of the probationary period. (c)  Temporary appointment. Temporary appointments may be made for special projects or for other work of a temporary or transitory nature. (1)  Such appointments shall be made from qualified applicants on eligible lists who indicate their willingness to accept temporary employment. The acceptance of such appointment by an eligible shall not affect the standing of such eligible on the list for permanent appointment. (2)  If certification from lists is impracticable because of the nonavailability of employees for temporary work, the commissioner of human resources may authorize the applicable appointing authority to select a qualified person of such authority's choice. (d)  Emergency appointment. When, because of an emergency involving the serious impairment of the public business of the city, it is impossible to fill a position in the competitive service by the normal procedure, the appointing authority, subject to the approval of the commissioner of human resources, may appoint any qualified person to such position. Such appointment shall continue only during such emergency or until an acceptable eligible list is established and a qualified applicant is selected therefrom. (e)  Part-time appointment. In a part-time appointment, the employee works on a continuing basis but devotes less than the normal time specified for that of a regular appointment in the affected class. (1)  The announcing of vacancies and the procedures for filling continuing part-time positions shall be the same as for full-time positions. (2)  Appointment shall be made from qualified applicants on eligible lists who indicate their willingness to accept part-time employment. (3)  Part-time employees in continuing positions shall receive sick, annual or other types of leave and holidays prorated on the basis of the time worked as related to the normal designated work period for the affected class. (f)  Provisional appointment. Whenever an urgent reason exists for filling a regular position in a class for which appropriate lists are not then available, the commissioner of human resources may authorize the vacancy to be filled by the means of a provisional appointment. (1)  Any candidate for provisional appointment must meet all of the requirements as established for the position being filled. (2)  An appropriate eligible list for the position shall be established at the earliest possible date, and the person serving on the provisional appointment shall be given an opportunity to compete. (3)  A provisional employee appointed to a regular position shall have the length of time served in a provisional status considered as a part of the required probationary period. (g)  Specially funded appointment. A specially funded appointment shall be in the unclassified services and shall be applicable with respect to positions funded on a time-limited basis from sources such as bonds, or federal or state sources. Such positions shall remain in existence only during the duration of such funds and may receive the benefits and privileges available to other unclassified employees. Candidates for appointment must meet the requirements as established for the position being filled. Upon the appointment to specially funded positions, employees shall be advised that the tenure of their services is based on the duration of the special funds and shall, prior to accepting appointment, execute a written acknowledgment of such which shall be filed with the commissioner of human resources. (h)  Military leave appointments. Whenever a position vacancy exists because of the fact that the regular occupant is on an authorized military leave of absence, such vacancy may be filled by certification from an eligible register. Such an appointee may be eligible for all benefits and privileges available to other employees; but, acquire no rights to the position. All provisions pertaining to classified and unclassified services apply. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-313. - Elimination of eligibles.     Under this division, the appointing authority may eliminate from consideration the following eligibles: (1)  Any eligible who declines an appointment, fails to reply to the appointment or when an inquiry concerning availability of an eligible is returned undelivered. (2)  Any eligible who has been separated for cause or resigned while suspended from city employment. (3)  Any eligible against whom the appointing authority has submitted objections which have been sustained by the commissioner of human resources. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-314. - Objections to eligibles. (a)  When an objection has been made to an eligible, the commissioner of human resources shall apply the following principles: (1)  The objection shall be sustained when it is determined that the eligible is disqualified for some or all of the positions to be filled from that eligible list, including the particular job to be filled. (2)  The objection shall be sustained, even though a sufficient basis for general disqualification of the applicant has not been presented, provided that a sufficient basis has been submitted to support the conclusion that the applicant is not fit for the particular vacancy. (b)  Objections will be sustained upon its being shown that the applicant is disqualified because of any one of the following general grounds for disqualification: (1)  Medical disqualification because of physical or mental unfitness for the position, as determined by licensed medical authority. (2)  Dismissal from employment for delinquency or misconduct. (3)  Intentional false statements, deception or fraud in the examination or appointment. (4)  Addiction to or habitual use of narcotics, other drugs and/or alcohol, as determined by licensed medical authority. (5)  Any legal or other disqualification which makes the applicant unfit for city service. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-315. - Sworn police and fire exception.     In the departments of police and fire, the mayor or the mayor's designee shall be the appointing authority and shall have the power and authority to recruit, employ and hire and shall have all other powers as a department head in the civil service and the appointing authority as defined in this article. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-316—114-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PROBATIONARY PERIOD OF EMPLOYMENT 
Sec. 114-326. - Policy and objectives.     All appointments to regular fulltime or part-time positions in the classified service shall be subject to the satisfactory completion of a six month probationary period. Such probationary period shall constitute an integral part of the selection process and shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new or promoted employee to the position, for rejecting any employee whose performance or conduct is not satisfactory and for affording the employee an opportunity to determine if such employee wishes to make a career in the service of the city. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-327. - Extension of time.     The commissioner of human resources shall extend the probationary period for up to an additional six months upon the request of the applicable department head, provided such request is made prior to the expiration of the original probationary period. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-328. - Promotional appointments. (a)  If an employee is removed during the probationary period following a promotion, for failure to perform satisfactorily the duties of the higher position, such employee may be returned to the position held prior to the promotion or to a similar position. Should an appropriate vacancy not exist, the employee may be allowed to remain in the position out of class until there is a vacancy in an existing position in the lower class. A probationary promotional appointment shall not affect an employee's earned regular status and rights in the classified service which have been acquired in another position. (b)  Promotions of employees covered by this division shall be made only according to merit and fitness and must be attained by competitive examinations, regardless of the number of applicants seeking promotion. Such examinations shall be administered by the department of human resources. All promotions in the classified service, except those under section 114-251, shall be for a probationary period of six months. During the probationary period, the person so promoted may be demoted by the appointing authority to the position the person formerly held, without a hearing. Any person so demoted shall be credited with any pay adjustments that the person would have earned in the position formerly held by such person had such person not been promoted. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-329. - Position changes and transfers.     If a demotion, reassignment or transfer of an employee in the classified service occurs before such employee has completed the probationary period, the remainder of such probationary period shall be served in the new position, and such employee shall not be required to serve a new probationary period in the new position. A written report of such demotion, reassignment or transfer must be filed by the applicable appointing authority with the commissioner of human resources within three work days after the effective date of such action. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-330. - Reemployment.     Upon reemployment in a position in the classified service, an employee shall not be required to serve a new probationary period when such employee has completed, within the previous 12-months, a probationary period in the same class for which reemployment is being effected. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-331. - Dismissal during probationary period. (a)  Any employee, during the probationary period, may be removed or dismissed, without the right of appeal to the civil service board, for the following reasons: (1)  Such employee is unable or unwilling to satisfactorily perform the duties of the position or the lack of dependability of such employee does not merit continuance with the service, as determined by the appointing authority. (2)  Such employee has committed an offense which would constitute cause for disciplinary action under this article. (3)  The appointment of such employee was secured through fraud or fraudulent acts. (b)  Upon removal or dismissal, as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the appointing authority shall notify the commissioner of human resources and the employee in writing enumerating the reasons for the removal or dismissal. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-332. - Probationary period reports.     Prior to the end of the six-month probationary period, a written performance evaluation shall be conducted on the probationary employee if such employee is demoted or separated for unsatisfactory performance. The performance evaluation shall be signed by the appointing authority and submitted to the commissioner of human resources. If the commissioner of human resources is not notified prior to the expiration date of the probationary period, such employee shall acquire regular status in the position. 
Secs. 114-333—114-345. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - PROMOTIONS 
Sec. 114-346. - Policy.     Vacancies in positions above the entry level in the civil service may be filled by promotion from lower classes or by recruitment of candidates, other than existing employees of the city, through appropriate competitive examination. A combination of both methods of filling vacancies may be used. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-347. - Political or partisan endorsement prohibited.     No consideration shall be given to political or partisan endorsement for promotions to positions in the civil service; only merit and fitness shall be considered. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-348. - Types of promotions.     The following shall constitute the types of promotions within the classified service: (1)  Noncompetitive promotions. Competitive procedures need not apply in the following instances: a.  A trainee appointee is moved into the class upon completion of an officially approved training program, provided the trainee was originally selected through competitive procedures. b.  A position is upgraded without significant changes in duties and responsibilities, the occurrence of a classification error or as a result of a change in the pay plan. c.  The promotion results from an employee's position being reclassified with the incumbent to a higher level due to significant changes in the actual duties and responsibilities. (2)  Competitive promotions. Competitive promotions shall be limited to a particular department upon request of the appointing authority. Competitive promotions of employees in the classified service shall be made in accordance with the following procedures: a.  Promotional announcements shall be sent to all departments or the particular department, as appropriate, and shall be posted on employee bulletin boards where appropriate and shall be posted on the official employee bulletin board in the department of human resources. b.  Each promotional announcement shall provide for a minimum period of seven calendar days between the date of the announcement and the date the application is to be filed with the department of human resources. The employee shall be responsible for ensuring receipt of such employee's application by the department of human resources prior to the filing deadline established in the announcement. c.  Promotional announcements shall include the following: 1.  Official class title; 2.  Salary range; 3.  General description of the position; 4.  Minimum entrance requirements; 5.  Examination procedure; 6.  Promotional potential, if the position is a formal trainee or career ladder position with defined promotion potential; 7.  Filing deadline; 8.  Announcement date. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-349. - Certification and selection. (a)  The commissioner of human resources shall certify a sufficient number of names ranking highest on the appropriate promotional register that will allow the appointing authority a reasonable choice of applicants to fill the vacancy. (b)  The appointing authority shall make the selection from the group of employees certified in accordance with this article. (c)  All selected employees promoted to a "position of trust" will be required to pass a criminal background check as a condition to such promotion(s). If such background check reveals criminal convictions related to the essential job duties, the promotion shall be rescinded and the employee may remain in the current position held. This provision does not apply to sworn public safety employees transferring within zones. A credit check shall be conducted if such promotion warrants such action based on job relatedness. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-350. - Release of promoted employees.     Upon an employee's promotion to a position in another department, such employee shall be released by such department within a reasonable period of time which shall not normally exceed two weeks. At the discretion of the appointing authority involved, such period of release may be extended for emergency or hardship. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-351—114-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - TRANSFERS, DEMOTIONS AND REEMPLOYMENT 
Sec. 114-361. - Transfers. (a)  Generally. A regular employee may be transferred to meet the needs of the civil service or may be transferred, upon request and acceptance, to a position in the same class or in a different class having the same entrance salary. A transfer may require the employee to move from one department to another or within a department. When an employee is transferred to a "position of trust," a criminal background check is administered as a condition to transfer. A credit check shall be conducted if such transfer warrants such action based on job relatedness. (b)  Intradepartmental transfers. The appropriate department head may, at any time, reassign an employee of the department in the civil service from one position to another in the same class or another class within the same pay range within the same department. (c)  Interdepartmental transfers. A transfer of an employee from one department to another shall have the approval of the commissioner of human resources and the two concerned department heads. Requests for such transfer shall establish that the employee meets the qualification requirements of the class to which the transfer is proposed. (d)  Salary range after transfer. An employee who is transferred shall continue to receive the same rate of pay, except as otherwise provided. (e)  Transfer of physically incapacitated employee. If an employee becomes physically incapacitated to the extent that such employee is unable to perform the duties of the employee's position, the commissioner of human resources may, with the consent of such employee and the appointing authority, transfer the employee to another position in the same pay range, the duties of which such employee can perform despite the physical incapacity. (f)  Use of intradepartmental or interdepartmental transfer for retaliation. Notwithstanding the foregoing subparagraphs, no employee shall be subject to intradepartmental or interdepartmental transfer in retaliation or response to engaging in a protected activity such as reporting fraud, waste or abuse in city government. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-362. - Demotions. (a)  Involuntary demotions. An appointing authority may demote, for just cause, an employee under such authority's jurisdiction from a position in one class to a position in a lower class, provided that the employee involved and the commissioner of human resources have been notified in writing of such contemplated action. Pay shall be calculated consistent with section 114-128. (b)  Voluntary demotions. Subject to the approval of the applicable appointing authority and the commissioner of human resources and upon the request of an employee, such an employee may be demoted to a vacant position in a lower class. The determination of whether or not the employee is qualified to perform the duties and responsibilities of the position in the lower class shall be made by the commissioner of human resources. Pay shall be calculated consistent with section 114-128. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-363. - Reemployment. (a)  Generally. Any regular employee, who is separated from the city in good standing and with a satisfactory performance evaluation may be eligible for reemployment for a period of three years following the date of separation. Such former employee may be reemployed in the class previously held, or in any class for which they are deemed eligible under the civil service system, provided a vacant position exists. (b)  Certification of eligibles to fill vacancy. When a vacancy exists which the appointing authority has decided to fill by reemployment, the commissioner of human resources shall certify to the appointing authority that the applicant is eligible for reemployment and meets the requirements for the position. (c)  Credit for former service. A former employee reemployed under this section may be credited for pay purposes with all former service in the class in which such employee is reemployed and service in any higher class, and shall be compensated in accordance with section 114-130. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-364—114-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - SEPARATIONS 
Sec. 114-376. - Types.     Separations and/or terminations from positions in the civil service shall be designated as one of the following types: (1)  Resignation means the voluntary action of an employee to separate from the position held. (2)  Termination means the act of ending an employment relationship with an employee or not for cause. (3)  Layoff or reduction in force means the termination of an employment relationship due to budgetary or financial reasons, or in the event an office or department reorganization. (4)  Not fit-for-duty means termination of an employee from the civil service as a result of a fitness-for-duty examination by a licensed physician certifying the employee is unable to perform the essential functions of the position. (5)  Dismissal means discharge or separation of an employee from the civil service for cause. (6)  Retirement means the voluntary election of an employee to separate from the civil service and receive a distribution from a retirement fund. (7)  Death means separation of an employee from the civil service shall be effective as of the date of death of the employee. (8)  Private contract management, privatization, managed competition, or outsourcing of city services means termination of an employment relationship due to the city's decision to utilize an alternative source to manage a business function or operation. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-377. - Resignation.     An employee shall submit written notice of resignation at least 14 days in advance of the date of resignation to the department head. Immediately upon receipt of such notice of resignation, the department head shall forward the notice to the commissioner of human resources. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-378. - Termination.     An employee may be terminated from the service of the city for reasons other than causes set forth in section 114-528. Such reasons may include, but are not limited to lack of funding, grant expiration, completion of an employment contract, organizational restructuring, loss of a required license, or elimination of job functions. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-379. - Layoff or reduction in force (a)  This section shall apply to regular employees within the classified service. (b)  A reduction in force (RIF) occurs when an agency is obliged to demote, separate or furlough one or more employees because of lack of work, shortage of funds, reorganization, changes in service priorities or technology, or budgetary concerns requiring adjustments to the workforce based on skill set needs and appropriate staffing levels. The cause of reduction in force may come from legislative action or from decisions of the head of the agency or some official who has been authorized to make such decisions. (c)  Reduction in force may not be used for the purpose of dismissing or demoting regular status employees whose job performance is not acceptable. The progressive discipline process and adverse action procedures, as set forth in City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances 114-526 et seq., should be applied when performance problems arise. A RIF shall not be used for the purpose of altering the racial or sexual composition of a department or classification. (d)  If a RIF is solely based on shortage of funds or budgetary concerns, the mayor should consider using other means prior to initiating a RIF, such as hiring freezes, reduction through attrition, furloughs without pay, reduced workweeks, reassignments or other methods to lessen the negative impact of such an action. (e)  It shall be the responsibility of the commissioner of human resources, upon recommendation of the appointing authority, to define the area within which the mechanics of the RIF are to apply. This area shall normally be city wide, department wide, or officewide. A more expanded or restricted area may be established when it is determined to be more practical. (f)  The appointing authority, with the power to appoint and remove subordinate employees as defined in City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances section 114-76, based on specific procedures established by the commissioner of human resources, will be responsible for developing a departmental RIF plan in keeping with this section. This departmental plan must be approved by the commissioner of human resources prior to implementation. (g)  Determination of the positions/employees to be included in a RIF shall be made in a manner that maximizes services provided while maintaining the efficient use of available public funds. Accordingly, RIF determinations shall be based upon a totality of factors including but not limited to employee job performance history, business needs of the city or the affected department, feasibility of consolidating duties from one or more positions into a single position, elimination of unnecessary or redundant services, and identification of new service priorities. The appointing authority and commissioner of human resources shall apply their best business judgment in implementing a RIF so that the resulting workforce is an appropriate size and composition to address current operational needs and to promote the public interest in the effective management of city government. (h)  All individuals within each affected class will compete for the remaining positions in that class based on retention points. Individuals not selected to be retained in the remaining positions will be placed in a RIF pool in priority order based on retention points. Retention points will be determined pursuant to city administrative policies and procedures, and seniority and performance evaluations will be the deciding factors. (i)  The commissioner of human resources, at least 14 calendar days prior to the date of separation or demotion, shall notify in writing any regular employees scheduled to be demoted or laid off. (j)  Employees in the classified service shall have the right to appeal to the civil service board a failure to follow procedure in the administration of the RIF, but shall not have the right to appeal the reason for this reduction. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No.2016-31(16-O-1375) , § 1, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 114-380. - Fitness-for-duty.     The head of the department, with the approval of the commissioner of human resources, shall have the right to direct any employee within such department to be examined by a physician or psychologist to be designated by the city. Upon the discovery of a physical disability or psychological condition of any kind which impairs the employee's ability to perform his/her essential job functions or which makes the employee's continuance on the job a direct threat to the safety of self or others, the following action shall be taken: (1)  If there is a dispute as to a physical disability of such person to be restored to such person's position with the city, the question of physical qualifications shall be submitted to arbitration. To constitute the board of arbitration, the city shall select one physician or surgeon, the person claiming employment shall select one physician or surgeon and the two so selected shall select a third. The report of such board shall be final and conclusive upon the question presented and shall not be subject to appeal to the civil service board. Reasonable expenses of such board and compensation of the members thereof shall be paid by the city. (2)  Should the board of arbitration determine that the physical disability is a correctable one, the employee shall be allowed a specified period of time, as determined by the board of arbitration, in which to have such disability corrected. Such time in which to correct the disability shall be charged to the sick leave of such employee until exhausted, then to the annual leave of such employee until exhausted and then to leave without pay. Should the employee fail to take steps to have the physical disability corrected within the specified time, such employee shall be subject to disciplinary action or layoff. (3)  The Commissioner of Human Resources along with the Chief Psychologist for the City of Atlanta will compile an independent and diverse panel of up to ten licensed mental health professionals to conduct the psychological fitness for duty examinations. An employee subject to a fitness for duty for a psychological condition shall not be entitled to a second opinion from a licensed psychologist, however they will be entitled to submit medical records from a personal medical professional to be considered in the process. (4)  If, in the opinion of the examining physician, the disability cannot be corrected, the department head, with the assistance of the commissioner of human resources, shall take the following action: a.  Attempt to place the employee in another position in which the employee can satisfactorily perform the duties of such position. b.  Separate the employee from the civil service, if placement cannot be successfully accomplished. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2017-93(17-O-1829), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
Sec. 114-381. - Dismissal (a)  Dismissal from the civil service shall constitute discharge or separation for just cause, which shall include but shall not be limited to delinquency, misconduct, inefficiency in performance or inability to perform assigned duties, insubordination or willful violation of this Code or the provisions of any city ordinance or of any rule or regulation of the city and any department thereof. (b)  As to offenses for which progressive discipline is applicable, a classified employee shall not be dismissed until progressive steps of discipline have been taken, without positive results therefrom, and until the employee to be discharged has been presented in writing with specifically stated reasons for such discharge. A copy of the document stating such reasons shall be filed by the department head with the commissioner of human resources prior to the effective date of such action. Any employee so discharged shall have the right to appeal such action to the civil service board according to the appeal process outlined in article VI, division 2 of this chapter and shall have the right to be represented before such board by any individual of such employee's choice. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-382. - Retirement. The  retirement of an employee from the civil service shall consist of the voluntary separation of an employee who has met the requirements of age and length of service under the law governing the pension fund of which such employee is a member or the mandatory separation of an employee who has attained the age of mandatory retirement. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) Charter reference— Retirement, § 3-506. 
Sec. 114-383. - Death.     Separation from the civil service shall be effective as of the date of the death of the employee. All compensation, including vacation pay, due to such employee as of the effective date of separation shall be paid to the beneficiary of the employee or the surviving spouse of such employee, as may be determined by law or by the applicable executed documents in the pension folder of such employee. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-384. - Separation on account of private contract management or operation, privatization or outsourcing of city services. (a)  Separation from the civil service system on account of private contract management, privatization, managed competition, or outsourcing of city services occurs when the city determines by legislative action that it is in the best interest of the city to have city services privately managed, operated, privatized or outsourced and when it is necessary action to terminate and transfer employees within the civil service system to the workforce of a private contractor, agency or entity. (b)  Separation of city employees from the civil service system on account of private contract management, privatization, managed competition, or outsourcing of city services shall be effective as of the commencement date of the contract which consummates the terms and conditions for the management, operation, privatization or outsourcing of city services. (c)  This section shall apply to all regular employees of the city within the classified service. However, separations pursuant to this Code section may not be appealed to the civil service board. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-385. - Exit interviews. (a)  An exit interview shall be utilized in order to provide the city with the reason for the termination by an employee of the employee's service with the city. (b)  An exit interview program shall be established by the commissioner of human resources. Where possible, each employee who separates from city service shall be given the opportunity to be interviewed by the commissioner of human resources or designee prior to the time such employee receives final payment for the employee's services. Should such a personal exit interview not be feasible, the commissioner of human resources shall attempt to achieve such interview through the mail. The results of such exit interview shall be maintained by the commissioner of human resources and may be utilized by the applicable department head and the commissioner of human resources, as may be deemed appropriate. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-386—114-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
Sec. 114-396. - Objective.     The commissioner of human resources shall prepare a system for evaluating the work performance of all employees in the civil service. Such employee performance evaluation shall be used primarily to inform employees as to the status of their work performance and as to methods of improving such performance. The performance evaluation shall be used in determining the annual increase. The performance evaluation may also be used as a basis for training, promotion, demotion, transfer or dismissal and for such other purposes as set forth in this article. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-397. - Period of evaluation.     All classified employees shall be evaluated prior to the expiration of a six-month interval following an original appointment or promotion. All classified and unclassified employees shall be evaluated annually and upon separation from service. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-398. - Evaluation.     Evaluations shall be prepared by the immediate supervisor of each employee and reviewed by the appropriate appointing authority. A supervisory employee who is leaving a position shall be required to submit performance evaluation forms on all of the employees under such supervisor's supervision who have not been evaluated within the previous six-month period. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-399. - Review with employee.     The evaluator shall discuss each performance evaluation with the employee being evaluated and provide the employee with an official copy. The appointing authority shall establish an internal procedure to review the evaluation of any employee who disagrees with the performance evaluation rating. The appointing authority shall be the final authority in resolving disagreements. In the event the appointing authority and the evaluator are one and the same, the final authority for resolving disagreements rests with the chief operating officer. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-400. - Confidentiality.     Performance evaluations shall be confidential and shall be available only to the employee evaluated, the supervisors in the employee's chain of command, the appointing authority or designee, the commissioner of human resources and to the mayor upon request and when requested under the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. 50-18-70 through 50-18-76. Evaluations of employees of the city council shall be confidential and available to the supervisor of those employees, the commissioner of human resources and to members of the city council. All performance evaluation forms shall be signed by the employee and the immediate supervisor and reviewed by the appointing authority or designee.     The employee's signature will not be interpreted as an agreement with the evaluation but rather, that the employee has reviewed and discussed the performance evaluation with the immediate supervisor.     Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit performance evaluations, where relevant, from being used as evidence in civil service board proceedings or in other legal proceedings. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-401. - Changes in evaluation.     If for any reason a department head shall request an alteration of the performance evaluation form after it has been officially submitted to the commissioner of human resources, such request shall be made in writing and shall set forth fully the reasons for the request. The request shall become part of the official performance evaluation. Any changes in evaluation shall be discussed with the employee being evaluated, and such employee shall have the right of review and appeal, the same as with the original evaluation. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-402—114-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - ATTENDANCE AND LEAVE 
Sec. 114-411. - Hours of work.     The hours of work in the civil service shall be determined in accordance with the needs of the city and the convenience of the public. The work schedule for each department shall be established by the department head in conjunction with the commissioner of human resources and approval of the mayor. Unless otherwise specified, the workweek for employees other than those engaged in public safety activities shall normally consist of eight hours during each of five consecutive 24-hour periods, which may begin on any day of the week and at any hour of the day. Such workweek may also consist of eight hours during each of five consecutive 24-hour periods for a position shared by two or more persons, where such work is established by the department head in conjunction with the commissioner of human resources and approved by the mayor. Hours of work for public safety sworn officers may be established consistent with the needs of the department and applicable FLSA standards. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-412. - Lunch period.     Employees shall be allowed 45 minutes for lunch or any other meal taken during the workday or worknight, except that the respective department heads may at their discretion reduce to 30 minutes the lunch period for personnel who work outside and are not required to report to city hall or other offices daily and shall prescribe appropriate lunch period regulations for employees whose continuous presence on the job is required. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-413. - Attendance.     Each department head shall be responsible for the attendance of all officers and employees within the department, and the department head shall keep complete attendance records, including annual leave, sick leave, overtime, etc. All employees non-exempt from FLSA must have a regular time-keeping method. Employees exempt from FLSA may do exception time-keeping. All leave shall be authorized in one hour increments, and shall be in compliance with FLSA. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-414. - Holidays. (a)  Designation, effect. The following days shall be legal holidays for employees of the city: (1)  January 1, New Year's Day. (2)  Third Monday in January, Martin Luther King, Jr.'s birthday. (3)  Last Monday in May, Memorial Day. (4)  July 4, Independence Day. (5)  First Monday in September, Labor Day. (6)  November 11, Veterans Day. (7)  Fourth Thursday in November, Thanksgiving. (8)  Day after Thanksgiving. (9)  December 25, Christmas Day. (b)  Holidays observed. Whenever any holiday shall fall on an employee's first normal weekly off-day, the preceding day will be taken as a holiday. If the designated holiday falls on an employee's regular second weekly off-day, the succeeding day will be taken as a holiday. All employees, except those who shall be necessary in order to carry on essential functions of the government of the city, shall receive a holiday on the days set forth in subsection (a) of this section. Those employees who are required to work on an observed holiday other than the designated holiday shall be given another day off within the calendar year for the holiday not observed. (c)  Premium payment for holiday work performed. Employees shall be eligible for compensation for work performed on a holiday only if the employee works on the actual day designated as the holiday in subsection (a) of this section. For purposes of this section the holiday for premium pay purposes is the 24-hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. and ending at 12:00 midnight of the designated day. Notwithstanding anything in this subsection, no employee may receive more than eight hours at premium pay rate for any one holiday, except for firefighters assigned to a 54-hour week, who may be paid premium pay for a maximum of 12 hours for each designated holiday worked. (d)  Necessary workers. The department head shall determine those employees necessary to render service on a designated holiday. These employees who are required to work on a designated holiday as defined in subsection (a) of this section will be compensated as follows: (1)  Exempt employees. Exempt employees who do not receive a holiday on any of the holidays named in subsection (a) of this section because of the necessity of their remaining on duty shall receive some other day in lieu of the holiday not received, and such holiday shall be given affected employees within the calendar year of the holiday not observed. (2)  Nonexempt employees. All nonexempt employees who do not receive a holiday on any of the holidays named in subsection (a) of this section because of the necessity of their remaining on duty shall be paid at a premium holiday rate equal to their regular rate plus one and one-half times their regular rate of pay for each hour of work for that day. (e)  Eligibility requirements. An employee shall be entitled to regular pay on any holiday, provided the employee has worked the regularly scheduled workday immediately before and the regularly scheduled workday immediately after the holiday or is on approved leave with pay on those days. Holidays which shall occur during the time that an employee is on annual or sick leave shall not be charged against such holidays based upon the number of hours that such employees normally work each day. Temporary employees shall not be paid for holidays not worked. (f)  Exceptions. Those city employees who are housed in buildings of other governments will observe the holidays of that government. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-415. - Annual leave (vacation).     Annual leave for an employee may be requested for personal or emergency reasons or for vacation. Temporary employees shall not be eligible for annual leave, and part-time employees shall be entitled to annual leave only in proportion to the number of hours worked as compared to the normal workweek. Annual leave shall be granted only in compliance with the following: (1)  The vacation system for all city employees shall be: Length of Service AnnualVacation in DaysMaximum VacationCarryover in DaysLess than 5 years 12 25 5 years up to 10 years 15 25 10 years up to 15 years 18 35 15 years up to 20 years 21 35 20 years and up 25 45  The time shall be accrued in equal parts each pay period and shall be cumulative; however, no employee may carry forward from one year to the next any vacation in excess of the maximum vacation carryover determined in accordance with the length of service as specified in this subsection. (2)  A request for annual leave shall be submitted to the employee's immediate supervisor on a form approved by the commissioner of human resources. Leave may be taken only after approval by the appropriate department or office head. Such leave shall be scheduled in accordance with the needs of the respective departments and the budgetary limitations governing the employment of additional or temporary help. Annual leave for vacation, insofar as possible, will be granted in accordance with employee preference and departmental seniority. (3)  Employees shall not be permitted to exchange annual leave for cash payment except as provided in this subsection. Any officer or employee entitled to annual leave with pay who terminates, is terminated, retires or is laid off, prior to taking vacation time earned, shall be continued on the payroll of the city and shall be presumed to have commenced annual leave on the workday following the last day such officer or employee reported for work. Any such employee, at the employee's election, may receive cash payment in exchange for such unused accrued annual leave. (4)  One hour increments shall be the minimum charge for annual leave, and additional annual leave shall be charged in multiples of one hour. (5)  Leave shall be used only when earned, and annual leave with pay shall not be allowed in advance of being earned. Should an employee have insufficient leave to cover a period of absence, no advance shall be granted, and such absence shall be without pay. (6)  If an officer or employee dies, all compensation, including vacation pay, due to such employee as of the date of death shall be paid to the beneficiary of such employee, the surviving spouse or domestic partner of such employee or to the estate of such employee, as may be determined by law or by the applicable executed documents in the pension records of such employee. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-416. - Sick leave. (a)  All officers and employees, except uniformed members of the department of fire, who are entitled to earn annual leave shall also be entitled to earn sick leave with full pay to be computed on the basis of one-fourth day for each five days of full-time paid service. Sick leave shall not be granted to temporary employees. (b)  Sick leave may be accumulated to an unlimited amount based upon the following stipulations: (1)  The base accumulation shall be 30 working days. (2)  Any sick leave used shall be from the base 30 days until this amount shall have been exhausted. (c)  Accumulation above 30 days shall be handled in the following manner: (1)  When an officer or an employee shall have accumulated 30 days of sick leave by the end of the last pay period in November, such officer or employee may be paid in cash each year by December 25 for one-fourth of the accumulated sick leave beyond the 30 days, and the other three-fourths above the 30 days shall be added to the sick leave reserve fund of such officer or employee. (2)  No charge will be made against this sick leave reserve fund until the base accumulation of 30 days has been exhausted and until a valid medical certificate has been presented as to the nature of the employee's illness. Any sick leave granted beyond 60 days from the reserve fund must have the approval of the chief financial officer or designee. (d)  In emergencies, officers and employees who, because of protracted illness, shall have used all accumulated sick leave and annual leave may be advanced sick leave upon the recommendation of the commissioner of human resources and the approval of the chief financial officer. To ensure the uniformity among the various departments, requests for advanced sick leave shall be addressed by the appropriate department head to the commissioner of human resources, who, upon investigation, shall make recommendation to the chief financial officer. Such advanced sick leave accruing to the credit of the officer or employee shall be charged against annual leave, exclusive of five days per year, accruing to the officer or employee. Should the employment of an officer or employee be terminated before the advanced sick leave has been repaid, there shall be a deduction of one day's pay, based on the rate of pay at the time of termination, for each day of sick leave advanced from the final pay or any other sum due such officer or employee. (e)  One-hour shall be the minimum charge for sick leave, and additional sick leave shall be charged in multiples of one hour. (f)  To receive sick leave with pay, the employee shall notify such employee's immediate supervisor or department head prior to or within one hour after the time set for the beginning of such employee's daily duties. Failure to so notify the supervisor, office director or department head may result in one day's loss of pay, and an additional day's loss of pay shall result for each succeeding day in which notification is not received. An employee of a department operating on a 24-hour basis must provide such notification within the time limit established by the office director or department head. (g)  An officer or employee eligible for sick leave with pay shall be granted such leave by the department head for the following reasons: (1)  Personal illness, injury or disability. (2)  Consultation or treatment for personal medical, dental or optical conditions. (3)  Exposure to a contagious disease which would endanger others. (4)  Maternity. (5)  Death or illness of a member of an employee's family or of an employee's domestic partner which requires the employee's personal care and attendance. An employee's family is defined as members of the same household related to each other by blood or marriage and living in a bona fide family relationship and who are either: a.  Legal dependents of the employee; b.  Parent, child, brother, sister, father-in-law and mother-in-law; or c.  Another relative who has been in a parent-child relationship to the employee. (6)  Death of a member of the employee's family, plus grandparents (both natural and in-laws), grandchildren, brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law. (h)  Under the following circumstances, a medical certificate executed by a licensed physician or chiropractor may be required by the employee's office director or department head in order to substantiate a request for sick leave: (1)  Any period of absence due to illness consisting of three or more consecutive working days, except that the fire chief shall adopt a policy requiring a doctor or chiropractor certificate in the department of fire. The policy shall be consistent with the intent of this article. (2)  Request for sick leave during a period when the employee is on annual leave. (3)  The occurrence of frequent or habitual absences from duty, provided the employee has been notified or warned that a certificate would be required. (i)  Any employee who is absent from work due to illness for a period of five or more consecutive days shall, prior to being allowed to return to work, obtain a medical certificate executed by a licensed physician or chiropractor. (j)  Should an employee utilize sick leave for purposes other than those set forth in this section, such time off shall be without pay. The employee may also be subjected to disciplinary action. (k)  An officer or an employee who leaves the service of the city and is reemployed within 90 days, upon compliance with the regulations then in force, shall be credited with all unused and nonpaid sick leave, not to exceed 30 days. (l)  Whenever an officer or employee is granted a leave of absence without pay and returns to the service of the city at the conclusion of such leave or has been laid off, upon reinstatement, the officer or employee shall be credited with all sick leave standing to the credit of the officer or employee on the effective date of the beginning of the leave of absence or layoff. No sick leave shall be accrued during a leave of absence without pay or during a layoff. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-417. - Military leave. (a)  Short-term military leave. In addition to the rights and benefits provided to employees taking extended military leave as described in section (b) below, regular full-time employees who must be absent from their job for a period of not more than 18 working days each year in order to participate in temporary military duty or training are entitled to receive up to 18 days paid military leave per year. All benefits will continue during an employee's short-term military leave. (b)  Extended military leave. Employees directed to participate in extended military duties in the U.S. Armed Forces that exceed 18 working days per year will receive paid military leave for the first 18 days of such military service per year, and shall be paid the difference between the military salary and current city salary for workdays 19 through 25 in any calendar year if such service is in conjunction with, or support of, homeland security or military action against terrorism, and thereafter be placed on an unpaid military leave of absence status for a period up to five years from the initial date of military service, and will be entitled to the rights and benefits described below, subject to the procedures outlined below. (c)  Procedure for military leave. (1)  The employee will provide the immediate supervisor with notice, (either verbal or written) that the employee will be engaging in military service. The employee should provide such notice as soon as they have knowledge of upcoming military service. (2)  An employee on short-term or extended military leave may, at the employee's option, use any or all accrued paid annual leave or compensatory time while absent. (3)  When the employee intends to return to work, a notification of reinstatement must be submitted to the applicable department head and to the commissioner of human resources within the application period set forth below. (4)  If the employee does not return to work, the supervisor must notify the applicable department head and the commissioner of human resources so that appropriate action may be taken. (d)  Benefits. If an employee is absent from work due to military service, benefits will continue as follows: (1)  If an employee has military orders for over 31 days, the employee and covered dependents may be offered health insurance coverage as long as the employee pays the required premium. (2)  Any group term life/AD&D insurance provided by the city for the employee will be suspended the day the employee becomes active military. Any group term life/AD&D insurance provided by the city for the benefit of dependents will remain in effect as long as the employee pays the required premium. (3)  Any group long-term disability insurance provided by the city will be suspended the day the employee becomes active military. (4)  No employee shall accrue annual or sick leave while on unpaid military leave of absence status. (5)  With respect to the city's retirement plans, upon reemployment, an employee who has taken military leave will be credited for purposes of vesting with the time spent in military service and will be treated as not having incurred a break in service. Immediately upon reinstatement, the employee may, at the employee's election, make any or all employee contributions that the employee would have been eligible to make had the employee's employment not been interrupted by military service. Such contributions must be made within a period that begins with the employee's reinstatement and that is not greater in duration than three times the length of the employee's military service, not to exceed five years. The employee will receive all associated city matches for such contributions. (6)  Voluntary supplemental life/AD&D insurance will suspend the day the employee becomes active military. Converting to an individual policy will continue voluntary dependent life insurance coverage. To exercise this conversion option, dependents must submit a written application and the first premium payment within 31 days immediately following the suspension of coverage. (e)  Reinstatement. Upon an employee's prompt application for reinstatement (as defined below), an employee will be reinstated to employment in the following manner depending upon the employee's period of military service: (1)  For a period of one to 90 days: a.  In the position of employment in which the person would have been employed if the continuous employment of such person with the employer had not been interrupted by such service, the duties of which the person is qualified to perform; or b.  In the position of employment in which the person was employed on the date of the commencement of the service in the uniformed services, only if the person is not qualified to perform the duties of the position referred to in subparagraph (a) after reasonable efforts by the employer to qualify the person. (2)  91 or more days: a.  In the position of employment in which the person would have been employed if the continuous employment of such person with the city had not been interrupted by such service, or a position of like seniority, status and pay, the duties of which the person is qualified to perform; or b.  In the position of employment in which the person was employed on the date of the commencement of the service in the uniformed services, or a position of like seniority, status and pay, the duties of which the person is qualified to perform, only if the person is not qualified to perform the duties of a position referred to in subparagraph (a) after reasonable efforts by the city to qualify the person. (3)  Employee with a service-connected disability - if after reasonable accommodation efforts by the city, an employee with a service-connected disability is not qualified for employment in the position that would have been attained or in the position that was vacated, the employee will be employed in: a.  Any other position of similar seniority, status and pay for which the employee is qualified or could become qualified with reasonable efforts by the city, or b.  If no such position exists, in the nearest approximation consistent with the circumstances of the employee's situation. (f)  Application for reinstatement. An employee who has engaged in military service must, in order to be entitled to the reinstatement rights set forth above, submit an application for reinstatement according to the following schedule: (1)  If service is less than 31 days (or for the purpose of taking an examination to determine fitness for service) —The employee must report for reinstatement at the beginning of the first full regularly scheduled working period on the first calendar day following completion of service and the expiration of eight hours rest and after a time for safe transportation back to the employee's residence. (2)  If service is for 31 days or more but less than 180 days —The employee must submit an application for reinstatement with the applicable department head and the commissioner of human resources no later than 14 days following the completion of service. (3)  If service is 181 days or over —The employee must submit an application for reinstatement with the applicable department head and the commissioner of human resources no later than 90 days following the completion of service. (4)  If the employee is hospitalized or convalescing from a service-connected injury —The employee must submit an application for reinstatement with the applicable department head and the commissioner of human resources no later than two years following completion of service. (g)  Exceptions to reemployment. In addition to the employee's failure to apply for reemployment in a timely manner, an employee is not entitled to reinstatement as described above if either of the following conditions exist: (1)  The city's circumstances have so changed as to make reemployment impossible or unreasonable. (2)  The employee did not receive an honorable discharge from military service. (h)  General benefits upon reinstatement. An employees reinstated following military leave will receive seniority and other benefits determined by seniority that the employee had at the beginning of the military leave, plus any additional seniority and benefits the employee would have attained, with reasonable certainty, had the individual remained continuously employed. In addition, an employee's time spent on active military duty will be counted toward their eligibility for FMLA leave once they return to their job with the city. (i)  Documentation. The applicable department head will, upon the employee's reinstatement, request that the employee provide the city with military discharge documentation (DD214) to establish the length and character of the employee's military service. (j)  Examination. An employee, ordered to appear for a physical examination for induction into the military service, shall be granted leave with pay for such purpose. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-418. - Family leave. (a)  An employee who is the primary caregiver for a child/children shall be entitled to time off with pay not to exceed six weeks upon the occurrence of any of the following events: (1)  Birth of a biological child or children; or (2)  Legal adoption of a child or children; or (3)  Becoming a foster parent to a child or children through the Georgia Division of Family and Children's Services, or a related or successor state agency. (b)  An employee who is the non-primary caregiver for a child/children shall be entitled to time off with pay not to exceed two weeks for family leave to support a domestic partner or spouse upon the occurrence of any events listed in subsection (a) of this Code section related to the formation of a legally recognized parent-child or foster parent-child relationship. (c)  Employees shall provide documentation of the basis for any leave requested under this Code section. (d)  Family leave provided in this Code section shall run concurrently with FMLA leave. ( Ord. No. 2015-34(15-O-1142), § 4, 6-25-15 ) 
Sec. 114-419. - Civil leave. (a)  An employee shall be entitled to time off with pay when performing jury duty or when subpoenaed to appear before any public body or commission, except when summoned to appear for personal matters. An employee will be permitted to take any necessary time off to vote in any municipal, county, state or federal political party primary or election, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-404. Such necessary time off shall not exceed two hours, and if the hours of work of such employee commence at least two hours after the opening of the polls or end at least two hours prior to the closing of the polls, the time off for voting need not apply. The employee's supervisor may specify the hours which may be used as provided in this section. (b)  An employee shall be entitled to time off with pay to work at the polls during a City of Atlanta Municipal Election, provided proper approval is received from the supervisor or department head of the employee. Eligible employees must submit an application to the Fulton or DeKalb County Department of Registration and Election, in accordance with applicable regulations, to be approved and selected to work at the polls on Election Day. (c)  An employee, while taking examinations before a federal, state or other governmental agency, may be granted leave with pay if such examinations are pertinent to the employment of such employee with the city. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-420, 114-421. - Reserved. 
Sec. 114-422. - Leave of absence without pay.     A department head, with notification to the commissioner of human resources, may grant a regular employee a leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed one year. The granting of a leave of absence without pay shall be subject to the following conditions: (1)  Leave without pay shall be granted only when such will not adversely affect the interest of the service of the city. (2)  Failure of an employee to return to work at the expiration of approved leave shall be considered as absence without leave and shall be grounds for dismissal. (3)  An employee granted leave of absence without pay and who wishes to return before the leave period has expired shall be required to give the department head of such employee written notice of such wish at least two weeks in advance of the date such employee wishes to return. Upon giving such notice, the employee shall be permitted to return to work on the date specified, unless the employee's position has been temporarily filled by another employee for the period of time originally specified in the leave of absence. (4)  The officers and employees may continue group life and health insurance benefits while on leave of absence from the employ of the city, provided that such leave of absence is granted for one of the following reasons: military leave, maternity leave, sick leave or study leave of absence. The premium payments for such insurance shall be made by the employee. (5)  Upon the return from a leave without pay, the employee shall occupy the salary grade which such employee occupied at the time of the commencement of the leave; provided, however, that any across-the-board increases granted during such employee's leave shall be granted to such employee. (6)  Upon the return from a leave without pay, the employee shall be entitled to employment in the department and in the same or equivalent class in which such employee was employed at the time of commencement of the leave. (7)  An employee who obtains employment elsewhere while on an authorized leave of absence shall forfeit such employee's position of employment with the city. (8)  An unclassified employee who is granted a leave of absence without pay to work on a political campaign shall have the employee's position of employment abolished with the city if the leave of absence to work on the political campaign extends for more than three months. (9)  All leaves of absence granted under this section, except leaves of absence to work on political campaigns, will be reviewed by the department head three months from the date such leave of absence begins to determine if it is in the best interest of the city for such leave to continue. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-423. - Compensatory time. (a)  Employees nonexempt from FLSA may be given compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay at the same overtime rate to which the employee is entitled. (b)  Employees exempt from FLSA may be given compensatory time off at the rate of one hour for each hour worked beyond their regularly scheduled work period. Exempt employees are not eligible for overtime pay. (c)  Each employee must use all compensatory time accrued by the end of the calendar year in which the time was earned. Except when work exigencies prevent the use of properly requested and approved leave, such leave may, with the request of the department head and the approval of the commissioner of human resources, be used in the following calendar year. (d)  All city employees who qualify can accrue a maximum of 160 hours of compensatory time. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-424. - Disability leave. (a)  This section shall apply to both the classified and unclassified service of the city. Any employee who is covered by the state workers' compensation act and who suffers an on-the-job injury which is compensable under O.C.G.A. tit. 34, ch. 9 (O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq.), the state workers' compensation act, may receive salary in lieu of workers' compensation during the period of disability as set forth in this section. (b)  Receipt of salary during such disability leave shall be subject to the following conditions: (1)  No compensation in the form of disability leave shall be allowed for the first three working days of incapacity resulting from an injury; however, if an employee is incapacitated for 28 consecutive days following an injury, disability leave shall be paid for such first three working days of incapacity. (2)  When an employee is injured in the line of duty, the department head shall file a report of the injury using form WC1 of the state board of workers' compensation, which must be received by the department of finance within 48 hours of the injury and which must be supplemented, if necessary, to advise fully of the injury and all related circumstances. (3)  A physician selected by the employee from the panel of physicians posted by the city under the provisions of the state workers' compensation act must be used to determine the extent of such employee's injury, the physical impairment of the employee resulting from the injury, the disability of such employee, the physical ability of such employee to continue to perform the duties of such employee's position or perform the duties of other positions and the physical ability of such employee to return to such employee's position after recovery from the injury. (4)  Should the employee's physical condition, as determined by the medical evaluation described in this subsection, warrant, such employee may be assigned by such employee's department head to the duties of other positions during the period of recuperation from injury or to any position citywide by the commissioner of human resources, should no appropriate position be available within such employee's department. (5)  Disability leave with full salary shall not exceed 90 calendar days from the date of injury, unless the authorized physician shall certify that such employee is unable to perform any duties during the period of recuperation from injury. In such case, the department of finance may extend the period of disability leave with full salary in increments of not more than 90 calendar days to a maximum period not to exceed six months from the date of such injury. The employee shall provide a doctor's certification of inability to perform duties every 30 days to continue to receive injury-on-the-job compensation. Thereafter, should the employee be physically unable to work as determined by the authorized physician, such employee shall be allowed to utilize all accrued sick and annual leave or be paid the rate provided by the state workers' compensation act. The payment of full salary as sick or annual leave shall be considered payment of full salary in lieu of workers' compensation income benefits provided by the state workers' compensation act. Holidays which occur during the employee's absence on disability leave shall not be accrued for use upon return to work. (6)  A temporary employee who is disabled in the line of duty shall not receive disability leave but shall be paid in accordance with the state workers' compensation act. (7)  Payments of salary made to an employee on disability leave shall be subject to subrogation rights by the city in those instances where payments of salary shall be made to the employee as a result of the act of a third party and if such employee should obtain a recovery from the third party. Any and all information necessary in order to effect such subrogation rights shall be furnished to the department of finance by the head of the department in which the employee was working at the time of the injury, and the employee shall be subject to dismissal from employment for refusing to cooperate in effecting the subrogation rights of the city. (c)  The commissioner of human resources is authorized to identify appropriate jobs which may be filled by those officers or employees subject to 1981 Ga. Laws, page 3569 and for purposes of O.C.G.A. tit. 34, ch. 9 (O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq.), the workers' compensation act. Such job assignments shall be known as "modified duty." (d)  All city employees who are not covered by the city's pension plan shall be paid only the compensation required by the state workers' compensation act (O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq.). (e)  For the purposes of this section, a sworn officer of the department of police shall be deemed to be injured in line of duty upon the occurrence of any of the following: (1)  The officer sustains an injury while on duty performing such officer's normal functions (2)  The officer sustains an injury while in the course of employment with another employer, within the boundaries of the city, pursuant to a valid permit approved by the department of police, and while taking appropriate and necessary action for the protection of the public. (3)  The officer sustains an injury while off duty performing a duty that is authorized by the rules and regulations of the department of police and which is appropriate and necessary for the protection of the public. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-425. - Absence without leave.     Any absence of an employee from duty for all or part of a day which is not authorized by a specific grant of leave of absence under this division shall be deemed to be an absence without leave. Any such absence shall be one without pay, and shall subject the employee so absent to disciplinary action. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-426. - Blood donation leave of absence.     An employee shall be entitled to a leave of absence of not more than 16 hours in each calendar year without loss of pay for the purpose of donating blood. This absence shall be computed at four hours per donation, up to four times per year upon satisfactory evidence of having donated or attempted to donate blood. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-427. - Leave to serve on an approved city employee board or commission.     City employees who are elected to or appointed to an approved city employee board or commission may attend meetings and other official functions of such board during such employees' regular or assigned working hours, and the time spent attending such meetings and functions shall not be charged to such employees' leave time, subject to the following conditions: (1)  The employees shall notify, in writing, their immediate supervisors of their attendance at such meeting not less than 48 hours prior to the scheduled date and time of the meeting. With regard to specially called or emergency meetings, the employees shall notify, in writing, their immediate supervisors of such meeting as soon as is practicable under the circumstances. In the case of emergency or special meetings called on short notice, reasonable accommodation shall be afforded the employee; however, if an employee's services are deemed indispensable by such employee's supervisors, the needs of the service shall take precedence over the board or commission meeting. (2)  Should it become necessary for an employee to travel out of the city in connection with such employee's official duties as a member of any city board or commission, or other such board or commission where city employee representation is required, such time shall be charged in the same manner as that related to absences while on official business of the city. (3)  The time taken pursuant to this section for attendance at meetings and other official functions of boards and commissions of the city or other such boards and commissions where city employee representation is required shall not exceed 48 hours per year for regular, special or emergency called meetings and shall not exceed three days per year for travel out of the city. Travel out of the city for "53 hour" employees of the fire department shall not exceed six days per year. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-428. - Paid leave for health screenings for certain health concerns. (a)  The city shall make available up to four hours of paid leave, one time per calendar year, to regular, full-time city employees for the purpose of undergoing health screening for cardiovascular disease, cancer, HIV, diabetes and pneumonia/influenza. (b)  Employees must submit to their supervisor or appropriate department personnel representative a signed copy of the medical documentation verifying they underwent a health screening for one or more of the above illness or disease processes, in order to be granted leave under provisions of this section. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-429. - Voluntary shared leave program. (a)  Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this section is to set forth procedures and requirements for a "Voluntary Shared Leave Program" under which leave (annual, sick and compensatory time) may be transferred from one employee to another in the event the receiving employee or an immediate family member suffers from a serious illness or injury that necessitates the employee's absence from work. (b)  Definitions. (1)  Family member refers to the following relatives of the employee: a.  Spouse or domestic partner and his/her parents; b.  Children, including adopted children, and their spouses; c.  Parents; d.  Brothers and sisters and their spouses; and e.  Any individual related by blood or whose close association is the equivalent of a family relationship. (2)  Leave recipient means an employee who receives donated leave. (3)  Leave donor means an employee who voluntarily transfers leave to the shared leave account of a leave recipient. (4)  Severe illness or injury means a catastrophic medical condition of an employee or a family member that would require the employee's absence from work for an extended period of time and would result in a loss of income. (5)  Shared leave account refers to an account established for a leave recipient to receive donated leave and shall be maintained separately from other leave balances. (c)  Requesting shared leave. To be eligible to receive shared leave, an employee shall: (1)  Meet the following eligibility requirements: a.  Is a regular employee with satisfactory or effective performance rating; b.  Incur a severe illness or injury; or c.  Serve as a caregiver responsibility for a family member with a severe illness or injury; and d.  Has exhausted all accrued leave. (2)  Prepare a "shared leave request form" by: a.  Obtaining a request form from the supervisor or manager; and b.  Submitting a completed form to the supervisor and department head for signatures and transmission of the form, including medical verification, to the department of human resources, before or during the period of leave. (3)  Provide medical verification by: a.  Obtaining a medical statement signed by a licensed physician that: 1.  Verifies and describes the incapacitating condition which requires the employee's absence; and 2.  Provides the beginning date of treatment and the date employee is expected to return to work, or in the case of a family member, the expected duration of the illness. b.  Sending the medical statement directly to the department head of the leave recipient. (d)  Status while receiving shared leave. (1)  Insurance benefits and leave accrual continue if an employee is in a shared leave status. (2)  Shared leave ends when an employee returns to work or is separated from employment. If the medical provider recommends a gradual return to work, additional shared leave use may be approved by the commissioner of human resources in conjunction with the recipient's department head. (3)  Any employee on shared leave shall be prohibited from taking another job. Violation of this section shall cause the immediate forfeiture of any remaining donated leave. (e)  Donating leave. (1)  An employee who desires to donate leave shall complete a "voluntary shared leave form" designating the recipient of the leave and the amount and category of leave to be donated. (2)  Employees donating leave shall donate a minimum of hours in any leave category. a.  An employee may donate no more than 50 percent of the annual or sick leave accrued in a work year. The amount of leave donation shall not exceed 50 percent of the leave balance at the time of donation. b.  A non-exempt employee may donate as many hours of compensatory hours as desired. (f)  Leave limitations. (1)  A leave recipient may receive and be allowed to use no more than 2,080 hours from the date of approval, per occurrence of severe illness or injury; except that sworn employees of the Atlanta Fire Department on a 53-hour schedule shall be entitled to receive and use no more than 2,756 hours. (2)  Donated leave may be used only for the severe illness or injury for which the leave recipient is approved. (3)  No employee may donate leave to an immediate supervisor. (4)  Donated leave may not be used to repay advance sick leave. (5)  A leave recipient shall not transfer donated leave to another leave recipient. (6)  Unused donated leave shall not be credited to the leave recipient's accrued or earned leave balances, or pension account. Any unused leave shall be forfeited. (7)  Nothing in this plan is grievable. (8)  Exempt employees may not donate compensatory time. (g)  Prohibition of coercion. An employee may not directly or indirectly intimidate, threaten, or coerce, or attempt to intimidate, threaten, or coerce any other employee for the purpose of interfering with respect to donating, receiving, or using sick or vacation leave. (h)  Records and reports. (1)  The department of human resources shall retain the following documents on individual leave donations: a.  Approved and disapproved leave recipient and donor forms; b.  Number of hours transferred to each leave recipient; c.  Number of donated hours used by each recipient, d.  Written notice of termination of severe illness or injury, and e.  Any other material pertinent to each leave recipient or donor. (2)  Voluntary shared leave program documents must be maintained separately from other employee personnel files. (i)  Administrative responsibilities. (1)  Department head of leave recipient shall review and provide recommendation concerning employee's request, monitor the status of the employee's severe illness or injury to ensure adherence to the policies and requirements concerning the voluntary shared leave program. (2)  The department of human resources shall: a.  Review request to become a leave recipient; b.  Verify the eligibility of a leave donor; c.  Advise when request to become a leave recipient is approved or disapproved; d.  Notify the department of finance of request approval; and, e.  Notify the department of finance when the leave status has ended. (3)  Department of finance shall: a.  Make appropriate adjustments to recipient and donor leave balance; and b.  Maintain special shared leave account. (j)  Confidentiality. This information will be kept confidential to the extent authorized under the Open Records Act. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-430—114-435. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT 
Sec. 114-436. - Definition and conditions.     Outside employment shall constitute any paid employment of an employee which is in addition to such employee's employment with the city. As related to one's employment with the city, outside employment shall only be allowed under the following conditions: (1)  Such employment shall not interfere with or affect the performance of the employee's duties. (2)  Such employment shall not involve a conflict of interest or a conflict with the employee's duties. (3)  Such employment shall not involve the performance of duties which the employee should perform as part of such employee's employment with the city. (4)  Such employment shall not occur during the employee's regular or assigned working hours, unless the employee is on either annual leave, compensatory leave or leave without pay. (5)  No employee engaging in outside employment shall work at such outside employment for a longer period of time than that stated in the employee's request for permission to engage in such employment. (6)  Such employment shall be conditioned upon the employee's being relieved immediately for the return to and performance of the duties of such employee's employment with the city, if such employee should be called for emergency service. (7)  Such employment shall not involve the use of records or equipment of the city. Police uniforms shall not be considered equipment in the meaning of this subsection. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-437. - Procedure. (a)  No employee shall perform outside employment without having first filed a written request with such employee's department head for permission to engage in outside employment. Such request shall state the type and duration of employment, the hours of work, the name and business address of the prospective employer and the location of the place at which such employee shall be engaged in outside employment. (b)  The department head shall have the right to deny the request or approve the request, provided that such employment is in compliance with section 114-436. (c)  The finance/executive committee of the city council shall be notified when outside employment has been approved for employees whose appointments are subject to city council confirmation. Such notification shall be accompanied by a copy of the written request required by subsection (a) above. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-438—114-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT 
Sec. 114-451. - Employee development. (a)  The commissioner of human resources shall cooperate with department heads, employees and others in promoting and providing programs of development for the civil service. Such programs shall improve the quality of service rendered to the public and to enhance employees' skills for advancement and career success. (b)  The commissioner of human resources shall cooperate with department heads, employees and others in promoting measures directed toward making working conditions more sanitary, safe and healthful. (c)  The commissioner of human resources shall create a comprehensive tuition assistance/job training program for all eligible employees of the city. The tuition assistance/job training program shall consist of associate and/or college degree programs and job-specific certification programs that are directly related to an employee's present position or to a reasonable promotional/transfer opportunity within the city that are approved by the commissioner of human resources. Included in the establishment of this program, the commissioner of human resources shall also create policies related to eligibility criteria, application process, performance requirements, and repayment obligations. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2015-24(15-O-1194), § 1, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 114-452. - Administration of employee development.     The commissioner of human resources shall perform the following functions: (1)  Recommend to department heads programs and standards for employee development. (2)  Assist department heads in development and implementation of programs to meet the specific needs of such departments and aid in the development and utilization of other techniques for increasing employee efficiency. (3)  Develop and implement supervisory, management and other employee development programs for all departments. (4)  Provide information concerning career development opportunities for employees. (5)  Ensure that all development opportunities and programs are provided to all employees without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, disability, age, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or religious creed. (6)  Maintain a record of all programs and a record of those employees successfully completing such. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 5-F, 7-16-13) 
Secs. 114-453—114-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LABOR RELATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 114-501. - Short title.     This article shall be known and may be cited as the labor-management relations ordinance. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-502. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Adverse action means a disciplinary action taken for cause by a department head or designee which results in suspension without pay, demotion or dismissal of a regular, nonprobationary employee in the classified service of the city or any regular nonprobationary sworn officer of the department of police who holds the rank of lieutenant or below or any regular nonprobationary sworn officer of the department of fire who holds the rank of captain or below. It does not include actions which result from challenging the decision to implement or the scope of a reduction in force or actions resulting from insufficient funds, decrease in funds or departmental reorganization or denial of annual increase based on the employee receiving a less than effective performance evaluation. Adverse actions may be appealed to the civil service board.     Appeal means a written request by an employee for review by the civil service board of an adverse action, removal from the eligible list, procedures used in a reduction in force or unjust coercion or reprisal as provided in this article.     Appointing authority means the official, group of officials, acting official or other person designated by the proper authority having the power of appointment, employment or election to or removal from subordinate positions in the city employment service.     Board means the civil service board of the city.     Classified service means that which is referenced in 114-84.     Commissioner, unless otherwise specified, means the commissioner of human resources.     Counseling means a deliberation or discussion between employee and supervisor in which the employee's supervisor advises the employee regarding the appropriateness of work-related attitudes, behaviors, actions, conduct or performance of the employee and where necessary offers assistance or advise in correcting such.     Days, unless otherwise specified, means working days.     Demotion means a change of employment to a position in a class which has a lower maximum salary limit than the class from which the assignment was made. A reduction in pay shall not be deemed a demotion for cause if such reduction results from a demotion during a probationary period such that the employee is returned to the position held immediately prior to the promotion, a reduction in force, insufficient funds, decrease in funds, departmental reorganization or a change of appointment made in the discretion of the appointing authority as provided by this Code and shall not be appealable under this article.     Disciplinary action means an action taken for cause by a department head or designee which results in an oral admonishment, a written reprimand, demotion, suspension with or without pay or dismissal of a regular nonprobationary employee in the classified service of the city or any regular nonprobationary sworn officer of the department of police who holds the rank of lieutenant or below or any regular nonprobationary sworn officer of the department of fire who holds the rank of captain or below. Disciplinary actions include all adverse actions. Only those disciplinary actions which are adverse actions, suspension without pay, demotions or dismissals, by definition of this article, are appealable to the civil service board.     Dismissal means the discharge, termination or removal of an employee from employment with the city.     Eligible means a person who has qualified to be placed on a list or register of persons eligible for employment with the city pursuant to article IV of this chapter pertaining to civil service.     Grievance means a written request by an employee for review of an allegation which describes a work-related event or a condition of employment which the employee reasonably believes is unfair in light of the rules, regulations and standards which govern the employment relationship with the city.     Hearing officer means a member of the civil service board appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council as provided in this article and who is designated in routine rotation sequence to hear appeals filed with the civil service board.     Hearing panel means three members of the civil service board who are designated in routine rotation sequence to hear appeals of dismissals filed with the civil service board.     Oral admonishment means a verbal discussion by a supervisor with an employee calling attention to the employee's substandard work performance or inappropriate conduct and requiring correction of the substandard work performance or inappropriate conduct within a specified timeframe.     Performance evaluation means a periodic written report approved by the appointing authority or designee relative to the work-related conduct and performance of the employee and which is issued in accordance with article IV of this chapter.     Probationary employee means any employee appointed to a regular position who has not completed the required probationary period in a given class qualifying the employee for regular employment in that class served in accordance with article IV of this chapter.     Reprimand means a written report to an employee by a supervisor calling attention to the employee's substandard work performance or inappropriate conduct and requiring correction of the substandard work performance or inappropriate conduct within a specified timeframe.     Separation means termination of the employment relationship.     Suspension means the temporary removal of an employee from a position of employment with the city with or without pay. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 6, 6-30-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 114-503. - Point of contact.     The commissioner of human resources shall serve as the principal employee relations official for this city and shall be responsible for representing the city in discussions with employee organizations concerning personnel policies, practices or procedures and working conditions of city employees. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-504. - Disparate treatment prohibited.     There shall be no disparate treatment against or in favor of any employee because such employee is a member of an employee organization. No employee shall be required, as a condition of employment with the city, to become or to remain a member of a labor or employee organization. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-505. - Meet and confer sessions. (a)  The mayor or designee shall meet and confer annually with any interested employee organization group recognized for deduction of dues under section 114-28 of this Code, for the purpose of discussing wages, rates of pay, working conditions, and other terms and conditions of employment. (b)  Any consensus reached between the mayor and employee organizations may be embodied in a written memorandum of understanding. (c)  The commissioner of human resources or designee shall meet and confer monthly with any interested employee organization recognized for deduction of dues under section 114-28 of this Code, for the purposes of discussing wages, rates of pay, benefits, working conditions and other terms of employment for its members. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-506—114-515. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GRIEVANCES 
Sec. 114-516. - Application of division.     The policies and procedures set forth in this division for the processing of grievances shall apply to all regular employees in the classified service of the city and all nonprobationary sworn employees in the departments of police and fire. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-517. - Statement of policy.     Employee grievances should, to the fullest extent practicable, be promptly considered and/or equitably resolved. The city establishes its policy to encourage employees to seek review of legitimate grievances and to require that the managerial and supervisory personnel of all city departments make every effort to fairly resolve grievances of employees in their respective departments at the earliest opportunity. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-518. - Purposes.     The procedures set forth in this division are established to: (1)  Establish and implement a clear, expeditious, efficient and equitable system of processing employee grievances; (2)  Allow for informal resolution of grievances between employees and managerial and supervisory personnel of city departments; (3)  Provide a prompt and fair opportunity for employees to seek review of legitimate grievances without fear of reprisal or coercion or unequal treatment; and (4)  Encourage managerial and supervisory personnel of city departments to eliminate or correct causes of legitimate grievances of employees. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-519. - Matters for which grievances may be filed.     The procedures set forth in this division for the resolution of employee grievances shall apply to the following: (1)  Supervisory-employee relationships; (2)  Working conditions; (3)  Classification and pay issues; (4)  Departmental policies and procedures; (5)  Citywide policies and procedures; (6)  Other employment-related issues not prohibited by city, state, county or federal law; (7)  Disciplinary actions other than adverse actions; and (8)  Any other matter determined grievable by the commissioner of human resources pursuant to section 114-521. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-520. - Matters for which grievances may not be filed.     The procedures set forth in this division for the resolution of employee grievances shall not apply to the following: (1)  Routine transfers. (2)  Selection from a properly certified eligibility list. (3)  Reassignment. (4)  Staffing levels. (5)  Neither the commitment setting session nor the rating an employee receives under the employee performance appraisal system. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-521. - Determination as to whether a matter is grievable.     If the determination by the employee's department is that the matter is not grievable under sections 114-519 and 114-520, the department must notify the employee in writing of the employee's right to request a review of the determination of grievability by the commissioner of human resources. The employee may request such review and the determination of grievability shall be made as follows: (1)  Submission of request for determination of grievability form. The employee shall obtain a request for a determination of grievability form from the commissioner of human resources. The employee shall complete the form and shall provide therein sufficient facts and details of the circumstances giving rise to or the causes of the employee's grievance. The employee shall submit the form to the commissioner of human resources within five days from the date the employee was notified by the employee's department that the matter for which the employee seeks redress is not grievable. (2)  Determination by commissioner of human resources. Within five days of receipt of the determination of grievability form, the commissioner of human resources shall make a written determination as to whether the matter is grievable under section 114-519. (3)  Notice of determination of grievability. A notice of determination of grievability shall be sent to the employee by certified mail and a copy to the employee's department. The notice shall state whether the commissioner of human resources finds the matter grievable or not grievable and shall contain the statement of reasons for such determination. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-522. - Right of representation.     The employee shall have the right of representation at all stages of the grievance procedure. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-523. - Grievance resolution procedures.     The following procedures shall govern the processing of grievances: (1)  Verbal discussions initiated by aggrieved employee. Any employee who has a grievance, as provided in section 114-519, or a matter found to be grievable, as provided in section 114-521, may initiate the grievance process by requesting a meeting for the verbal discussion of the grievance with the employee's immediate supervisor within three working days of the occurrence of the incident giving rise to the grievance or becoming aware of the incident giving rise to the grievances. The immediate supervisor, at the time of the employee's request for a meeting, shall schedule a meeting for discussion for a definite time and place, but such meeting shall not take place later than three working days following the employee's request. After the meeting, the supervisor shall investigate the employee's grievance and verbally communicate a decision to the employee within three working days of the meeting. (2)  Submission of grievance to immediate supervisor. If, after the supervisor's verbal response, the grievance is not resolved to the employee's satisfaction and the employee desires to pursue the matter, the employee shall submit, in writing, on a form supplied by the commissioner of human resources, the nature of the grievance, the facts to support the grievance, any supporting documents and the requested remedy. Copies of the grievance will be forwarded to the head of the affected department and the commissioner of human resources. The form shall be submitted by the employee to the immediate supervisor within five working days of receipt of the verbal decision rendered by the supervisor. Within three working days of the receipt of the grievance form, the supervisor shall set forth in writing on the corresponding section of the grievance form and transmit to the employee the findings of the investigation and the reasons therefor and shall attach all supporting documents. (3)  Submission of grievance to next level supervisor. If the grievance is not resolved by the supervisor to the employee's satisfaction and the employee desires to pursue the matter, the employee may submit the completed grievance form to the next level supervisor having authority to resolve the grievance within three working days of receipt of the decision by the supervisor. The next level supervisor shall investigate the grievance and, as necessary, shall collect evidence. Within five working days of receipt of the grievance form, the next level supervisor shall set forth in writing on the corresponding section of the grievance form and transmit to the employee the findings of the investigation, the decision on the grievance and the reasons therefor and shall attach all supporting documents. (4)  Submission of grievance to director. If the grievance is not resolved by the next level supervisor to the employee's satisfaction and the employee desires to pursue the matter, the employee shall submit the completed grievance form to the director of the office under which the employee is employed within three working days of receipt of the supervisor's decision. The director shall investigate the grievance and, as necessary, shall collect evidence. Within five days of receipt of the grievance form, the director shall set forth in writing on the corresponding section of the grievance form and transmit to the employee the findings of the investigation, the decision on the grievance and the reasons therefor and shall attach all supporting documents. (5)  Submission of grievance to department head. a.  If the grievance is not resolved by the director to the employee's satisfaction, the employee may submit the completed grievance form to the head of the employee's department within three working days of receipt of the decision of the director. The head of the employee's department shall investigate the grievance as appropriate and shall collect evidence. Within five working days of receipt of the completed grievance form, the department head shall set forth in writing the final determination of the employee's grievance by the department. The final determination shall include the decision on the grievance, state the reasons therefor shall and include any supporting evidence. A copy of the final determination by the department shall be given to the employee or sent to the employee by registered mail no later than the tenth day from date of receipt of the grievance by the head of the employee's department. b.  If the grievance is from an employee of the department of fire or department of police, the final paragraph of the chief's letter will differ significantly depending upon the grieving employee's sworn or nonsworn status as follows: 1.  If the grieving employee is sworn, the last paragraph will advise the grievant that the chief's decision is not subject to any further administrative appeal, but that the grievant could seek redress in the civil courts on the employee's own initiative and expense. Copies of this letter will be distributed to the deputy chief, the immediate supervisor, the employee's personnel file and the city attorney's office. 2.  If the grieving employee is nonsworn, the last paragraph will advise the grievant that the chief's decision could be appealed to the commissioner of human resource as per subsection (6) of this section. Copies of this letter will be distributed to the deputy chief, immediate supervisor, the employee's personnel file and the city attorney's office. 3.  The time constraints of subsection (5)a of this section shall apply to this subsection. (6)  Submission of grievance to department of human resource. If the employee is not satisfied with the final determination on the grievance by the department and the employee desires to pursue the matter, the employee may submit the completed grievance form to the commissioner of human resources within three working days of receipt of the decision by the department. Within ten working days of the receipt of the grievance, the office will investigate the circumstances surrounding the grievance, prepare findings of fact thereon and, upon approval of the commissioner of human resources, recommend to the employee and the department, in writing, a resolution of the grievance. If the grievant is an employee of the department of human resources, such prior approval shall not apply. If the recommended resolution requires action by the employee's department, the recommendation shall include a timetable for the implementation of the action. All recommendations made by the commissioner of human resources shall be binding on both the employee and the affected department. Should the employee's department disagree with the decision of the commissioner of human resources, the recommendation may be submitted by the commissioner of human resources to the chief operating officer or designee who shall make within ten days the final determination on the grievance. In no case shall the time to inform the employee of the final decision exceed 15 days from the date of the decision by the commissioner of human resources, and to the extent that this subsection is in conflict with subsection (5)b of this section, then subsection (5)b of this section controls. (7)  Failure to follow procedure. The failure of supervisory employees or city officials to follow the steps outlined in this section shall result in conferring upon the employee the right automatically to proceed to the next step in the grievance procedure. Failure of the employee to follow the steps outlined in this section shall result in the dismissal of the grievance. (8)  Final determination. The decision by the commissioner of human resources or, in instances in which the grievance is submitted to the chief operating officer, the decision of the chief operating officer shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-524. - Extension of time in grievance process.     Time limit requirements for employees who request action on a grievance or for departmental supervisor to respond to employee grievances, as specified in section 114-523, may be extended by agreement of the employee and the supervisor. All agreements for extension of time shall be in writing and shall be signed by the parties thereto. Copies of such agreement shall be attached to the grievance form, kept by the supervisor and given to the employee. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-525. - Grievance forms.     The diversity manager, upon approval of the commissioner, shall issue standard grievance forms for use by employees and managerial personnel of city departments in the grievance resolution process prescribed in section 114-523. Grievance forms shall be available at least in the following places: the offices of department heads, office directors and agency heads of all city departments, and the department of human resources. The form should require at a minimum the following: (1)  Name; (2)  Title of position; (3)  Grade; (4)  Department and office; (5)  Code section violated; (6)  Remedy requested. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
DIVISION 3. - DISCIPLINARY ACTION 
Sec. 114-526. - Statement of policy. (a)  Progressive discipline. It is the policy of the city to impose, where reasonable, progressive discipline according to procedures that are fair, prompt and appropriate to the situation. However, when an infraction is such as to impair or destroy the future effective performance of the employee or when the employee's presence impairs the effectiveness of others or presents danger to the employee, others or city property, action shall be taken to immediately remove the employee from the work environment. The city supports a process in which disciplinary action is applied in several steps of increasing severity. The usual sequence of progressive discipline is oral admonishment, written reprimand, suspension and dismissal. The progressive disciplinary process affords the employee the opportunity to correct behavior or inadequate job performance with the minimum level of discipline applied at each step. (b)  Authority of fire chief and police chief. Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, the fire chief and police chief shall retain authority to administer corrective and disciplinary action, to formulate rules and regulations for the operation of their departments and such other powers and responsibilities as are provided by ordinance. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-527. - Process of progressive discipline.     Prior to application of any disciplinary action permitted by this division, the following shall be met: (1)  Orientation. During the probationary period all employees shall be informed of their job duties and the rules, regulations and standards that apply to them. At a minimum, this should include an initial orientation to the job and the organization. (2)  Course of action when rule or standard is violated. a.  Duty to promptly investigate violation. The manager or supervisor shall promptly investigate the facts and circumstances of the incident before deciding on the disciplinary action to be taken. b.  Determination of appropriate disciplinary action. The reasonable disciplinary action shall be determined by considering relevant factors, including but not limited to the seriousness of the offense, whether the offense was willful and deliberate, unintentional or the result of gross negligence and the employee's record of performance and conduct. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-528. - Cause for action. (a)  No employee shall be dismissed from employment or otherwise adversely affected as to compensation or employment status except for cause. However, this shall not apply to employees dismissed or otherwise adversely affected due to curtailment of funds or reduction in staff or reorganization or demoted during a probationary period such that the employee is returned to the position held immediately prior to promotion when such action is in accordance with article IV of this chapter. (b)  The following actions constitute cause for which disciplinary action may be imposed, but the imposition of disciplinary action shall not be limited to such offenses: (1)  Negligence in performing assigned duties. (2)  Incompetence, inability or failure to perform assigned duties, including but not limited to loss of job requirements, such as the loss of a required license. (3)  Failure to carry out an official directive or refusal to carry out the lawful, reasonable directions given by a supervisor or other acts of insubordination. (4)  Misconduct, including but not limited to engaging in offensive conduct or language toward the public, supervisory personnel or fellow employees. (5)  Excessive tardiness. (6)  Excessive absenteeism. (7)  Abuse of sick leave. (8)  Absence without official leave. (9)  Abandonment of job. An employee not on authorized leave of absence who, without valid reason, fails to report for work for three consecutive days. (10)  Unauthorized use of city property. (11)  Abuse or theft of city property. (12)  Willful making of false statements to the public, supervisors, officials, boards, department heads or agencies or the willful making of false statements on an employment application within the city. (13)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages, drugs or controlled substances while at work. (14)  Intoxication on the job. (15)  Acceptance of gratuities or contingent fees or other conduct in violation of the code of ethics. (16)  The refusal, when so directed, to be examined by a licensed physician designated by the city. (17)  Political activity in conflict with article IV of this chapter or with other sections of this Code. (18)  The conviction of a job related felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. (19)  The violation of article IV of this chapter or of administrative rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this Code. (20)  Any other conduct or action of such seriousness that disciplinary action is considered warranted. (21)  The sale or distribution of any illegal drugs or controlled substances, as defined by state law. (22)  Failure to comply with the requirements of chapter 3 (transparency) in this Code. (c)  Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, the appointing authority or designee shall require the dismissal of any city employee who is convicted while a city employee of the sale, distribution or use of any illegal drug or controlled substance as defined by state law, rape, murder or any felony. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2018-41(18-O-1266), § 2, 9-25-18 ) 
Sec. 114-529. - Procedure for imposing disciplinary action. (a)  Oral admonishment. Oral admonishment, as defined in section 114-502, shall be given verbally and shall communicate a warning of an error or inappropriate behavior, inform the employee of the appropriate behavior and offer assistance in correcting the situation. The employee should be advised that the date and nature of the oral admonishment will be documented in the supervisor's file. Depending on the circumstances or seriousness of the offense, no more than two oral admonishments should be given to the employee for the same type of offense, after which a more severe type of disciplinary action should be taken. Sufficient time for improvement should be allowed before further action is taken. (b)  Reprimand. A reprimand, as defined in section 114-502, shall be written and given promptly following the act or behavior in question. It shall communicate a warning of error or inappropriate behavior and state more serious action will be taken if the offense is repeated. The reprimand shall be addressed to the employee and shall include the charge, the specific behavior, dates of the behavior where appropriate, the warning that continuance of the behavior will result in further disciplinary action. A copy of the reprimand should be forwarded to the commissioner of human resources and placed in the employee's official personnel file. (c)  Adverse actions. An adverse action shall be written and shall be imposed in accordance with the procedural requirements set forth in section 114-530. Adverse actions include the following: (1)  Suspension without pay. a.  When proper. The appointing authority or designee may suspend an employee without pay for cause and proper disciplinary purposes, as set forth in section 114-528, or for pending criminal court action when such criminal court action is job related or in the reasonable judgment of the department head would deter the employee from effective performance of job duties. b.  Length of suspension. A suspension without pay for disciplinary purposes shall be proportional to the offense and shall not exceed 30 days for any one offense or for multiple offenses arising out of the same incident. A suspension without pay pending the adjudication of criminal charges may be imposed until the final disposition of those criminal charges. However, back pay shall be awarded if the final disposition of charges does not result in a conviction. (2)  Demotion. The appointing authority or designee may demote an employee for cause as set forth in section 114-528, provided that a change of appointment made in the discretion of the appointing authority as provided by this Code or a demotion during a probationary period which results in an employee's being returned to the position held immediately prior to promotion shall not be considered an adverse action. (3)  Dismissal. The appointing authority or designee may dismiss an employee for cause as set forth in section 114-528. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-530. - Procedure for imposing adverse actions. (a)  Notice required. An employee against whom an adverse action is to be taken shall be given a written notice of proposed adverse action, signed by the appointing authority or designee, at least ten working days prior to the effective date of the proposed adverse action. However, in an emergency situation, the adverse action may become effective immediately following the employee's response, if any. During the period of the notice, the employee is expected to perform usual duties without disrupting the activities of other employees or operations of the city department. Any action by the employee to the contrary shall be considered an emergency situation as defined in section 114-532. (b)  Contents of notice required. The notice of the proposed adverse action shall include the following: (1)  The proposed action to be taken. (2)  The effective date of the adverse action, which shall be at least ten working days after the date the notice is received by the employee, or delivered by certified mail to the employee's last-known address. (3)  The specific and detailed charges and reasons for the adverse action. (4)  A statement that the employee has the right to respond in writing to the charges or to appear before the appointing authority or designee who has authority to affirm or modify the proposed adverse action at a specified time, with a representative if desired, during regular working hours within the employee response period specified in this section. (5)  A statement that failure by the employee to respond by the specified date means that the employee has waived all further appeal rights within the department. (c)  Procedures for employee response to adverse action. (1)  Purpose. The employee response procedure is created to protect the employee from erroneous, arbitrary adverse actions and to afford the acting department an opportunity to reevaluate its position on the proposed adverse action and affirm or modify the action. (2)  Requirements. The employee shall be given the opportunity to respond to charges before the appointing authority or designee who has authority to affirm or modify the proposed adverse action, provided that a full evidentiary hearing prior to the adverse action is not required. a.  Employee response period. The employee shall respond to the adverse action verbally or in writing within five working days from the date of receipt of the notice of the proposed adverse action. If the employee does not respond by the date required in the notice, the employee shall waive further appeal rights within the department. b.  Response options. The employee's response may be made in writing or in person or both. c.  Supporting documentation. The employee may submit statements or supporting documentation from persons having knowledge of the circumstances to support the employee's response. d.  Representative. If the employee chooses to meet with the appointing authority, the employee may be accompanied by a representative of the employee's choice. e.  Further official investigation. The appointing authority or designee may conduct further investigation of the charges, provided that if the appointing authority or designee determines that additional time is necessary for further investigation and proper consideration of the employee's response to the proposed adverse action, the period of consideration may be extended for a reasonable number of days but in no event longer than ten working days, by notifying the employee in writing as to the length of the extension. The extension notice shall also state that the effective date of the proposed adverse action shall be delayed for the same number of days as the length of the period of the extension of time for consideration. (d)  Determination and notice of final action. (1)  Time limit. The appointing authority shall issue the notice of final action not later than three days after the date of the employee's response. However, if the appointing authority or designee determines that additional time is necessary for further investigation and proper consideration of the employee's response to the proposed adverse action, the period of consideration may be extended as provided in this section. (2)  Contents of notice of final action required. The notice of final action shall include but not be limited to the following information: a.  Statement of the specific adverse action to be taken; b.  The specific charges for which the adverse action is taken and the reasons therefor; c.  The effective date of the final action which shall not be earlier than the effective date specified in the notice of proposed adverse action, except in emergency situations in which the effective date of the final action may become effective immediately following the employee's response; and d.  A statement advising the employee of the right to appeal the determination of final action to the civil service board. (e)  Copy to commissioner of human resources. A copy of the notice of final action shall be sent to the commissioner of human resources not later than the effective date of the action. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-531. - Modification of charges of proposed adverse action.     If the appointing authority or designee determines that additional charges or substantially different charges should be made than specified in the notice of proposed adverse action, the following procedure shall govern: (1)  If the additional or substantially different charges are more severe than the original charges, a new proposed adverse action or other appropriate action shall be initiated. (2)  If the final charges are less severe but not substantially different than the original charges, no new proposed adverse action will be required, but the employee shall be furnished with a written notice of the charges, and the proceedings on these charges shall be concluded within the timeframe and according to the same procedures governing the original proposed adverse action. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-532. - Emergency situations. (a)  Conditions for use. The appointing authority or designee may immediately suspend an employee with pay upon the determination that the following circumstances exist: (1)  There is cause to believe that the employee has committed a crime involving moral turpitude or a felony which is job related or deters the employee from effective performance of the employee's job. (2)  The retention of the employee in active duty status may result in damage to property or may be disruptive, detrimental or injurious to the employee, coworkers, subordinates or the general public or may be disruptive to the daily operation of a city government function. (b)  Notice of emergency action. The appointing authority or designee shall give the employee against whom the emergency action is taken a notice of emergency action in writing, not later than five working days after the effective date of the emergency action. The notice of emergency action shall include a statement of the emergency situation that caused the action to be taken. Should the action be an adverse action, the notice shall meet the requirements of section 114-530. A copy of such notice shall be sent to the commissioner of human resources. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2007-46(07-O-1617), § 3, 8-28-07) 
Secs. 114-533—114-545. - Reserved. 
Sec. 114-546. - Right to file appeal.     Unless otherwise provided, all appeals to the civil service board, pursuant to this division, are entitled to a hearing which shall be conducted by a hearing officer of the civil service board pursuant to this division. However, with the written consent of all parties and the approval of the hearing officer, a hearing may be waived and the appeal considered on the written record. The following matters constitute proper reasons for which appeals may be filed with the civil service board under this division, along with the conditions required for such appeals: (1)  Adverse actions. Any nonprobationary employee in the classified service or any nonprobationary sworn officer of the department of police who holds the rank of lieutenant or below that of lieutenant or sworn officer of the department of fire who holds the rank of captain or any rank below that of captain shall have the right to file an appeal of an adverse action, i.e., suspension, demotion or dismissal, to the civil service board pursuant to the procedures in this article. (2)  Removal from eligible list. An eligible, as defined in section 114-502, whose name is removed from a register pursuant to article IV of this chapter, may appeal to the civil service board for reinstatement to the eligible list. If the appeal is upheld, relief shall be limited to reinstatement to the current eligible list. (3)  Disqualification for reemployment. An employee under Section 114-84 who has been disqualified for reemployment, as provided in article IV of this chapter, may appeal to the civil service board. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of notice of disqualification for reemployment. (4)  Failure to follow procedures of layoff or reduction in force. A regular employee who has been laid off, demoted or reduced in salary as a result of a reduction in force may appeal to a civil service board if the reduction in force, as implemented by the appointing authority, is not in accordance with the plan of reduction as approved by the commissioner of human resources. (5)  Unjust coercion or reprisal. An employee who is subjected to coercion or reprisal because of participation in an appeal or grievance proceeding authorized by this article may appeal for relief to the civil service board, as provided in this division. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 7, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 114-547. - Notice of appeal. (a)  Time for filing appeal. All appeals to the civil service board shall be initiated by filing a written notice of appeal with the commissioner of human resources, in accordance with the procedures established under this division. Unless otherwise provided, the notice of appeal shall be filed and postmarked within five days after the later of: (1)  The date when the employee receives final written notice of the action or decision or the date final notice is delivered by certified mail to the last known address or date of last delivery attempt by certified mail to the last known address, as documented by the United States Postal Service. (2)  The effective date of the action or decision.     The notice of appeal shall be considered timely if postmarked within the time allowed for an appeal but shall not be considered filed until actually received by the commissioner of human resources. (b)  Transmittal of copies of notice within city and assignment to hearing officer/panel. Upon receipt of the notice, the commissioner of human resources shall immediately transmit a true copy of the notice to the appointing authority and the commissioner of human resources and shall promptly investigate and attempt to mediate the appeal. Upon completion of the investigation and after every effort has been made to mediate, the commissioner of human resources shall assign the appeal for hearing by a hearing officer of the civil service board in the normal rotation of hearing officer assignments as provided in section 114-548. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-548. - Civil service board members serving as hearing officers. (a)  Authorized. For the purposes of holding hearings of appeals as provided in article IV of this chapter and otherwise assisting in the resolution of appeals under this article, the civil service board shall serve as individual hearing officers. In a dismissal, a panel of three board members shall be convened for the purpose of hearing the dismissal. Notwithstanding any other authority and duties given to the civil service board members, as individual hearing officers they shall compile evidence, prepare findings of fact, issue initial decisions and the basis therefor, certify records and make investigations of matters under the jurisdiction of this article where a review is appropriate. (b)  Assignment of hearing officers to appeals. Upon appointment to the civil service board, the appointee's name shall be placed in the alphabetical listing of civil service board members for the purpose of being assigned appeals as scheduled by the commissioner of human resources. Appeals will be assigned according to alphabetical rotation of names. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-549. - Authority and duties of hearing officers/panels.     Any duly appointing hearing officer/panel shall have the authority to do the following in connection with any hearing under this article: (1)  Administer oaths and affirmation. (2)  Regulate the course of the hearing. (3)  Set the time and place for continued hearings and prehearing conferences. (4)  Fix the time for filing written arguments as deemed appropriate. (5)  Dispose of motions to dismiss for lack of the board's jurisdiction over the subject matter or parties or for any other grounds. (6)  Dispose of motions to amend or to intervene. (7)  Provide for the taking of testimony by deposition or interrogatory. (8)  Reprimand or exclude from the hearing any person for any indecorous or improper conduct committed in the presence of the hearing officer. (9)  Make informal disposition of any case by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order or default, unless such disposition is precluded by law. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-550. - Hearing procedures.     Under this article, the following are established to provide uniform procedures for the conduct of hearings by the board or hearing officer appointed by the board: (1)  Notice of hearing. The hearing shall be held within 60 days after receipt of the notice of appeal by the commissioner of human resources. Within ten days prior to the date for which the hearing is set, the commissioner of human resources shall designate, from an alphabetical rotation system, a hearing officer/panel of the civil service board and an appropriate time and place to conduct the hearing and shall so notify all parties in writing. Such notification shall be mailed or served at least ten days prior to the date for which the hearing is set. Any hearing officer/panel shall have the authority to postpone or to continue a hearing upon its own motion or upon the motion of either party. (2)  Representation. Opportunity shall be afforded both parties a representative of their choice. All arrangements for providing legal counsel shall be the responsibility of the party desiring such representation. (3)  Prehearing conference. The hearing officer/panel may arrange a prehearing conference for the purpose of reviewing the matter being appealed and establishing stipulations to expedite the hearing. (4)  Witnesses. The appellant or the agency may request the attendance of employees or other persons as witnesses when their testimony will aid in establishing the facts in the case. Employees appearing as witnesses shall be released from duty without the loss of pay or time and without effect on their service rating. No person shall directly or indirectly use or threaten to use any official authority or other influence which would tend to discourage any other person from testifying. (5)  Subpoenas. a.  Request for subpoena. The appellant, the department or the hearing officer/panel may request the commissioner of human resources to issue subpoenas for witnesses for hearings. The cost for securing the attendance of witnesses who are noncity employees, including fees or mileage, shall be computed and assessed in the same manner as prescribed by law for civil cases in the superior court. b.  Issuance of subpoenas. Subpoenas shall be issued without discrimination between public and private parties. When a subpoena is disobeyed, any party in the matter may apply to the superior court of the county in which the hearing is being held for an order requiring obedience. Failure to comply with such order shall be cause for punishment as for contempt of court. c.  Quashing or limiting subpoenas. Once issued, a subpoena may be quashed or limited by the hearing officer/panel upon the motion of the hearing officer/panel or any party or at the request of the witness, if it appears that the subpoena was used primarily as a means of harassment, that the testimony or documents sought are cumulative, that the testimony or documents sought are not relevant or material, that to respond to the subpoena would be unduly burdensome or that for other good reasons basic fairness dictates that the subpoena should not be enforced. (6)  Record of hearing. A court reported recording shall be made of all hearings; however, the recording of a hearing shall not be transcribed unless approved by the commissioner of human resources. If the transcription is so made pursuant to a request by either party in the hearing, the cost thereof shall be borne by the party making the request. In addition to the recording of the hearing of the transcription thereof, all documents entered into the record during the hearing shall be made part of the official record of the hearing. (7)  Appointing authority's opportunity to be heard. At the request of the appointing authority or at the invitation of the hearing officer/panel or the board, the appointing authority or designee shall be entitled to be heard and to submit evidence in any appeal in which the interpretation of a civil service rule, regulation, policy or practice is at issue. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-551. - Conduct of hearing.     In the hearing of an appeal under this division, the proceeding shall be informal but orderly. The following procedure shall prevail: (1)  The hearing officer/panel shall open the hearing by explaining the procedure to be followed in the hearing. At the discretion of the hearing officer/panel, any or all witnesses may be sequestered. (2)  The hearing officer/panel shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications as contained in the notice of appeal, as filed with the commissioner of human resources. Any written response to the notice of appeal as filed with the director shall then be read. By agreement, these documents may be inserted in the record without reading. (3)  The facts not in dispute shall be stipulated. (4)  Each party shall be given the opportunity to make a brief opening statement identifying the issues and stating what is to be proven. (5)  All witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation. (6)  Each party may conduct such examination of the witnesses as shall be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. In addition, the hearing officer may examine the witnesses. (7)  Official notice may be taken of facts generally recognized by the public. In addition, official notice may be taken of technical facts within the specialized knowledge of the hearing officer. Parties shall be notified either before or during the hearing, by reference in preliminary reports or otherwise, of the material officially noted, including any staff memoranda or data, and they shall be afforded an opportunity to contest the materials so noticed. (8)  The hearing officer's/panel's experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge may be utilized in the evaluation of evidence. (9)  Before closing the hearing, the hearing officer/panel shall allow both parties the opportunity to make brief oral or written closing statements. (10)  The hearing officer/panel who presided shall, within 15 days from the close of the evidence, issue a decision. However, for good cause the time may be extended for rendering a decision but in no case shall exceed an additional 15 days. The decision shall be to the parties or their representatives. The hearing officer's/panel's decision shall become final, and there shall be no right to any additional administrative appeals. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-552. - Evidence.     With respect to all hearings before the board or the hearing officer/panel under this division, the following rules regarding the evidence shall govern: (1)  Formal, legal rules of evidence shall not be strictly applied. Evidence may be admitted if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. The hearing officer/panel shall follow the state rules of evidence regarding privileges, recognized by the law of the state. (2)  Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. (3)  Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in the record. (4)  When a hearing will be expedited and the interest of the parties will not be prejudiced substantially, any part of the evidence may be received in written form, including but not limited to the use of depositions or interrogatories. (5)  Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies if the original is not readily available. Upon request and at the discretion of the hearing officer/panel, parties shall be given the opportunity to compare the copy with the original document. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-553. - Decision of hearing officer/panel. (a)  Requirements of decision. As part of the final decision, the hearing officer/panel shall include findings of fact and any law on which the decision is based, separately stated, and the effective date of the decision or order. Findings of fact shall be accompanied by a concise and explicit statement of the underlying facts supporting the findings. Copies of the decision or order shall be mailed to all parties of record by the commissioner of human resources. (b)  Finality of decision. The decision of the hearing officer/panel shall be binding on both parties. For appeals of adverse actions, the hearing officer/panel may modify the action of the appointing authority but may not increase the severity of such action on the employee. If the appellant is a nonprobationary sworn officer of the department of police who holds the rank of lieutenant or below that of lieutenant or sworn officer of the department of fire who holds the rank of captain or any rank below that of captain, the hearing officer/panel may not modify, but must affirm or revoke a suspension or demotion and may affirm, revoke or modify a dismissal to no less than a 30-day suspension. The appointing authority shall promptly comply with the final decision as may be issued as a result of the appeal. (c)  Relief of appellant. If the decision of the hearing officer/panel is in favor of the appellant on appeals of dismissal, suspension or demotion, the employee shall be reinstated in accordance with the decision to the classification from which the employee was removed. The effective date of the reinstatement shall be the date immediately following the effective date of the appealed action as if there had been no break in service, unless otherwise specified in the order. The employee shall be entitled to the same salary, with any increases in the position or salary which would have automatically inured to the employee if the employee had remained in actual service. The employee shall receive payment as if there had been no break in service, minus any amount earned by or paid to the employee from other employment and wage substitutions, including but not limited to unemployment compensation, during the period off the job and minus any amount paid the employee for annual leave. Sick and annual leave shall be restored to the employee in the same amount that existed at the time of the appealed action, plus sick and annual leave that would have been earned for the period if the employee had actually been in service. However, any period of postponement or continuance of the hearing for the convenience of the appellant shall be excluded from any payment of benefits due, and this period of time shall be considered as if the appellant had been on leave without pay. Prior to any payment to the employee, the employee shall certify under oath the amount of any income received from other employment and any wage substitutes received during the period off the job. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 8, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 114-554. - Judicial review.     The decision of the hearing officer/panel under this division shall not limit the right of either party to judicial review, and such decision shall be stayed by the filing of a petition for review. Any party, including the city or any city department, office, division, commission or board, who has exhausted all administrative remedies available before the board and who is aggrieved by a final decision or order of the board on any hearing may seek judicial review of the final decision or order of the board in the superior court of Fulton County. At the discretion of the appointing authority, it may comply with the decision of the civil service board with out waiving its right to petition for review of that decision. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-555. - Dismissal of appeal.     Upon the motion of either party or upon its own motion, the hearing officer/panel may dismiss any appeal under this division prior to holding a full hearing of the appeal upon the following conditions: (1)  The appeal is clearly moot; (2)  The appeal is without merit; (3)  The appeal was not properly filed with the commissioner of human resources; or (4)  The appeal is not within the scope of the hearing officer's/panel's authority, as provided in section 114-549. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-556—114-565. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY 
Sec. 114-566. - Application of division.     This division shall apply to all employees of the city. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-567. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Substances includes the following: (1)  Alcohol; (2)  Illegal drugs, including but not limited to marijuana, cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine and any derivatives thereof; (3)  Legal drugs and other substances which may impair an employee's ability to effectively perform job functions; and (4)  Any other dangerous drugs or controlled substances as defined by state law. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-568. - Employee reform. (a)  The city recognizes that the work environment should be free from the effects of alcohol and drug abuse. To this end the city shall provide all of its employees an opportunity to voluntarily enter the city's employee assistance program (EAP) for substance abuse without being subjected to any disciplinary action based on substance abuse provided that the employee: (1)  Voluntarily enters the EAP and adheres to its established guidelines and requirements. (2)  Completes the primary and after-care elements of the rehabilitation program in strict accordance with the established guidelines as set forth by the EAP. (3)  Is free of any criminal or administrative charges and has not been directed to be tested based upon reasonable suspicion prior to voluntary entry into the EAP substance abuse program. (4)  Successfully completes the primary care portion of the EAP and abides by the elements of after-care treatment. Any employee who voluntarily enters the EAP and fails to abide by the established guidelines and requirements shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. (b)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the appointing authority or designee may take appropriate personnel action to protect the affected employee, fellow employees and the public and to meet the needs of the service, necessitated by an employee's temporary or permanent inability to adequately perform the employee's job. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-569. - Use of substances. (a)  The consumption or use of illegal drugs by employees is prohibited. (b)  The consumption or use of alcohol while on duty by employees is absolutely prohibited. (c)  The abusive use of prescription or other legal drugs and substances while on duty by employees is absolutely prohibited. (d)  An employee must not report to work or be subject to duty while the employee's ability to perform job duties is impaired due to the use of alcohol, prescription or other legal drugs and substances. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-570. - Drug-free workplace statement. (a)  No employee may illegally engage in the manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of a controlled substance at any time or place, including while at the employee's workplace. Such unlawful activity will be considered a sufficient ground for a serious adverse personnel action, up to and including discharge. (b)  In addition to prohibiting employees from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of illegal drugs in the workplace, this city prohibits its employees from engaging in such illegal activity at all times and at all places. Such activity, even during nonworking hours, clearly affects an employee's ability to perform public duties. (c)  If an employee is convicted of violating any criminal drug statute in any jurisdiction, regardless of whether the alleged violation occurred at the workplace or elsewhere, the employee must notify the city personnel office in writing of the conviction within five calendar days of conviction. (d)  Failure to comply with any part of this section will result in disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. Specific disciplinary action will follow the prescribed guidelines of this article. (e)  The implementation of this section shall be the responsibility of all department heads, office directors and supervisors. Each employee will receive a copy of the drug awareness program along with one hour of in-service training on the city's substance abuse policy in this division. Each employee will acknowledge by signature receipt of the policy. All city employees are responsible for the continued adherence to all policies and ordinances. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-571. - Supervisors' responsibilities and guidelines. (a)  Supervisors are responsible for consistent enforcement of this division. Any supervisor who knowingly permits a violation of this division by employees under the supervisor's direct supervision shall be subject to disciplinary action. (b)  Reasonable suspicion. (1)  When a supervisor has reasonable suspicion that an employee is intoxicated or under the influence of drugs or alcohol, the supervisor must immediately notify the appointing authority or designee. The appointing authority or designee shall advise the employee of right of representation and allow the employee the opportunity to explain the employee's behavior. The appointing authority or designee may require the employee to submit to a drug and/or alcohol analysis. (2)  Reasonable suspicion must be based on specific, objective facts about the conduct of an individual that would lead the reasonable person to suspect that the individual is or has been using drugs. Observations which may constitute a factual basis for determining reasonable suspicion may include but are not limited to the following, alone or in combination: (i)  Slurred speech. (ii)  Alcohol on breath. (iii)  Inability to walk a straight line. (iv)  Any accident involving city property when the following elements are present: a.  Vehicular accidents involving city employees who are cited for traffic code violations. b.  Other accidents involving city property in conjunction with additional behavior as outlined in this subsection. (v)  Behavior which is so unusual and inappropriate in its nature as to create an unsafe work environment or disrupt the normal working condition. (vi)  Possession of alcohol and/or illegal drugs. (c)  Random drug-testing. (1)  Sworn employees of the Departments of Police, Fire, and Rescue, Corrections as well as all other employees of the various departments of the City of Atlanta who hold positions which have been designated by the Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources as being safety-sensitive in accordance with section 114-575, are subject to random drug and/or alcohol analyses as established by the subject employees' respective departments, when directed by the appointing authority. (2)  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources may designate certain employment classifications which affect safety and/or security as safety-sensitive positions in accordance with applicable law, rules, and regulations. (3)  Random drug screens for general fund employees in safety sensitive positions shall only be conducted when funding has been allocated in the annual operating budget. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-68(08-O-0632), § 1, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 114-572. - Drug and/or alcohol analysis. (a)  When directed by the appointing authority or designee, an employee must submit to a drug and/or alcohol analysis test. The direction to submit to the drug/alcohol test must be in writing, signed by the appointing authority or designee, in accordance with section 114-571(b) or (c). The method of testing shall be established by the Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources. All testing labs, utilized by the city to analyze specimens, shall be certified to do so in accordance with applicable state and federal law and guidelines. (b)  The recognized limit for the level of alcohol which cannot be exceeded for purpose of this section shall be 0.02. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-68(08-O-0632), § 1, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 114-573. - Results of drug/alcohol analysis.     A positive test result of the drug/alcohol analysis made under this division shall constitute cause for which disciplinary action may be imposed, up to and including dismissal. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-574. - Disclosures.     No public release of information obtained by the city pursuant to this division will be made, except as required by state or federal law. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-575. - Procedures.     The commissioner of human resources shall be responsible for developing procedures for the implementation of this division. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-576—114-600. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY 
Sec. 114-601. - Statement of policy.     The city is proud of its tradition of a collegial work environment in which all individuals are treated with respect and dignity. Each individual has the right to work in a professional atmosphere which promotes equal opportunities and prohibits discriminatory practices, including sexual harassment. Sexual harassment, whether verbal, physical or environmental, is unacceptable and will not be tolerated. In the event incidents of sexual harassment do occur, it is the policy of the city to take prompt remedial action, calculated to end the harassment. Retaliation for making a complaint of sexual harassment will not be tolerated. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-602. - Definition of sexual harassment.     It is illegal and against the policies of the city for any employee, male or female, to sexually harass another employee. It is also illegal and against city policy for any employee who may be deemed a representative of the city to sexually harass a non-employee. Sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when: (1)  Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment; (2)  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; (3)  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.     Examples of sexual harassment include, but are not limited to: unwanted sexual advances; demands for sexual favors in exchange for favorable treatment or continued employment; repeated sexual jokes, flirtations, advances or propositions; verbal abuse of a sexual nature; graphic, verbal commentary about an individual's body, sexual prowess or sexual deficiencies; leering, whistling, touching, pinching, assault, coerced sexual acts or suggestive, insulting, obscene comments or gestures; display in the workplace of sexually suggestive objects or pictures; ostracizing an employee in conformity with sexual conduct; sexual conduct that reasonably causes mental and emotional detriment to the victim; retaliation against an individual for reporting or complaining about sexually harassing conduct. This behavior is unacceptable in the workplace and is unacceptable in other work-related settings such as business trips and business-related social events. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-603. - Individuals covered. (a)  The provisions of this division are applicable to all city employees. The use of the term "employee" shall include any person holding any position or employment with the city, to include without any limitation, employees of any status or tenure, appointed and elected officials, members of commissions and boards, agents, representatives or interns. The city encourages reporting of all incidents of sexual harassment, regardless of who the offender may be, in accordance with the methods set forth in section 114-604. (b)  In order to ensure the integrity of the work environment, managerial and supervisory personnel are required to ensure adherence to and compliance with this policy and, upon being informed of possible harassment, are required to take appropriate, prompt action in response thereto, including informing complainants of their rights under the procedures set forth in this policy. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-604. - Complaint and investigation procedure.     Employees who feel that they have been victims of sexual harassment should file a discrimination complaint. Prompt reporting of complaints is strongly encouraged, as it allows for rapid response and resolution of objectionable behavior or conditions for the complainant and any other affected employees. An individual who believes he or she has been subjected to sexual harassment should report the incident to any of the following: employee's departmental EEO coordinator or complaint investigator, the city's diversity manager, or the employee's supervisor or commissioner. In the case of employees in the departments of police, fire or corrections, complaints of sexual harassment may also be made at their respective office of professional standards. The aggrieved employee may elect, at his or her option, to use formal or informal procedures as follows: (1)  Informal complaint procedure: a.  Each department shall designate the departmental EEO coordinator (DEEOC) and at least one man and one woman from the department to serve as complaint investigators. b.  The complainant will meet with a complaint investigator of his/her choosing to discuss any complaint of sexual harassment. A written statement will be taken. An accurate record of objectionable behavior is necessary to resolve a complaint of sexual harassment. c.  The complaint investigator will immediately attempt to resolve the complaint through discussions with appropriate managers, scheduling of meetings with concerned parties, and other informal efforts as appropriate, taking care to preserve confidentiality to the maximum reasonable extent. d.  Upon completion of the investigation, the complaint investigator will forward a written report of the investigation to the department head, with recommendations for resolution or corrective action as appropriate. e.  If the investigative report indicates that there is "reasonable cause" to believe that sexually harassing conduct has occurred, the department head shall implement disciplinary procedures, as outlined below in section 114-605(b), as may be appropriate. f.  If the informal efforts are unsuccessful, the complaint investigator will inform the complainant of his/her right to file a formal complaint with the affirmative action division, and will provide the complainant with a copy of the formal charge form. (2)  Formal complaint procedure: If the complainant elects not to pursue the informal procedures or is not satisfied with the results of the informal procedures, a formal complaint may be filed with the diversity manager in the department of human resources as follows: a.  The complaint will be reduced to a written statement on an appropriate form. An accurate record of objectionable behavior is necessary to resolve a complaint of sexual harassment. b.  The diversity manager will review the complaint to assure that the issue is appropriate for the discrimination complaint process. If it is incomplete, the diversity manager will seek clarification. c.  The diversity manager will notify the appropriate departmental officials of the complaint. d.  An investigation of the formal complaint will be initiated by the affirmative action division within five working days of the notification. e.  Upon completion of the investigation, the diversity manager will forward a report of the investigation, with recommendations for appropriate resolution or corrective action, to the commissioner of the department of human resources for review and any recommended changes. f.  The commissioner of the department of personnel and human resources shall forward the report to the head of the office or department in which the harassment is alleged to have taken place. g.  If the investigative report indicates that there is "reasonable cause" to believe that sexually harassing conduct has occurred, the department head shall initiate disciplinary procedures, as outlined below in section 114-605 as may be appropriate. h.  The finding of "reasonable cause" by the diversity manager as approved by the commissioner of the department of human resources on a formal complaint will result in the issuance of a notice of proposed adverse action, where appropriate. (3)  A member of the public who believes that he or she has been subjected to sexual harassment by a city employee should report the incident to the employee's department head or to the diversity manager, for investigation by the diversity manager in the manner outlined in subparagraph (2) above. Alternatively, members of the public may make sexual harassment complaints against employees of the departments of police, fire and corrections at the office of professional standards of the appropriate department. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-605. - Resolving the complaint. (a)  Determination of "no cause": If the investigation reveals that there is no "reasonable cause" to believe that the allegation of sexual harassment is true, the matter shall be deemed resolved for city purposes and the parties shall be free to pursue other available legal remedies. (b)  Determination of "cause": (1)  Discipline of "cause": If the investigation reveals that there is "reasonable cause" to believe that the allegation of sexual harassment is true, the employee determined to have committed the offense of sexual harassment shall be subject to disciplinary action. The complainant shall be informed of the disciplinary action taken. (2)  Penalty: Sexual harassment is considered a sufficient ground for serious adverse personnel action. Failure to comply with any part of this policy will result in disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. A severe or pervasive violation of this policy may result in an employee's termination for the first offense. Where appropriate, specific disciplinary action will follow the process prescribed by section 114-526 through 114-556 of this Code of Ordinances. The employee's appointing authority shall impose discipline within the following ranges: a.  First offense: Sexual harassment training and disciplinary action ranging from a ten-day suspension to dismissal. b.  Second offense: Dismissal. (c)  Return to the workplace upon a finding of "cause": As the staffing needs of the city dictate, and whenever possible and practical, an employee who has been disciplined upon a finding of "cause" and who returns to the workplace shall not be returned to the same location or assignment that placed him/her in close proximity to the victim, for a period of at least one year from the date of the last act of sexual harassment. As the staffing needs of the city dictate, and whenever possible and practical, a victim's request for a transfer to an assignment or location away from that of the harasser shall be granted for a period of at least one year from the date of the last act of sexual harassment. This provision shall not be mandatory where impractical, inefficient, logistically impossible or contrary to the best interests of the city as a whole, or a department, office or agency. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-606. - Complaints against elected officials. (a)  Complaints against elected officials can be reported either through the "informal" or "formal" processes in section 114-604, however such complaints shall be promptly investigated by an independent investigator specifically selected for this purpose. Such investigator shall be selected by the city attorney and shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia with appropriate skills and experience. Upon completion of the investigation, the findings and recommendations of the investigator shall be transmitted by the city attorney, to the complainant, the alleged harasser and to the city council president or the chair of the committee on council or the committee on the executive, as appropriate. (b)  Upon a determination of cause, the city council president, or the chair of the committee on council, or the chair of the committee on the executive, as appropriate, shall take remedial action against the harasser. That remedial action may include, but is not limited to, counseling by the city council president or committee chair, or a resolution sponsored by the appropriate council committee censuring the offending official. (c)  Any further remedies against an elected official for violation of this sexual harassment policy would be those provided to the electors by the Georgia Recall Statute O.C.G.A. § 21-4-1, et seq.) (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-607. - Confidentiality.     In an attempt to protect the privacy of all persons involved, confidentiality will be exercised throughout the investigatory process to the greatest extent practicable. Inasmuch as the city is subject to the Open Records Act, (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70, et seq.) and the Open Meetings Acts, (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, et seq.), absolute confidentiality cannot be assured. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-608. - Retaliation.     No city employee, official or officer shall discriminate or retaliate against an individual who makes a report of sexual harassment. Retaliation is a very serious violation of this policy and should be reported immediately. Any individual found to have retaliated against an individual for reporting sexual harassment, or against anyone participating in the investigation of a complaint, will be subject to the disciplinary actions as provided by section 114-605. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-609. - Sexual harassment prevention training. (a)  Supervisory and management employees: (1)  Each supervisory and management employee shall receive an initial training course of at least four hours and a one-hour annual update training session. (2)  The training course for supervisory and management employees shall include instruction on what sexual harassment is, how to prevent it, what the repercussions are, and the complaint process. (3)  Training for supervisory and management employees shall include sensitivity training. (4)  Training shall be conducted by the diversity manager or his/her designee, who shall be assisted by at least one person of the opposite gender. (b)  Other employees: (1)  Each nonsupervisory, nonmanagement employee shall receive an initial training course of at least three hours and a one hour annual update training session, separate and apart from supervisory and management employees. (2)  The training course for nonsupervisory and nonmanagement employees shall include instruction on what sexual harassment is, how to respond to it, what the repercussions are, and the complaint process. (3)  Training shall be conducted by the diversity manager or his/her designee, who shall be assisted by at least one person of the opposite gender. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-610. - False allegations.     If an investigation results in a finding that the complainant willfully made a false complaint of sexual harassment, that complainant shall be subject to disciplinary action as provided by section 114-605. (Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Chapter 122 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 122-1—122-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND DEALERS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; local regulation of same, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-5; used motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 122-26. - Applicability of article.     Every person, except licensed junk dealers and pawnbrokers, who, exclusively or as incidental to or in connection with other business, purchases, sells or acquires in trade used or secondhand jewelry of any kind or description, including watches and clocks or articles of that kind or description made in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals; diamonds, emeralds, rubies or other precious stones; pistols or guns; bicycles or accessories, shall, for the purpose of this article, be a secondhand dealer. Any person who shall purchase any article of the kinds described in this section from any person other than a bona fide dealer in those articles shall, for the purpose of making the reports required in this article, also be a secondhand dealer and subject to all the sections of this article relating to those records and reports. However, secondhand dealers are specifically prohibited from buying or selling any automobile parts and accessories, including tires and batteries, under this article. (Code 1977, § 14-6391) 
Sec. 122-27. - Construction and interpretation of article.     Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as repealing or modifying any section of this Code or other ordinance regulating pawnbrokers and junk dealers. The sections of this article with reference to the acquisition of automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicular tires and tubes by purchase, exchange, gift or in any other manner shall apply not only to secondhand dealers as described in section 122-26 but to every person, unless the tires or tubes were acquired from a regularly licensed dealer therein. (Code 1977, § 14-6392) 
Sec. 122-28. - Records required. (a)  Contents. All secondhand dealers shall keep a book wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property of the kinds specified in section 122-26 which they acquire by purchase or trade and the name, address, estimated age, weight and height of the person from whom purchased or acquired and the date and hour of the purchase. These entries shall be made as soon as possible after the transaction is had, in no case more than one hour thereafter. (b)  Inspection. This record shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by the department of police. (Code 1977, § 14-6393) State Law reference— Permanent records required of dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-3. 
Sec. 122-29. - Serially numbered entries in record with corresponding numbers on property.     Every entry required to be made in the secondhand dealer's book required by section 122-28 shall be numbered serially, and the property described in the entry shall have attached to it a tag bearing the same serial number. (Code 1977, § 14-6394) 
Sec. 122-30. - Acquiring articles with serial number mutilated or altered.     It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to purchase or acquire in trade any watch, clock, pistol, gun, automobile tire or battery or any other article commonly branded with a serial number, upon which the number has been mutilated or altered. (Code 1977, § 14-6395) 
Sec. 122-31. - Daily reports to police.     Every secondhand dealer shall make a daily report in writing to the department of police in such form as may be prescribed by the police chief of all property purchased or acquired by the secondhand dealer during the 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. In addition, secondhand dealers shall make daily reports of all typewriters, adding machines and radios coming into and going out of their places of business. The daily report shall be in such form and shall contain such information as may be required by the police chief but shall contain sufficient information to identify each of the articles. (Code 1977, § 14-6396) State Law reference— Reports of purchaser by dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-4. 
Sec. 122-32. - Examination and inspection of articles by police; segregation of suspicious articles.     All property purchased or acquired by a secondhand dealer shall at all times be subject to examination and inspection by the department of police. If, upon the inspection, a police officer shall have reasonable cause to believe that any of the property is stolen, the police officer shall segregate it. It shall thereafter be unlawful for the person in possession of the property to dispose of it or in any manner mutilate, melt or disfigure it, until 15 days have elapsed from the date of the inspection. (Code 1977, § 14-6397) 
Sec. 122-33. - Time period for holding property.     All property purchased or acquired by a secondhand dealer shall be held for not less than 15 days. (Code 1977, § 14-6398) 
Sec. 122-34. - Acquiring property from underage persons.     It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to buy or receive any property of the kinds described in section 122-26 from any person under the age of 18 years. However, any secondhand dealer taking from the seller a statement in writing that the seller is of age will not be held subject to this section, if the appearance of the seller is such as to make it uncertain that the seller is not 18 years of age. (Code 1977, § 14-6399) 
Sec. 122-35. - Purchase and sale of used tires or tubes. (a)  Report to police chief. All persons who shall acquire by purchase or otherwise any used vehicular tires or tubes from any source other than from a regular licensed dealer shall, within 24 hours after the acquisition, make and deliver to the police chief, upon a form to be prescribed and furnished by the police chief, a report disclosing the name and make of each tire or tube; the size, serial number; and for tires the type or description of the tread or if the tread is smooth a statement to that effect. The report shall further contain and disclose the name, address and detailed physical description, together with a legible print of a flat impression of the prints of the four fingers of the right hand of the person or the representative from whom each of the tires or tubes were acquired, stating the manner of acquisition thereof. (b)  Retention; segregation; inspection. All persons to whom subsection (a) of this section shall apply shall not, for a period of 15 days after the delivery of the report required to be made to the police chief covering the acquisition of the tires or tubes, sell or otherwise dispose of any of them except upon written permission from the police chief or other police officer authorized to grant permission and shall, during that 15-day period, make and keep accurate and detailed bookkeeping records as to the acquisition of each tire and tube, segregated and tagged so that they may be readily and easily identified from the information describing them upon the report and so that they may be readily and easily examined and inspected by the police chief or any other police officer who has been properly authorized to make the examination and inspection. (c)  Acquisition if serial number, maker's name is altered, mutilated or defaced. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to acquire, by purchase or otherwise, any used vehicular tire or tube commonly branded with the name of the maker or a serial number, upon which the name of the maker or the serial number has been altered, mutilated or defaced. (Code 1977, § 14-6400) 
Sec. 122-36. - Dealers in secondhand automobiles. (a)  Daily report. Every dealer in secondhand automobiles shall furnish the police chief at the chief's office each day a complete description in writing of all automobiles bought by the dealer during the preceding day or left or deposited with the dealer for the purpose of sale or exchange. The report shall state the make, year, model, type, motor and serial numbers of any secondhand automobile and also the date and hour of the sale to the dealer. (b)  Report by auctioneer. Any person acting as auctioneer of secondhand automobiles shall furnish a description with respect to any automobile offered by the auctioneer for sale at auction, whether the automobile is sold at auction or not. (Code 1977, § 14-6401) State Law reference— Records of purchasers of used motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-4-5, 40-4-40. 
Sec. 122-37. - Dealers in secondhand watches. (a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, a watch shall be deemed to be secondhand if: (1)  It, as a whole, or the case thereof or the movement thereof has been previously sold to or acquired by any person for such person's use or the use of another, but not for resale; provided, however, a watch that has been so sold or acquired and is thereafter returned either through exchange or for credit to the original vendor who sold or passed title to the watch shall not be deemed to be a secondhand watch for the purpose of this section, if the vendor shall keep a written or printed record setting forth the name of the purchaser thereof, the date of the sale or transfer thereof and the serial number, if any, on the case and movement and any other distinguishing number or identification mark, which record shall be kept five years from the date of the sale or transfer and shall be open for inspection during all business hours by the police or prosecutor for the city; (2)  Its case or movement serial numbers or other distinguishing numbers or identification marks shall be erased, defaced, removed, altered or covered; or (3)  Its movement is more than five years old and has been repaired by any person, including the vendor, notwithstanding that it may have been returned either through exchange or for credit to the original vendor. Cleaning and oiling a watch movement or recasing the movement in a new case shall not be deemed a watch repair for the purpose of this subsection. (b)  Tagging. Any person engaged in the business of buying or selling watches, who may sell or exchange or offer for sale or exchange, expose for sale or exchange, possess with the intent to sell or exchange or display with the intent to sell or exchange any secondhand watch shall affix and keep affixed thereto a tag with the term "secondhand" clearly and legibly written or printed thereon, which shall be affixed or placed so that the term "secondhand" shall be plainly visible at all times. (c)  Contents of invoice; records. Any person who may sell a secondhand watch or in any other way pass title thereto shall deliver to the vendee a written invoice bearing the term "secondhand" in bold letters larger than any other written matter upon the invoice. The invoice shall further set forth the name and address of the vendor, the name and address of the vendee, the date of the sale, the name of the watch or its maker and the serial number, if any, and any other distinguishing numbers or identification marks upon its case and movement. If the serial number or other distinguishing numbers or identification marks shall have been erased, defaced, removed, altered or covered, the invoice shall so state. The vendor shall keep on file a duplicate of the invoice five years from the sale thereof, which shall be open to inspection during all business hours by the police or prosecutor for the city. (d)  Advertising. Any person who may advertise or display in any manner a secondhand watch for sale or exchange shall state clearly in the advertisement or display that the watch is secondhand. (Code 1977, § 14-6402) State Law reference— Secondhand watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq. 
Secs. 122-38—122-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PAWNBROKERS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; local regulation of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 122-61. - Records required.     All pawnbrokers shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged or sold to them. The description shall include the name of the maker of the article, any identifying mark or number and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. In these books shall also be entered the name of the person by whom the article was deposited or sold and the time when the deposit or sale was done. These entries shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible, in no event more than one hour thereafter. The books and the articles themselves so pledged or sold shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by the police. Any person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section or who shall make false entries concerning the transactions named or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any police officer of the books and of the property pledged with or sold to them shall be guilty of an offense. (Code 1977, § 14-6306) State Law reference— Permanent records required of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132 et seq. 
Sec. 122-62. - Daily report to police; fingerprints and information required from persons pawning property. (a)  Contents of daily report. Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report in writing to the department of police in the form prescribed by the police chief of all property pledged to or bought by the pawnbroker during the 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. The reports shall be typewritten. In addition to any other information required by the police chief, the reports shall show the name and address of the pawnbroker; the time of the transaction; the serial number of pawn tickets; the amount paid or advanced; a full description of the articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry and all identifying names, marks and numbers; and a description of person selling or pawning, including name, address, weight and height. Insufficient reports shall be rejected, and any pawnbroker making them shall be deemed guilty of an offense. In addition, pawnbrokers shall make daily reports of all typewriters, adding machines and radios coming into and going out of their places of business. The daily report shall be in such form and shall contain such information as may be required by the police chief, but shall contain sufficient information to identify each of the articles. (b)  Fingerprints and information required. In addition to the owner records and information called for in subsection (a) of this section, each pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pawning any article with that pawnbroker the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless that finger is missing in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand of the person pawning the article shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. All prints shall be made on forms to be furnished by the department of police, and the pawnbroker shall obtain all other information called for on the form furnished. Fingerprints and the information as required in this section shall be obtained from all persons each time the persons pawn any article with a pawnbroker, regardless of whether or not that person may have previously pawned an article with the pawnbroker and been fingerprinted. (c)  Exception. Subsection (b) of this section need not be complied with where the pawnbroker knows personally the person pawning the article or can identify within 90 days after the transaction the person pawning the article. (d)  Effect of failure to comply. Failure to fingerprint or, in the alternative, to know personally or to be able to identify when called upon within 90 days after an article has been pawned the person pawning the article shall constitute an offense. (Code 1977, § 14-6307) 
Sec. 122-63. - Hours of operation.     The hours within which pawnbrokers may keep open their places of business shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., except Saturdays and the week before Christmas, when the hour of closing shall be 12:00 midnight. The department of police shall enforce this section. (Code 1977, § 14-6308) 
Sec. 122-64. - Adding merchandise to stock.     Pawnbrokers selling goods other than those pledged may add new merchandise to their stock of the same type as that on which loans are made, up to value of $1,000.00, without having to pay a license tax in addition to the general pawnbroker's license prescribed in chapter 30, article III. (Code 1977, § 14-6309) 
Sec. 122-65. - Time period for holding articles.     Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto shall hold the goods so taken in pawn or purchased for 30 days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. As used in this section, the term "goods" shall be used in the broadest sense and shall include all kinds of personal property. (Code 1977, § 14-6310; Ord. No. 2004-45, § 1, 7-22-04) 
Sec. 122-66. - Restrictions upon sale, pledge of building glass and plumbing material. (a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for pawnbrokers to purchase, advance money on or take in pawn glass taken from buildings, such as mantel mirrors, art glass and the like, or copper wire, copper lining of bathtubs, lead pipes or any kind of plumbing material sold as junk where offered for sale or pawn by others than persons of known good character. (b)  Duties of pawnbrokers. In all cases where these goods are purchased or money advanced, pawnbrokers shall keep a record of the purchases or advances, showing the names of the persons from whom received, their residence, the goods so taken and the amount of money paid or advanced, and this shall be at all times open for inspection to members of the department of police. It shall also be unlawful for pawnbrokers to purchase these goods or to advance money thereon where their appearance indicates that they have been tampered with or there is an effort to conceal identity or if they are mutilated or otherwise show an effort to destroy evidence of the former location of the property. While the goods are being kept for ten days before being disposed of, they shall be so arranged that they can be inspected by members of the department of police on demand. (Code 1977, § 14-6311) 
Sec. 122-67. - Receiving goods from underage persons.     It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or the pawnbroker's agents or employees to receive in pawn from any person under 18 years of age goods of any character or description. Any pawnbroker taking from an applicant a statement in writing that the applicant is of age will not be deemed to have violated this section if the appearance of the applicant as to age and size makes it uncertain that the person is not 18 years of age. (Code 1977, § 14-6312) 
Sec. 122-68. - Effect of conviction for furnishing weapons to underage persons.     A conviction of any person for furnishing weapons to a person under 18 years of age in violation of any laws of the state shall constitute cause for the revocation of any license issued by the city, and, upon notice to the person and a hearing before the license review board, the license shall be subject to revocation. (Code 1977, § 14-6313) 
Secs. 122-69—122-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT AND LICENSE 
Sec. 122-81. - Permit required.     Every person, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall first file an application with the department of police for a permit to conduct the business. (Code 1977, § 14-6301) 
Sec. 122-82. - Contents of application for permit.     In order to obtain a pawnshop license, the owner(s) of the proposed pawnshop must first file an application for a pawnshop license with the licenses and permits unit of the Atlanta Police Department. A nonrefundable application fee of $100.00 is due at the time of application. Each applicant shall submit the following information: (1)  The name and address of the applicant. (2)  The name and address of the proposed business. (3)  The nature and character of the business. (4)  If a partnership, the name of the partnership and the names and addresses of the partners. (5)  If a corporation, the name of the corporation and the names and addresses of the officers and members of the board of directors and stockholders. (6)  Any bank accounts listed in the name of the applicant, or maintained by the applicant, whether an individual, partnership or corporation. (7)  Whether the applicant, or any partners, or any corporation officers or board members, or any principal shareholders, have, within the preceding five years, a record for any conviction for the violation of any statute of the several states, or the United States, or of any ordinance of any city in the United States. "Conviction" as used in this section shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond. (8)  A listing of all real property which the applicant, partnership or corporation is presently leasing, and names and addresses of all lessees and lessors of such property. (9)  A certified copy of the applicant's financial statement for the 12-month period ending one week before the filing of the application for license, and state of incorporation of such corporation, as well as the names and addresses of the agents and employees of such corporation for a period of two years immediately prior to the filing of such application. (10)  Documentation of oral agreements and copies of all written agreements among any persons or stockholders of corporations or partners of partnerships applying for licenses to engage in adult entertainment, which agreements reflect or control ownership or division of profits, sharing of revenues or payment of rents, or which agreements reflect any other arrangements in connection with ownership, rents, profit sharing or income application of use. (Code 1977, § 14-6302; Ord. No. 1999-11, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 122-83. - Investigation, granting or denial. (a)  Investigation. All applicants shall be investigated by the department of police, and its findings shall be presented to the license review board at a public hearing on the application as provided in this division. (1)  Upon receiving an application for a pawnshop license, the permits division of the department of police, shall forward a copy of said application to the chairperson(s) of the affected neighborhood planning unit(s) for review. (2)  Said NPU(s) shall subsequently forward its recommendation to the permits division. The recommendation shall become a part of the permits division's report to the license review board. (b)  Granting or denial. The license review board shall conduct the hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (c)  Fees. The fee for an annual pawnshop license shall be $750.00. (Code 1977, § 14-6303; Ord. No. 1999-11, § 2, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-36, § 1, 3-9-99; Ord. No. 2004-44, § 1, 7-22-04; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 24, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 122-84. - Grounds for nonissuance. (a)  No license or renewal for the operation of a pawn shop shall be issued to any person where any individual, having an interest either as owner, partner, officer, or principal shareholder, directly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of such application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance involving a crime of moral turpitude or relating to sexual offenses and related matters, to alcohol or drug offenses and related matters or to gambling offenses and related matters. (b)  No license shall be issued under this article if the application contains a material omission, untrue or misleading information, or if the application fails to indicate the true ownership of the proposed establishment. (c)  No license shall be issued under this article if the applicant fails to furnish any and all data, information, and records related to the operation of licensed establishments, when the same has been requested by the department of police or the license review board. (d)  No license shall be issued under this article if the proposed premises do not comply with the zoning ordinances, the fire code or the building code of the city. (e)  No license shall be issued under this article where the person applying has had a permit to conduct a similar type business denied or revoked within a period of five years. (Code 1977, § 14-6304; Ord. No. 1999-11, § 3, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 122-85. - Renewal.     Licenses to operate a pawnshop shall be renewed annually as of the date of the original issuance of the license for a fee of $750.00. All applications for renewal licenses shall furnish all data, information and records requested by the license review board or the department of police. The chief of police or designee shall have the authority to renew the license, and such decision may be appealed to the license review board for a hearing and recommendation to the mayor for final action. (Code 1977, § 14-6305; Ord. No. 1999-11, § 4, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-36, § 2, 3-9-99) 
Sec. 122-86. - Revocation; hearing.     Any license issued under this article shall be subject to revocation for: (1)  The violation of any of the prohibitions contained in this article or in this Code. (2)  The violation of any other law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of establishments licensed as pawnshops or which are reasonably related to the operation of such business. (3)  The violation of any occurrence which would have barred issuance of the original license. (4)  Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other illegal act where the licensee, the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. (5)  The failure to obtain prior approval of the maybe after hearing by the license review board for changing the type of establishment operated pursuant to this section. (6)  Failure by the licensee to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises, or on any property owned or leased by the licensee, including but not limited to the parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. (7)  The violation of the human relations ordinance of the city, which violation shall be evidenced by receipt of an order by the human relations commission which shall contain findings of discrimination pursuant to chapter 94, article III of this Code. (Ord. No. 1999-11, § 5, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-36, § 3, 3-9-99) 
Sec. 122-87. - Background checks.     The owner of a licensed pawnshop shall perform criminal background checks on all employees hired after the date of passage of the ordinance. The pawnshop shall maintain such background check records for a minimum period of at least five years after an employee leaves the pawnshop's employ. The pawnshop shall provide all information relevant to the criminal background checks on all new employees to the Atlanta Police Department Licenses & Permits Unit within 30 days of the date of hire of said employee. (Ord. No. 1999-36, § 7, 3-9-99) 
Sec. 122-88. - Location restrictions. (a)  No pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn. This distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. (b)  No pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall be located within 1,000 feet of any of the following uses: (1)  From any structures in residential use. (2)  From any public or private school. (3)  From any public or private park or recreation facility. (4)  From any public library branch. (5)  From any church or similar place of religious worship. (6)  From any public or private hospital or mental health care facility. (7)  From any child care or day care facility.     The distance in subsection (b)(1)—(7), notwithstanding the definition of distance contained in subsection (a), shall be measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the site proposed to be occupied by the pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, to the closest property line of any use identified above. (c)  Applicants for license to operate a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall include with their application, a plat of survey prepared and sealed by a surveyor registered in the state certifying that all of the locational requirements listed above in subsections (a) and (b) have been met. Such applications shall be reviewed by the bureau of buildings for compliance with all distance requirements. (d)  Except as provided in section 122-89, a location licensed to operate a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn on or before July 1, 2010 shall not be required to comply with the distance requirements set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above, provided that such location is not expanded or enlarged.     Nor shall the distance requirements set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above apply to any location for which a new application to operate a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, has been filed with the police department if such application was filed prior to July 1, 2010. (Ord. No. 2010-09(10-O-0388), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 122-89. - Application for new license at existing location. (a)  An applicant for a new license to operate a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, who has acquired a previously licensed pawn location may, within one year after the expiration of the previous owner's license, apply for a pawnshop license for that location even though the location may not meet distance requirements from churches, schools, private residences and other distance requirements set forth in section 122-88. (b)  An application filed under this section shall meet and qualify under all other requirements of this division for the granting of a new license. (Ord. No. 2010-09(10-O-0388), § 2, 3-23-10) 
Secs. 122-90—122-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; local regulation of same, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-5. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 122-106. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Precious metals means any metals, including but not limited to, in whole or in part, silver, gold, platinum.     Precious metals dealer means any person who, exclusively or as incidental to or in connection with any other business, is engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or goods made from precious metals from persons or sources other than industrial producers, manufacturers or licensed dealers. The term "precious metals dealer" also means any person as defined in this subsection and who engages in such business for a period not exceeding 180 days. (Code 1977, § 14-6501) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-107. - Effect of state law.     This article shall be automatically repealed and shall have no force and effect after such date as a statute of general application which regulates in any way the subject matter of this article becomes the law of the state. (Ord. No. 1980-102, § 2, 11-22-80) State Law reference— State regulation of dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq. 
Sec. 122-108. - Records required. (a)  Every precious metals dealer shall maintain a book, in permanent form, in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each purchase of precious metals or goods containing precious metals, the following information: (1)  The date of the purchase transaction. (2)  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller. (3)  The name, age and address of the seller of the items purchased; a description of the general appearance of such seller or a photograph of the seller; and the number from such seller's driver's license or other similar identification. (4)  An identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial numbers, model numbers or other numbers, and any identifying marks inscribed therein. (5)  The signature of the seller. (b)  The permanent record book required in this section shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or goods for a period of four years. (c)  Entries shall appear in chronological order in ink. No blank lines may be left between the entries. No obliterations, alterations or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book and all precious metals and goods containing precious metals shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer at all times. (Code 1977, § 14-6504) State Law reference— Permanent records of dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-3. 
Sec. 122-109. - Daily written report to police. (a)  Every precious metals dealer shall make a daily report in writing to the department of police of all precious metals or goods containing precious metals purchased during the 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. The reports shall be on forms or on duplicate invoices as may be prescribed or approved by the department of police. The reports shall be typewritten and mailed or delivered to the department of police prior to 10:00 a.m. on the day following the date of the report. In addition to any other information required by the department of police, the reports shall include the name and address of the permittee, date of transaction, description and amount of the precious metals or goods containing precious metals purchased and the name and address of the person from whom purchased. (b)  The department of police may promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this section to require the proper enforcement of this section. (Code 1977, § 14-6505) State Law reference— Written reports of purchases by dealers of precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-4. 
Sec. 122-110. - Time period for retention.     For a period of 30 days, excluding Sundays and legal holidays, after the purchase or receipt of any precious metals or goods containing precious metals, every precious metals dealer shall retain upon the licensed premises or in a sealed vault off the premises, provided such a precaution is necessary for safekeeping, all such precious metals or goods containing precious metals purchased or received and shall not alter the original form, shape or condition of such metals or goods until that time shall have elapsed. (Code 1977, § 14-6506; Ord. No. 2004-45, § 2, 7-22-04) 
Sec. 122-111. - Applicability of certain sections. (a)  Sections 122-108 through 122-110 shall not apply to any precious metals or goods containing precious metals from industrial producers, manufacturers, licensed dealers or distributors. (b)  Division 2 of this article shall not apply to licensed pawnbrokers, scrap metal processors or secondhand dealers. Pawnbrokers, scrap metal processors and secondhand dealers are not, however, relieved from compliance with sections 122-108 through 122-110 when the purchase of precious metals or goods containing precious metals is from persons or sources other than industrial producers, manufacturers or licensed dealers or distributors. (Code 1977, § 14-6507) 
Sec. 122-112. - Unlawful activities. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any precious metals dealer or any agent or employee of a precious metals dealer who makes purchases of precious metals or goods containing precious metals to: (1)  Fail to maintain and make entries in the permanent record book as required by section 122-108; (2)  Make any false entries therein; (3)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy or remove from the place of business such permanent record book; (4)  Fail to submit daily reports as required in section 122-109; or (5)  Refuse to allow a duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such permanent book or any precious metals or goods containing precious metals in such dealer's possession. (b)  Any person violating subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor. (Code 1977, § 14-6508) 
Secs. 122-113—122-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- State Law reference— Dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-2. 
Sec. 122-126. - Required; application. (a)  No person shall engage in business as a precious metals dealer without first obtaining a permit. (b)  A permit for a precious metals dealer shall authorize the permittee to engage in the business of a precious metals dealer. (c)  Application for the permit to engage in business as a precious metals dealer shall be made to the police department and shall be accompanied by an application fee of $100.00. (d)  The application for a permit shall be in writing and shall be sworn to or affirmed by the applicant. The application shall contain the name, address and age of the applicant, together with the names, addresses and ages of all other persons having an ownership interest in the business other than a publicly held corporation. Applications for publicly held corporations shall include the names, addresses and ages of all officers of the corporation and their titles, as well as the name and address of a permanent agent for service within the city. All applications shall contain an accurate description of the premises upon which the business is conducted and the zoning and planning classification of the premises, as well as such other things as may be required from time to time by the department of police. (Code 1977, § 14-6502; Ord. No. 1999-12, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 1, 3-9-99) 
Sec. 122-127. - Processing application; issuance of permit. (a)  After the application for the permit required by this division has been filed, the department of police shall determine whether the applicant has been convicted of a violation of a criminal law or section of this Code or other ordinance involving larceny, burglary or theft of any description as defined in the Criminal Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.). The application, together with the report of the department of police, shall be forwarded by the department of police to the license review board within 20 days after the initial filing, after which time the license review board shall hold a public hearing on the application. (b)  The license review board shall thereafter report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (c)  Upon the issuance of a permit to engage in business as a precious metals dealer, the permit holder shall submit an annual permit fee in the amount of $750.00 (Code 1977, § 14-6503; Ord. No. 1999-12, § 2, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 2, 3-9-99; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 25, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 122-128. - Suspension or revocation.     Any permits issued pursuant to this division may be suspended or revoked upon the following grounds: (1)  The holder of the permit misrepresents any information in the original or renewal application for any permit authorized by this division; (2)  The violation of a conviction of the holder of the permit of any criminal law involving larceny, burglary or theft of any description as defined in state law; or (3)  The violation of a conviction of the holder of the permit of any part of section 122-112(a). (Code 1977, § 14-6509) 
Sec. 122-129. - Notice and hearing on suspension or revocation. (a)  No permit which has been issued to any person pursuant to this division shall be suspended or revoked except upon one or more of the grounds stated in section 122-128 and until after the holder of the permit has been afforded a hearing. (b)  No hearing as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be held unless the holder of the permit has been given at least five days' notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a written statement of the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. (c)  Charges upon which any permit issued pursuant to this division may be initiated by the license review board or the police chief. (d)  The license review board has the authority to conduct such hearings and report its findings and recommendations to the mayor, who shall make the final decision with regard thereto. The mayor may suspend any such permit. The suspension may be made effective immediately and be in force until the next regular meeting of the license review board. Nothing in this section limits the powers of the mayor to suspend the permit for a time expiring prior to its next regular meeting. (Code 1977, § 14-6510) 
Sec. 122-130. - Background checks.     All persons or businesses licensed by the city to deal in precious metals ("dealer") shall perform criminal background checks on all employees hired after the date of passage of the ordinance. The dealer shall maintain such background check records for a minimum period of at least five years after an employee leaves the dealer's employ. The dealer shall provide all information relevant to the criminal background checks on all new employees to the Atlanta Police Department Licenses and Permits Unit within 30 days of the date of hire of said employee. (Ord. No. 1999-12, § 3, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 3, 3-9-99) 
Secs. 122-131—122-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SECONDARY METAL RECYCLERS[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- State Law reference— Secondary metals recyclers, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-350 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 122-151. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Chief means the police chief or any member of the department of police designated by the chief.     Department means the department of police.     Ferrous metals means any metals containing significant quantities of iron or steel.     Fixed location means any site occupied by a secondary metals recycler as owner of the site or as lessee of the site under a lease or other rental agreement providing for occupation of the site by the secondary metals recycler for a total duration of not less than 364 days.     License review board means the city license review board.     Money means a medium of exchange authorized or adopted by a domestic or foreign government as part of its currency.     Nonferrous metals means metals not containing significant quantities of iron or steel, including, without limitation, copper, brass, aluminum, bronze, lead, zinc, nickel and alloys thereof, excluding precious metals subject to regulation under article IV of this chapter.     Personal identification card means a driver's license or identification card issued by the department of police or a similar card issued by another state, a military identification card, a passport or an appropriate work authorization issued by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service.     Purchase transaction means a transaction in which a secondary metals recycler gives consideration having a value in excess of $5.00 in exchange for regulated metals property.     Regulated metals property means any item composed primarily of any nonferrous metals, but does not include aluminum beverage containers, used beverage containers or similar beverage containers.     Secondary metals recycler means any person who is engaged, from a fixed location or otherwise, in the business of paying compensation for ferrous or nonferrous metals that have served their original economic purpose, whether or not such person is engaged in the business of performing the manufacturing process by which ferrous metals or nonferrous metals are converted into raw material products consisting of prepared grades and having an existing or potential economic value. (Code 1977, § 14-6341) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-152. - Records required. (a)  A secondary metals recycler shall maintain a legible record of all purchase transactions to which such secondary metals recycler is party. (b)  The following information must be maintained for each purchase transaction: (1)  The name and address of the secondary metals recycler. (2)  The name, initials or other identification of the individual entering the information on the ticket. (3)  The date of the transaction. (4)  The weight, quantity or volume and a description of the type of regulated metals property purchased in a purchase transaction. (5)  The amount of consideration given in a purchase transaction for the regulated metals property. (6)  The distinctive number from and type of the personal identification card of the person delivering the regulated metals property to the secondary metals recycler and that person's name, address and signature. (c)  A secondary metals recycler shall maintain or cause to be maintained the information required by this section for not less than three years from the date of the purchase transaction. (Code 1977, § 14-6344) 
Sec. 122-153. - Inspection of regulated metals property and records.     During the usual and customary business hours of a secondary metals recycler, a law enforcement officer shall, after properly presenting identification as a law enforcement officer, have the right to inspect any and all: (1)  Purchased regulated metals property in the possession of the secondary metals recycler; and (2)  Records required to be maintained under section 122-153. (Code 1977, § 14-6345) 
Sec. 122-154. - Hold notice. (a)  Whenever a law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that certain items or regulated metals property in the possession of a secondary metals recycler have been stolen, the law enforcement officer may issue a hold notice to the secondary metals recycler. (b)  The hold notice shall be in writing, shall be delivered to the secondary metals recycler, shall specifically identify those items of regulated metals property that are believed to have been stolen and that are subject to the notice and shall inform the secondary metals recycler of the information contained in this section. The hold notice may be delivered via facsimile transmission; however, a hold notice delivered in such manner shall be valid for a period not to exceed 24 hours from such transmission. The hold notice may be extended to the full period of time allowed in subsection (c) of this section by hand delivery to the secondary metals recycler by a law enforcement officer of the hold notice. (c)  Upon receipt of the notice issued in accordance with this section, the secondary metals recycler receiving the notice may not process or remove the items or regulated metals property identified in the notice or any portion thereof from the place of business of the secondary metals recycler for 15 calendar days after receipt of the notice by the secondary metals recycler, unless sooner released by a law enforcement officer. (d)  At the expiration of the hold period the hold is automatically released, and the secondary metals recycler may dispose of the regulated metals property unless other disposition has been ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Code 1977, § 14-6346) 
Sec. 122-155. - Applicability of certain sections.     Sections 122-152, 122-153 and 122-154 shall not apply to any regulated metals property purchased or received from any public utility; any industrial or manufacturing plant; any other commercial vendor that generates regulated metals property in the ordinary course of business; the United States or any agency thereof; any state, county or municipality or any department thereof; or any public authority or any scrap purchased at any judicial sale. However, all of such sections shall apply to any regulated metals property which is delivered to a secondary metals recycler by any agent or employee of any of the entities named in this section. (Code 1977, § 14-6347) 
Sec. 122-156. - Identification of vehicles.     It shall be unlawful for any secondary metals recycler to purchase regulated metals property in the city utilizing any vehicle which is owned, operated by or in the custody of such secondary metals recycler unless the vehicle shall have printed upon it, in large letters not less than six inches in height, the name of the secondary metals recycler. (Code 1977, § 14-6348) 
Sec. 122-157. - Unlawful acts.     It is unlawful for a secondary metals recycler to do or allow any of the following acts: (1)  Purchase regulated metals property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (2)  Purchase regulated metals property at a location other than the place of business set forth in the license. (3)  Purchase regulated metals property in return for money from a trailer, a vehicle or any location other than a fixed location. However, regulated metals may be purchased from a nonfixed location with any negotiable or nonnegotiable instrument, including a check or draft or any other type of instrument purchased with money, and sold for the purpose of making payments or transfers to others. (Code 1977, § 14-6351) 
Secs. 122-158—122-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
Sec. 122-171. - Required; application. (a)  As used in this section, the term "applicant" means the following: (1)  If a corporation, the chief executive officer or some other person with written authority from the corporation to bind the corporation as to its business operations within the city; (2)  If a partnership, the partner with the greatest proprietary interest; (3)  If an individual, that individual; or (4)  If a firm or association, the person with the greatest proprietary interest. (b)  No person shall engage in business as a secondary metals recycler at any location without first obtaining a license to engage in the business. (c)  A license for a secondary metals recycler shall authorize the licensee to engage in the business of paying compensation for ferrous or nonferrous metals that have served their original economic purpose. (d)  Application for the license shall be made to the department of police. (e)  The application for any such license shall be in writing and shall be sworn to or affirmed by the applicant. (f)  A fee of $100.00 shall be charged. (g)  The application shall contain the name, age and address of the applicant, together with the names, ages and addresses of all other persons having an interest in the business. For a publicly held corporation, only those owners holding at least 40 percent of the shares shall be required to be named. The application shall also contain a statement that the applicant will comply with the sections of this Code and other ordinances of the city relating to the business for which the applicant seeks a license. If the applicant is a corporation, the application must include the name and address of such corporation's registered agent for service of process in the state and a certified copy of statement from the secretary of state that the corporation is duly organized in the state or, if the corporation is organized in a state other than this state, a certified copy of the statement that the corporation is duly qualified to do business in this state. (Code 1977, § 14-6342) 
Sec. 122-172. - Processing application; issuance of license. (a)  After the application for the license required by this division is filed with the department of police, a criminal record check will be done. During the investigation by the police, the application shall be transmitted to the department of planning and development for review as to compliance with applicable sections of this Code and the Ordinances. This department shall send its report to the license review board. (b)  The license review board shall hold a public hearing and shall report its recommendation, together with the recommendation of the department of planning and development and of the department of police, to the mayor. (c)  The mayor, upon receiving the recommendations described in subparagraph (b) above, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendations, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. (d)  If final action on the application is favorable, the applicant shall be issued an initial annual license for a fee of $500.00. The initial annual license will allow the licensee to engage in business as a secondary metals recycled or scrap processor and shall be valid until December 31 of the initial year of issuance, unless the license is suspended or revoked for violations of the Charter or related state laws or this code or other ordinances of the city. Thereafter, the applicant shall be required to obtain a renewal license for each succeeding year. A renewal application shall be accompanied by a fee of $500.00. A renewal license shall be issued by the licenses and permits unit of the police department if the applicant for renewal continues to meet all of the prerequisites for obtaining an initial license and no action to deny, suspend or revoke the license is pending against the applicant. (Code 1977, § 14-6343; Ord. No. 1999-19, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 26, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 122-173. - Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation.     Any license issued pursuant to this division may be denied, suspended or revoked upon the following grounds: (1)  For the holder of the license to state any untrue or false information in any original, renewal of transfer application for any license authorized by this division, notwithstanding the fact that the untrue and false information may have been discovered by the department after the applicant has been granted the license; (2)  For any three violations within a 12-month period by the holder of the license or an applicant for a license, of any laws or sections of this Code, or other ordinances regulating the business licensed pursuant to this article, for the violation of any laws, rules or regulations of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) or any successor agency with the same or similar regulatory function or of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or any successor agency with the same or similar regulatory function. (3)  For the conviction of the license holder of any criminal offense relating to theft. (Code 1977, § 14-6349; Ord. No. 2007-30(07-O-0971), § 1, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 122-174. - Notice and hearing on denial, suspension or revocation. (a)  No license issued to any person pursuant to this division shall be denied, suspended or revoked except upon one or more of the grounds stated in section 122-174 and until after the holder of the license has been afforded a hearing. (b)  No hearing as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be held unless the holder of the license has been given at least ten days' notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a written statement of the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. (c)  Action to deny, suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this division shall be initiated by the chief. (d)  The license review board is delegated that authority to conduct the hearings in this section and report its findings and recommendations to the mayor, who shall take final action. (Code 1977, § 14-6350) 
Chapter 126 - SOCIAL SERVICES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Office of citizen employment and training, § 2-231; office of human services, § 2-236; budgets for and rental of neighborhood centers, § 2-921; mayor's committee on drug control, § 2-1956 et seq.; free burial permits for paupers, § 38-28; health and sanitation, ch. 86. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; social services generally, O.C.G.A. § 49-1-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 126-1—126-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS 
Sec. 126-26. - Monthly appropriations; effect of institution's refusal to receive charitable cases.     The amounts appropriated to charitable institutions shall be paid to these institutions in monthly installments. On failure of an institution to receive persons sent to it, as provided in section 126-28, the officer who shall have designated the institution shall report it to the chief financial officer, and it shall be unlawful for the chief financial officer to draw any further check or warrant for that institution or to approve any vouchers in its behalf. In that case, the appropriation set apart to that institution shall be stricken, and the amount appropriated for it shall be transferred to the department of contingent and grants. (Code 1977, § 14-7031) 
Sec. 126-27. - Reception by institution of persons claiming injury on streets, public places. (a)  Notice required. The officers and agents in charge of all institutions of public charity to whose maintenance the city contributes shall notify the department of law at once of the reception of any person claiming to have received an injury upon the streets, avenues or public places of the city, in order that the claim may be promptly investigated and the evidence attending it ascertained for the information of the council or for defense, if suit follows. (b)  Investigation. Inquiries shall be made by those officers and agents to ascertain the cause of injury, if the patient fails voluntarily to reveal it or if the circumstances suggest that injury. (Code 1977, § 14-7032) 
Sec. 126-28. - Duty of institutions to receive objects of charity when sent by heads of departments, mayor.     All organizations, bodies and homes organized for charitable and beneficent purposes to which the city may make appropriations, annually or otherwise, shall receive any objects of charity or persons in need of protection or aid sent to them by the head of any department of the city in the course of whose duty it may become necessary to provide for any of those persons, the institution selected each time to be the one appropriate to the particular case in hand. If there is no head of a department to give this direction, the mayor shall direct which institution shall receive and care for those persons. (Code 1977, § 14-7033) 
Chapter 130 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Authority to provide for collection and disposal of solid waste, § 1-102(c)(25). Cross reference— Department of public works, § 2-461 et seq.; clean city commission, § 2-1876 et seq.; solid waste disposal at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, § 22-106; littering by vendors, § 30-1412; environment, ch. 74; health and sanitation, ch. 86; property to be maintained free of unhealthful conditions, including solid waste, junk, weeds and exterior storage, § 86-6; utilities, ch. 154. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific grant of constitutional authority relative to garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 130-1. - Statement of purpose and definitions. (a)  Statement of purpose. (1)  It is the stated policy of the City of Atlanta to protect the health, safety and welfare of its residents. Furthermore, the City of Atlanta recognizes environmental protection as a right of the people living within the city. So that the objectives of these policies might be achieved, it is also essential to take necessary measures to preserve and protect the environment of the city for its inhabitants. (2)  Therefore, it is declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide an effective solid waste management program within the city to better protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of City of Atlanta and its residents. Furthermore, the City of Atlanta must work to maintain an effective solid waste management program to ensure that the City of Atlanta remains an effective steward of the environment and its natural resources. (b)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: Brown goods means any discarded appliances including but not limited to electronic equipment such as stereos, televisions, computers, and VCRs and other similar items. Building of public worship means any lot upon which is located one or more buildings used for the purpose of public worship. Bulk yard trimmings means oversized yard trimmings such as tree trunks and branches exceeding two feet in diameter and four feet in length that are biodegradable. Bulky items means discarded non-putrescible waste of a size and form which cannot be easily deposited in, or removed by city personnel from, containers provided by the city for the disposal and collection of solid waste from residences, including but not limited to the following items: furniture; carpets; mattresses; clothing; and tires. Bulky items does not include any motor vehicle or any subassembly, component or part thereof (except tires). Chief of staff means the Chief of Staff to the Mayor of the City of Atlanta, or authorized designee. City means City of Atlanta. Collector means a person who, under verbal or written agreements, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and transporting solid waste, from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and similar locations or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and transporting waste from such individual's own single-family dwelling unit. Commercial and industrial property means any lot that is used wholly or predominantly, according to the total square footage of building structure on all stories devoted to a particular use, for business, commercial or industrial purposes or for the purposes of boardinghouses or mobile home parks and any other lot which is excluded from any other categories set forth in this section or the definitions contained in this section. Commercial waste means waste materials generated in commercial operations. Commissioner means the commissioner of public works or any duly authorized assistant, agent or representative of the commissioner. Commissioner of public works means the commissioner of the department of public works or any duly authorized deputy, assistant, agent or representative of the commissioner. Compostable material means any organic materials that are source separated for processing or composting, such as yard trimmings and food waste.     Construction and demolition waste : A.  Construction and demolition waste means discarded waste building materials and rubble generally resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of buildings and pavements, including but not limited to processed wood, metal, bricks, concrete, wallboard, paper and cardboard. B.  Construction and demolition waste does not include materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition or buildings and pavements, that contain or have been contaminated by hazardous materials which must be handled and disposed of separately.     Container means any receptacle used to accumulate solid waste from residential, commercial and industrial waste generators. Containers vary in size and type according to the needs of the customer.     Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal and includes administration, personnel, land, equipment, design and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal.     Disposal site means the location or land area where the final disposition of solid waste occurs.     Extra garbage means garbage placed outside the city provided container.     Garbage : A.  Garbage means putrescible wastes including kitchen and table food wastes; animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the storage, preparation, cooking, processing or handling of foodstuffs; nonputrescible wastes that are mixed in the same container with or contaminated by putrescible wastes; small dead animals not exceeding five pounds in weight; and any putrefactive or easily decomposable waste material that is likely to attract flies, vermin, birds or rodents. B.  Garbage does not include materials that are separated and set aside for recycling or composting and does not include hazardous material, household hazardous material, or sewage or sewage sludge or human or animal excrement or yard waste.     Generator means any person or business responsible for the creation, generation, or production of solid waste upon any premises.     Hazardous material as defined in Section 1004(5) of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA), means a solid waste, or combination of solid wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: 1) cause, or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or 2) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. The owner or operator of a facility which treats, stores, manages, or disposes of such materials is required by Section 312 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act (EPCRA) to submit an emergency and hazardous chemical inventory form to the State and to the Local Emergency Planning Commission, and is required to submit a MSDS per RCRA. Hazardous material includes all household hazardous materials in single containerized volumes of five gallons or greater, or uncontainerized improper discharges or deposits of volumes of two or more gallons.     Hazardous material disposal facility means any facility where final disposal of any hazardous material occurs; including any facility classified Subtitle C under Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).     Household hazardous materials means any discarded liquid, solid, contained gas, or sludge, including any material, substance, product, commodity or waste used or generated in the household or similar source that is either ignitable, corrosive, reactive or toxic, in single containerized volumes under five gallons. Household hazardous materials also includes any item, product or material containing or contaminated by any household hazardous material.     Incinerator means any device intended or used for the reduction or destruction of solid waste by burning.     Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations.     Landfill means a method of disposing of solid wastes, other than putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon.     Litter means uncontrolled or uncontainerized solid waste.     Multi-family dwelling means any permanent premises on a single parcel of land designed for or occupied by more than six residential dwelling units where the residential units do not receive separate or individual solid waste collection service.     Municipal solid waste (MSW) means any solid waste derived from commercial and residential properties, including garbage, trash, yard trimmings and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multi-family residences, hotels and motels, picnic grounds, parks, and day use recreation areas.     Nuisance means any improper deposit or disposal of refuse as defined in this section.     Outdoor event means any gathering of 2,000 people or more, including but not limited to a Class A, B, C, or D outdoor festival, and events such as sporting events, circuses, concerts, or exhibitions, and other events that may or may not qualify as an outdoor festival.     Outdoor event property means any property located in the city, including but not limited to a parking lot, where the property has been used for or in conjunction with an outdoor event.     Owner means the person holding the legal title to any real property located in the city.     Paper bags means biodegradable, unlined paper or paperboard (cardboard) produced from chemical pulp produced in the kraft process.     Permit holder means the individual who is the named recipient of a city permit that authorizes an outdoor event to occur on city-owned property.     Plastic #1 means Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) which include soft drink, water, and other beverage bottles, detergent and cleaning containers, condiments such as ketchup, salad dressing, peanut butter and other food containers and bottles.     Plastic #2 means High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) which include milk and water jugs, laundry detergents, shampoo bottles.     Plastic #3 means Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC or V) which include clear food packaging, detergents and window cleaner bottles, some plastic squeeze bottles, cooking oil, peanut butter jars.     Plastic #4 means Low Density Polyethylene (LDPE) which include most bottles.     Plastic #5 means Polypropylene (PP) which include deli soups, syrup, yogurt and margarine containers, clouded plastic containers.     Plastic #6 means Polystyrene (PS) which include egg [cartons].     Plastic #7 means mixed plastics (other) which include lids five-gallon water bottles, and "sport" water bottles.     Private contractor means any business or person operating under a contract for the collection and removal of solid waste from any multi-family residential, commercial, or industrial premises within the city.     Property owner means the owner, or agent of the owner, of any property located in the city, where the city does not own the property.     Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include but are not necessarily limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes and garbage.     Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing.     Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such term shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable city, State of Georgia and federal laws and regulations relating to such solid waste.     Recycling contamination means any garbage, bagged recyclables, food, liquids, plastic bags, clothes hangers, Styrofoam, batteries, light bulbs, human waste, animal waste, medical waste, clothes, electronics, cords, hoses, chains, tanks, wood, plastic furniture, metal or such other items as determined by the commissioner that is placed in a recycling container provided by the city.     Recyclable materials means: (a)  Those materials, including but not limited to metal containers, plastic bottles and jars, glass containers and paper, which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential, and can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and (b)  Those materials limited to metal; plastics numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7; glass; paper; and cardboard, which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential, and can be feasibly used, reused or recycled. This term does not include: food, liquids, plastic bags, clothes hangers, Styrofoam, batteries, light bulbs, and medical waste, or such other items as determined by the commissioner.     Residence means any lot that is used exclusively for residential purposes, but not lots upon which are located licensed hotels or motels or apartments.     Residential composting means any composting of yard trimmings generated on the residential premises for use on the residential property on which it was generated.     Residential property means any property that is used exclusively for residential purposes, but not properties upon which are located licensed hotels or motels.     Residential vacant land charge means a flat charge for right-of-way maintenance assessed to residential parcels with the Class Code of 100     Rubbish means all uncontainerized, discarded, nonputrescible waste matter excluding yard trimmings that cannot be easily deposited in, or removed by city personnel from containers provided by the city for disposal and collection of solid waste from residences.     Salvage means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use as approved by the commissioner.     Sanitary landfill means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon.     Scavenging means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials.     Single-family dwelling means any permanent premises used for or designated as a single-family residential dwelling. Single-family dwelling includes each part of a condominium project, duplex, triplex, townhouse project or apartment building which has been approved by the commissioner of solid waste services for separate or individual solid waste collection service.     Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plan, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923).     Solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes but is not limited to landfills, sanitary landfills, municipal solid waste landfill and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities.     Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposing of solid wastes or any combination thereof. Special pickup means a pickup of bulky items, bulk material or extra garbage requested by the customer at a time other than the regularly scheduled service time, which involves the dispatch of a truck.     Solid waste handling facility means any facility or location, the primary purpose of which is storage, collection, sorting, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. Such facility shall include any facility engaged in the handling, as described above, of compostable waste, other than a facility engaged solely in the handling of yard trimmings, as defined herein.     Tenant means any person or persons, other than the owner, occupying or in possession of a premises.     Transfer station means a supplemental transportation facility used to transfer solid waste or facilitate the transfer of solid waste from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to another facility for further processing or disposal.     Transporter means any person or business moving, relocating or transporting any solid waste upon the public streets, highways and public right-of-way within the city.     Trash means nonputrescible solid waste, of a size and form which can be easily deposited in, and removed by city personnel, from containers provided by the city for the disposal and collection of solid waste from residences, and which includes paper, cardboard, small metal items or containers and packaging materials, and similar items normally accumulated in the care and maintenance of residential or commercial property.     Vegetative overgrowth means any and all uncultivated vegetative growth exceeding a height of 18 inches, as measured vertically from the surface of the ground, and covering a continuous area of 400 square feet or 25 percent, whichever is less, of that portion of any lot, tract or parcel of land which is not occupied by buildings, other structures or trees.     Weeds means all rank, vegetative growth, including kudzu, poison ivy, plants of obnoxious odors, weeds and grasses causing hay fever or those which serve as a breeding place for mosquitoes and other unhealthy or undesirable insects or as a refuge for snakes, rats or other rodents or as a hiding place for filth, litter or trash or that create a fire or traffic hazard or provide a hiding place for persons.     White goods means discarded household appliances including but not limited to refrigerators, ranges, washers, dryers, water heaters, and dishwashers and other similar items.     Yard trimmings means plant material (leaves, grass clippings, branches, brush, flowers, roots, wood waste, etc.); debris commonly thrown away in the course of maintaining yards and gardens, including sod; and biodegradable or compostable waste approved for the yard trimmings programs. It excludes loose soils; food waste; plastics and synthetic fibers; lumber; any wood or tree limbs over four inches in diameter or four feet in length; human or animal excrement; soil contaminated with hazardous materials; and all matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance by a professional contractor.     Yard trimmings bag means lawn-and-leaf paper bags designed to contain yard trimmings that is no larger than 34 gallons and no heavier than 35 pounds. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1, 3-9-04; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 7, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2015-08(15-O-1045), § 1, 2-26-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 2, 11-14-18 ) Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. 
Sec. 130-2. - Maintenance and inspection of property. (a)  Required. Every person owning or occupying public or private property in the city shall maintain the property free of any condition that may render the premises or property to be unhealthy, unsanitary, unsightly or unaesthetic to the occupants thereof, the neighborhood or the community at large. (b)  Conditions in violation. Because they are deemed to be conducive to breeding or harboring of harmful germs or to the breeding or harboring of insects, snakes, rodents, lizards or similar or undesirable living pests and carriers of harmful germs or poisons or to the harboring of undesirable persons or illicit activities and are in violation of the general public health, safety, welfare and well-being, the existence of any one of the following conditions on property within the city shall be in violation of this section and this Code: (1)  Uncontainerized garbage or uncovered garbage containers of all kinds and types. (2)  Trapped litter or any other improperly containerized solid waste. (3)  Exterior storage of solid waste or other unsightly materials. (4)  The existence of weeds and vegetative overgrowth. (5)  The existence, storage or accumulation of garbage, hazardous, putrescible solid waste or rubbish. (c)  Inspect ion of premises. The commissioner of public works or any duly authorized agent of the department of public works or other city departments may enter on and inspect any and all public and private property in the city to determine by inspection that those properties are or are not free of any condition which may be in violation of this section or chapter. For the purpose of this duty, the sanitation code enforcement officer, including code enforcement officers, route supervisors, assistant sanitary area supervisors, sanitary area supervisors or subsequent classification titles performing the same duties, are eligible to apply for status as code enforcement agents under section 98-1. In order to enforce code provisions and issue citations, these employees must apply for and receive status as a code enforcement agent. (d)  Notice of unsanitary conditions. Upon the determination through inspection by the commissioner of public works or any duly authorized agent of the department of public works or any other duly authorized agent of the city that any property within the city is in violation of this section, the commissioner shall give written notice to the owner or agent of the owner of the property of the condition found. (1)  Such notice shall set forth the condition of the property, the specific violation of this section and the Code and the remedial action to be taken. (2)  The notice to the owner or agent shall include a time certain in which the nuisance is to be abated, but not more than ten days from date of receipt of the notice by the owner or agent. All notices shall be sent by personal service or sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address as listed in the official tax register of the county or records of the secretary of state. The nuisance shall be processed and abated in accordance with section 74-161. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2006-76, § 1, 10-11-06; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-3. - Deposit of solid waste on streets and sidewalks. (a)  Generally. No person shall deposit in any street, sidewalk or other public place in the city any solid waste of any type; provided, however, that earth and rubbish or building debris caused by construction may be allowed to lie in those places subject to permit by the department of public works. In compliance with this section, it shall be lawful to place bulk yard trimmings, such as branches and similar matter, in the parkway between the sidewalk and the curbstone, provided the debris does not extend over the sidewalk so as to block pedestrian traffic or fall into or extend over the street so as to block pedestrian traffic or fall into or extend over the street so as to hinder vehicular traffic or make it difficult to use motor-driven sweepers. (b)  Tree services. All persons engaged in the business of trimming or removing trees, shrubbery or similar growth shall not allow any sawdust, branches, stumps and all portions of the byproduct generated by any tree service to accumulate on any adjacent public way and shall remove all debris from the public way at least once a day. Any property owner shall be responsible for ensuring that such persons or businesses shall properly remove, transport and dispose of the debris in conformity with the requirements of this Code and in a manner that does not cause any debris to be washed, drained, discarded or otherwise allowed to flow into the city sewer system. (c)  Landscaping, nurseries or yard maintenance services. All persons engaged in the business of landscaping, nurseries or yard maintenance and who shall contract with a property owner, the owner's agent or the occupant to improve the property, trim or remove shrubbery and trees or maintain yards shall remove from the property all solid waste and rubbish, including rocks, dirt, glass, trimmings and other byproducts generated by such service. Any property owner shall be responsible for ensuring that such persons or businesses shall properly remove, transport and dispose of the debris in conformity with the requirements of this code and in a manner that does not cause or allow any debris to be washed, drained, discarded or otherwise allowed to flow into the city sewer system. (d)  Construction and demolition waste. All persons engaged in the business of construction or demolition who shall contract with a property owner, the owner's agent or the occupant to improve the property shall remove from the property all solid waste and other byproducts generated by such service. Any property owner shall be responsible for ensuring that such person or businesses shall properly remove, transport and dispose of the debris in conformity with any requirements of the State of Georgia, and the requirements of this Code and in a manner that does not cause or allow any debris to be washed, drained, discarded or otherwise allowed to flow into the city sewer system. (e)  Damage to the public right-of-way. If the public right-of-way is damaged during the removal of any solid waste from any property, such person, business or commercial entity shall restore the public right-of-way to the condition that it was in before the damage occurred or shall pay the city in full for any costs and expenses which the city incurs in connection with the performance of that work. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-4. - Cleanliness of sidewalks.     It shall be the duty of all occupants and owners of property and owners of vacant property, in front of which the sidewalk area is paved or unpaved, to keep that area clean and to do such sweeping and scraping and cutting of grass or weeds and watering, pruning and maintaining planted material and planters as may be necessary to remove clay, dirt and trash therefrom and to render it passable, comfortable and sightly. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-5. - Decaying animal matter. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person having the ownership or control of any animal matter within the city which is in process of decay so as to be offensive or dangerous to the public health and welfare to permit the same to remain within the city, while in such condition, more than 12 hours after such animal matter shall have come into such offensive or dangerous condition, whether it be at an establishment for the rendering or changing the character thereof or not. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any decaying animal matter through the curbside collection program of the city. (c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $25.00 and not more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Every day on which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-6. - Throwing, depositing, or disposing of garbage, trash, yard trimmings or other solid waste upon streets, sidewalks, public places, public property and public rights-of-way. (a)  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to: (1)  Throw, deposit or discard debris, uncontainerized garbage, litter, trash, solid waste; uncontainerized recyclable materials; or uncontainerized yard trimmings upon the streets, sidewalks, public places, public property and public rights-of-way within the city. (2)  Place, throw, deposit or discard nails, tacks, glass or any similar substance, object or objects which would be likely to injure the feet of persons or animals or cut, puncture or otherwise damage tires or vehicles, upon the streets, sidewalks, public places, public property and public rights-of-way within the city. (b)  Signs in rights-of-way. The commissioner of public works or authorized designee shall be responsible for installing "No Littering" signage within the right-of-way as deemed appropriate. These signs shall be highly visible and placed strategically throughout the entire city. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2015-08(15-O-1045), § 2, 2-26-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 3, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-7. - Disposal of garbage and other solid waste on private property; uncontainerized garbage on private property. (a)  Garbage on private property. It shall be unlawful for any owner within the city to have upon the owner's property any containerized or uncontainerized garbage, trash or other materials or substances which may catch and retain rainwater or anything which will furnish food for or attract or harbor rats or which will attract flies or breed mosquitoes or otherwise become a fire hazard or health menace. (b)  Improper dumping or disposal. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or otherwise place, or allow to be dumped, deposited or otherwise placed on any public or private property within the city, with or without the consent of the owner or the owner's agent, any solid waste that is not prepared and placed according to the provisions of this code, unless otherwise permitted according to the provisions of section 130-63. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-8. - Transporting garbage, trash, solid waste, or other material in open motor vehicles; spills from motor vehicles. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated upon any public street in the city any open truck, wagon or other motor vehicle in and upon which garbage, trash, manure, solid waste material, other debris, or other materials are transported, unless the vehicle shall be equipped with a cover or other securing device that will prevent the garbage, trash, waste material, other debris or other material from falling from the truck onto the streets of the city. (b)  In the event that spillage does occur in spite of the appropriate use of said devices, the person responsible for the operation of the vehicle shall take immediate action to remove the material from the street or sidewalk. Shoveling, sweeping, or vacuuming the material and removing it from the roadway is an appropriate response. Failure to properly remove spilled material from a public street or sidewalk, or washing spilled material into any storm sewer, sanitary sewer, catch-basin, manholes, or other drainage-way is not an acceptable response, and is a violation of City Code. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-9. - Spills from vehicles; concrete, cement, gravel, sand, dirt, and asphalt hauling. (a)  Any person engaged in hauling concrete, cement, gravel, sand, dirt, or asphalt on any public street within the corporate limits of the city shall load or fill vehicles so as to not allow spillage of any material onto the city streets or sidewalks. All vehicles hauling wet concrete, cement or loose material, arc required to use suitable covers, spill prevention and capture devices to prevent materials from blowing, spilling, or dripping from the vehicle. (b)  In the event that spillage does occur in spite of the appropriate use of said devices, the person responsible for the operation of the vehicle shall remove the material from the street or sidewalk. Shoveling, sweeping, or vacuuming the material and removing it from the roadway is an appropriate response. Failure to properly remove spilled material from a public street or sidewalk, or washing spilled material into any storm sewer, sanitary sewer, catch-basin, manholes, or other drainage-way is not an acceptable response, and is a violation of city. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-10. - Hazardous materials. (a)  Prohibited conduct. (1)  No person shall dispose of any hazardous materials at any of the solid waste disposal facilities or transfer stations within the limits of the city. (2)  No person shall store or accumulate any hazardous materials in any container used for storage or accumulation of garbage, rubbish, recovered materials, or solid wastes. (3)  No person shall store or accumulate any hazardous materials in any container not designed, intended or permitted for storage or accumulation of hazardous materials. (4)  No person shall deposit or discard on any public or private property any type or kind of hazardous material within the city. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-11. - Household hazardous materials. (a)  Prohibited conduct. (1)  No household hazardous materials shall be disposed through the curbside collection service of the city in a matter different from the procedures for the proper disposal of household hazardous wastes established by the commissioner of public works or authorized designee. (2)  No person shall deposit or discard on any public or private property any type or kind of household hazardous material within the city. (3)  Specific household hazardous materials. Specific household hazardous materials which require special handling for disposal through the curbside collection program of the city include but are not limited to the following materials: a.  Automotive . Specific automotive materials considered household hazardous materials which are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste include but are not limited to antifreeze; batteries and battery fluids; gasoline, motor oil and other petroleum products; solvents; and transmission fluid. b.  Cleaners . Specific cleaners considered household hazardous materials which are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste include but are not limited to bleach; disinfectants; drain openers; mold and mildew stain removers; oven cleaners; toilet bowl cleaners; and tub and tile cleaners. c.  Hobby products . Specific hobby products considered household hazardous materials that are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste include but are not limited to chemistry sets; artists' paint; photography chemicals; and picric acid. d.  Home maintenance . Specific home maintenance materials considered household hazardous materials which are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste include but are not limited to metal polishes; latex paint; solvent-based paint; paint strippers; paint thinners; and wood polishes and waxes. e.  Pesticides . Materials and substances used for the control of pests, vermin and rodents are considered household hazardous materials that are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste. f.  Lawn care products . Herbicides, insecticides, fungicides and fertilizers containing pesticides are considered household hazardous materials that are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste. g.  Miscellaneous home products . Other specific materials considered household hazardous materials that are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste include but are not limited to aerosol air fresheners; any explosives; fluorescent lamps; freon; household batteries; kerosene; pool chemicals; smoke detectors; thermometers; and thermostats. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 4, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-12. - Enforcement, violations, and penalties. (a)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter, the City of Atlanta Municipal Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of the provisions of this Chapter, is authorized to impose a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, work on the public streets or on public works of the city for not more than six months, or any combination thereof as set out in Section 1-8 of the Atlanta City Code of Ordinances. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each calendar day the violation exists is considered a separate offense. (b)  In addition to the penalties prescribed above, the following penalties may be imposed: (1)  Recovery of costs. Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be liable to the city for the total amount of all costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating any violation of this chapter. (2)  If any person or business performing work under any contract with the city is found guilty of violating this chapter, the city may terminate the contract by giving written notice of the termination to the person or business, according to the terms of the contract. (3)  Impounding of motor vehicles. a.  A motor vehicle that is used in any violation of this chapter shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this subsection. The owner of record of such vehicle shall be liable to the city for an administrative penalty equal to the total cost incurred by the city for the towing and storage of the vehicle and in addition to any other penalties imposed under this section. b.  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing. (4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of a violation of this chapter. (c)  The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the department may seek cumulative remedies. (d)  Each day a separate offense. Each day any violation of any section of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Secs. 130-13—130-27. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SCRAP TIRE ENFORCEMENT[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, approved December 12, 2012, effective April 1, 2013, added provisions designated as a new Art. II, §§ 130-28—130-35.1. It should also be noted that § 5 of said ordinance provides, "This Ordinance shall take effect on April 1, 2013." 
Sec. 130-28. - Title.     This article shall be known as the "The City of Atlanta Scrap Tire Enforcement Ordinance." (Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 130-29. - Intent and purpose.     The City of Atlanta finds that protection of the environment is vital to the health, welfare and economic progress of the City of Atlanta and its citizens. Therefore, it is the intent of this article to establish a regulatory and procedural process that prohibits the unlawful dumping of scrap tires from the point of generation to the point of disposal. (Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 130-30. - Georgia Solid Waste Management Code and Scrap Tire Management Regulations incorporated by reference.     The provisions of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, at Title 12, Chapter 8, Article 20 (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20, et seq.) and the Rules for Solid Waste Management, Georgia Rules and Regulations Chapter 391-3-4 are hereby incorporated by reference into this article and made a part of this Code. (Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 130-31. - Definitions. (a)  Dumping means to abandon, dispose of, throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, or burn. (b)  End user means the last person who uses the scrap tires, chips, crumb rubber, or similar materials to make a product with economic value, or in the case of energy recovery, the person who utilizes the heat content or other forms of energy from the incineration or decomposition of scrap tires, chips, or similar materials. (c)  Financial assurance means a mechanism designed to demonstrate that funds will be available to ensure compliance with statutory/regulatory and permit requirements of scrap tire carriers. The financial assurance mechanisms must be either performance bonds or letters of credit. (d)  Manifest means a form or document used for identifying the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation through any intermediate points to an end user, scrap tire processor, sorter, or disposal facility approved by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources ("EPD"). (e)  New replacement tires include, but are not limited to, tires for automobiles, trucks, heavy equipment, motorbikes, boats and other trailers, aircraft, and recreational vehicles. (f)  Recycled means any process by which materials that would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed to be reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. (g)  Retail tire dealer means a person or business entity actively engaged in the business of selling new and/or used tires and may also be, but is not limited to, manufacturers, wholesalers, and others who sell new and/or used tires to the ultimate consumer. (h)  Retreadable casing means a tire that retains such quality and soundness of the tire structure that it can accept a retread or repair and provide additional service, and that is destined for retreading. It is a rebuttable presumption that non-new tires are scrap tires and not retreadable casings. (i)  Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. (j)  Scrap tire carrier means any person or business entity that is engaged in picking up or transporting scrap and/or used tires for the purpose of removal to an end user, scrap tire processor, sorter, or disposal facility, and that is currently required under Georgia state law to obtain and possess an EPD scrap tire carrier permit. (k)  Scrap tire generator means any person or business entity that generates scrap tires and that is required under Georgia state law to obtain and possess an EPD scrap tire generator permit. Scrap tire generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, and service stations. (l)  Scrap tire processing means any method, system, or other treatment designed to change the physical form, size, or chemical content of scrap tires and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, building, and other elements). Scrap tire processing includes, but is not limited to, shredding, chopping, chipping, baling, splitting, recycling, and sorting of scrap tires. (m)  Scrap tire processor means any person or business entity that receives scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. (n)  Storage means the act of storing tires or the state of being stored on private property. (o)  Store means to accumulate, amass, garner, hive, layup, or stockpile. (p)  Tire means a continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering designed for encircling the wheel of a motor vehicle that is neither attached to the motor vehicle nor a part of the motor vehicle as original equipment. (q)  Tire handling business means any person or business entity whose income is at least partially derived from the sale, processing, transporting, or disposal of tires. (r)  Tire retreader means any person or business entity actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface tread and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire. (s)  Ultimate consumer means the last person who receives and uses a new or used replacement tire. Ultimate consumers may be, but are not limited to: (1)  Individuals, (2)  Leasing companies purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet; (3)  Private companies purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet; or (4)  Governmental agencies. (t)  Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of 2/32 -inch of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose but is no longer new. A tire retailer shall inventory and market used tires in substantially the same fashion as a new tire and be; able to provide satisfactory evidence to the EPD that a market for the tire exists and the tire is in fact being marketed as a used tire. A used tire shall not be considered solid waste. (Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13; Ord. No. 2014-33(14-O-1329), § 1, 7-16-14 ) 
Sec. 130-32. - Dumping of scrap tires.     It is unlawful to cause, suffer, or allow the dumping of scrap tires within the City of Atlanta including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right of way thereof, or on any other public or private property unless: (a)  The person or business entity carrying out the disposal is an EPD approved scrap tire processor or disposal facility with a valid scrap tire processor permit and/or a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification number, and the disposal is carried out on the property of the scrap tire processor; or (b)  The activity constitutes storage as defined in this article and is conducted in a manner consistent with the provisions of section 130-32(c) of this article. (Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 130-33. - Scrap tire management.     This section is intended to apply to all persons presently engaged in or proposing to be engaged in the retail sale of new tires, used tires, and/or handling of scrap tires. (a)  Scrap tire generator enforcement. (1)  Scrap tire generators shall have the necessary licenses and specifications as required by Georgia state law. (2)  Scrap tire generators shall maintain, pursuant to Georgia state law, accurate records and reports detailing the number of new and/or used replacement tires sold and the amount of fees collected, as well as receipts indicating the disposition of scrap tires. These records shall be maintained on file at the facility in question for three years and shall be made available for inspection by the City of Atlanta during normal business hours. (3)  Scrap tire generators shall, pursuant to Georgia state law, initiate a manifest to transport scrap tires from the point of generation to an EPD approved end user, scrap tire processor, sorter, or disposal facility. The manifest shall include the following information: a.  Name and identification number of the scrap tire generator; b.  Number of' scrap tires or total tons [accurate to within ten percent of actual number] of scrap tires to be transported; c.  Name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier; d.  Date of transport; and e.  Destination of scrap tires. (4)  Scrap tire generators shall ensure that all scrap tires are transported to an EPD approved end user, scrap tire processor, sorter, or disposal facility, as evidenced by a completed manifest. (5)  Unless otherwise approved in writing by the EPD, scrap tire generators shall ensure that any person collecting and transporting their scrap tires holds a valid scrap tire carrier permit issued by the EPD. However a person or business entity that generates less than 100 tires per month and that transports only its own scrap tires to EPD approved end users, scrap tire processors, sorters, or disposal facilities is not required to have a scrap tire carrier permit, but must comply with all other provisions required of scrap tire generators and scrap tire carriers. (6)  Scrap tire generators shall maintain copies of completed manifest records for three years. Such documentation shall be made available for inspection by the City of Atlanta during normal business hours. (7)  Scrap tire generators may choose to determine whether a tire, because of wear, damage or defect, is not suitable for classification as a used tire or retreadable casing as defined in this article. However, if a scrap tire generator fails to sort or delineate which tires are used tires, retreadable casings or scrap tires, then all tires transported shall be considered scrap tires and must be thusly indicated on the shipment manifest. It is a rebuttable presumption that non-new tires are scrap tires. (8)  Scrap tire generators shall mark scrap tires with their EPD issued scrap tire generator number within 24 hours of receipt of the scrap tires. Each scrap tire shall be marked on the outside of the tire in a manner sufficient to provide notice of ownership. Said marking shall be at least one inch in height and shall be permanent and waterproof. (9)  The Atlanta Police Department and/or its designee shall coordinate to conduct annual random inspections of all scrap tire generators in the City of Atlanta to ensure compliance with this article. (b)  Scrap tire carrier enforcement. (1)  Scrap tire carriers shall transport used and scrap tires, properly manifested, only to EPD approved end users, scrap tire processors, sorters, or disposal facilities. (2)  No scrap tire carrier permit and no decal to be displayed on any vehicle transporting tires is required to transport used tires when the tires are transported: a.  By a common carrier that collects tires exclusively from outside the State of Georgia and transports them directly to a scrap tire processor or end user with the State of Georgia; b.  By a municipal solid waste collector holding a valid solid waste collection permit issued by the EPD whose primary business is the collection of municipal solid waste; c.  By a private individual transporting no more than ten of the individual's own tires or a private individual transporting more than ten tires if such individual can provide proof of purchase with receipt for such tires; d.  By a company transporting the company's own tires to a scrap tire processor or end user or for proper disposal; e.  By a tire retailer transporting its own used tires if such dealer can provide proof of purchase with receipt for all used tires being transported and a document verifying the origin, route, and destination of such used tires; f.  By any person transporting tires collected as part of an organized site cleanup activity; and g.  By the United States, the State of Georgia, any Georgia county, municipality, or public authority. (3)  The City of Atlanta may inspect scrap tire carriers to determine if they have been issued a scrap tire carrier permit by EPD and are in compliance with the requirements for scrap tire carriers prescribed in this article. (4)  Scrap tire carriers shall produce to the City of Atlanta upon demand a valid scrap tire carrier permit issued by the EPD and a manifest indicating that the scrap tires have been properly manifested and are being transported, or have been delivered, to an EPD approved end user, scrap tire processor, sorter, or disposal facility. (5)  Scrap tire carriers and scrap tire processors shall maintain financial assurance in the form of a surety bond in compliance with requirements imposed by the EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 12-8-40.1(l)(1). (6)  The City of Atlanta shall review documentation maintained by scrap tire carriers to ensure that the quarterly reports required by the EPD include the number of scrap tires transported and the manner of scrap tire disposition. (7)  The City of Atlanta shall review scrap tire carrier records to determine if the scrap tire carriers have returned a completed copy of the manifest to the scrap tire generators, which shall be indicated on the manifest. (c)  Scrap tire storage enforcement. (1)  No person may store more than 25 scrap tires anywhere in the City. Any person storing in excess of 25 scrap tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this Article. This section, however, shall not apply to any of the following: a.  A permitted solid waste disposal site if the permit authorizes the storage of scrap tires prior to their disposal; b.  A tire retailer or a publicly owned vehicle maintenance facility with not more than 1,500 scrap tires in storage; c.  A tire retreader with not more than 3,000 scrap tires in storage as long as the scrap tires are of the type the retreader is actively retreading; d.  A licensed used motor vehicle parts dealer, a registered secondary metals recycler, or a privately owned vehicle maintenance facility that operates solely for the purpose of servicing a commercial vehicle fleet with not more than 500 scrap tires in storage; and e.  A Georgia EPD approved scrap tire processor so long as the number of scrap tires in storage do not exceed the quantity approved by the EPD if all of the scrap tires are secured in a locked enclosure or are otherwise adequately secured in a manner suitable to prevent unauthorized access. This requirement may be waived by the EPD in cases of significant and unique economic hardship which impairs a person's ability to continue operating his or her business. (2)  It is unlawful for any person or business entity, including scrap tire generators, to store scrap tires outside of an enclosed building except in a single secured, covered, and locked container. (3)  Where scrap tires are stored inside of an enclosed building, said building must be maintained and operated in a manner reasonably sufficient to prevent theft or the potential for scrap tires to be removed from the facility and improperly disposed of. (Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13; Ord. No. 2014-33(14-O-1329), §§ 2—4, 7-16-14 ) 
Sec. 130-34. - Authority.     The primary authority and responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this article is vested in the Atlanta Police Department and/or its designees. (a)  Investigations. Authorized agents from the City of Atlanta shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article. This is including but not limited to the power to enter upon any property public or private at reasonable times, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting facilities conducting scrap tire generation, storage, transportation, or disposal activities. The city's authorized agent, upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent, or tenant in charge is authorized to enter any such premises during the hours of operation. (b)  Right of entry. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for the purpose of inspection and who presents appropriate identification, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process or carrying out his/her official duties. (Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 130-35. - Violations.     Any person found in violation of any provision of this article may be issued a citation by the City of Atlanta and may be prosecuted and punished as provided by law for the violation of an ordinance. It is also a violation of this article for any person to violate state law and regulations regarding scrap tire management as prescribed in the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. and Georgia Rules and Regulations Chapter 391-3-4. (Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 130-35.1. - Penalties. (a)  Assessment of penalties. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the City of Atlanta Municipal Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of the provisions of this article, is authorized to impose a fine not to exceed $1.000,00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, work on the public streets or on public works of the city for not more than six months, or any combination thereof as set out at section 1-8 of the Atlanta City Code. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each calendar day the violation exists is considered a separate offense.     The penalty provisions set out immediately above shall take precedence over the penalty provisions set out at section 130-12 of this chapter which shall not apply to the provisions contained herein in Article II of Chapter 130 (the "City of Atlanta Scrap Tire Enforcement Ordinance"). (b)  Impoundment of vehicles. A motor vehicle that is used in any violation of this article is subject to seizure and impoundment under this subsection. The owner of record of such vehicle shall be liable to the city for an administrative penalty equal to the total cost incurred by the city for the towing and storage of the vehicle and in addition to any other penalties imposed under this section.     Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing. (c)  Recovery of costs. In addition to the other penalties provided in this section, any person found in violation of this article shall be liable to the city for the total amount of all costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating any violation of this article. (Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 4, approved December 12, 2012, effective April 1, 2012, renumbered former Art. II as Art. III. See also the Code Comparative Table. It should also be noted that § 5 of said ordinance provides, "This Ordinance shall take effect on April 1, 2013." 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 130-36. - Removal of yard trimmings. (a)  Generally . No collection of yard trimmings shall be made by the department of public works from any residence, business or dwelling where the yard trimmings are the result of or includes: (1)  Business or service conducted by others working under contract or agreement with the occupant; a.  The department of public works will not collect tree trunks, stumps, limbs and trimmings generated by tree surgeons and/or any commercial entity engaged in tree trimming or removal. The removal and proper disposal of any and all such tree trunks, stumps, limbs and trimmings generated by tree surgeons and/or any commercial entity engaged in tree trimming or removal shall be the responsibility of the said commercial entity. b.  The department of public works will not collect any matter generated by any landscaping development or landscaping maintenance and/or any commercial entity engaged in landscaping development or maintenance. The removal and proper disposal of any and all such matter generated by any landscaping development or landscaping maintenance and/or any commercial entity engaged in landscaping development or maintenance shall be the responsibility of the said commercial entity. (2)  Yard trimmings not generated at the dwelling. (b)  Curbside yard trimmings collection . It shall be mandatory for each occupier of single-family residential, property in the city to prepare and place any yard trimmings intended for removal by city personnel through the city's curbside program, separately and distinguishable from rubbish, trash and garbage, in accordance with the provisions of this article. (c)  Removal by city . The department of public works may remove yard trimmings from the premises of residents, if such yard trimmings are prepared for removal in accordance with subsection (d), and is separately placed for removal in accordance with subsection (g). (d)  Authorized containers . Yard trimmings shall be placed in proper, separate yard trimmings bags, the adequacy of which for identification of contents and the facilitation of removal by city personnel must be approved by the commissioner. The department of public works may collect up to 20 yard trimmings paper bags per collection period placed for yard trimmings collection, when full, are not to exceed 35 pounds in weight. Reusable containers or receptacles used for the disposal of yard trimmings may not exceed a volume of 32 gallons visibly marked with YARD TRIMMING on four sides. (1)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any premises, to maintain all yard trimming containers serving the owner's property in a clean and healthful manner, free of obnoxious odors, maggots, insects and rodents or any other conditions which may render them unhealthy to those upon the premises or to the surrounding community. (2)  It shall further be the responsibility of the owner of any premises, to see that all containers serving the owner's property are kept in good repair at all times and that the doors and lids of the containers be properly closed when not in use. (e)  Extra yard trimmings . The department of public works may collect yard trimmings paper bags in excess of 20 per collection period in accordance with the fee for excess yard trimmings established under section 130-84, Rates and Charges. (f)  Uncontainerized yard trimmings . The department of public works will not be required to collect any uncontainerized yard trimmings over four inches in diameter or four feet in length, human or animal excrement, nor yard trimmings or soil contaminated with household hazardous materials or hazardous materials. (g)  Placement . All yard trimmings intended for removal by the City of Atlanta through its curbside service shall be placed either between the sidewalk and curb or in a place approved by the commissioner or his designee as accessible for removal by city personnel. (h)  Collection schedule . The commissioner of public works or authorized designee shall establish a schedule for the collection and removal of yard trimmings. (i)  Exempted circumstances . The commissioner is authorized to waive the requirements for preparation of yard trimmings and to provide collection service for organized community clean-up programs which are coordinated with the department of public works, for events that include but are not limited to the clean-up of massive property destruction resulting from fires and the like, and following natural disasters, such as storms, hurricanes, and tornadoes. (j)  Preparation prior to pickup . It shall be unlawful for any person to place yard trimmings for removal by city personnel that is not prepared, placed and separated as required by this chapter. It shall be the duty of the commissioner or authorized designee to notify the property owner or occupant, in writing, to remove all yard trimmings not prepared and placed as required by this section, at the property owner's or occupant's expense, or to prepare it in accordance with this article. (k)  Residential composting . Residents not placing yard trimmings for disposal through the curbside collection may use residential composting provided that the composting: (1)  Occurs on the residential premises where the waste organic matter was generated; (2)  Is conducted in accordance with accepted composting practices; (3)  Is conducted in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations; (4)  Does not generate offensive odors or provide a source of food or harborage for vermin and other pests; and (5)  Does not create a public or private nuisance. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2015-08(15-O-1045), § 3, 2-26-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 5, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-37. - Removal of residential garbage and recyclable materials from single-family dwellings. (a)  Generally . No collection of garbage, recyclable materials, or other refuse matter shall be made by the department of public works from any residence where the refuse matter is the result of: (1)  Business or manufacturing in which the occupant may be engaged; (2)  A lot that has been cleaned for the erection of a building; or (3)  Material that is the result of repairs or rebuilding by a contractor or any admixture that contains construction and demolition wastes; and (4)  Yard trimmings may be stored in containers on the premises and set out for separate curbside collection, subject to the provisions of section 130-36 of this Code, but shall not be mixed with or in the containers designated for garbage or recyclable materials. (b)  Collection containers for garbage and recyclable materials. (1)  Required . Any and all garbage or recyclable materials generated within or upon any single-family residential premises in the city shall be separated and placed in the appropriately designated collection containers supplied by the city or as otherwise authorized by this section. Garbage shall be bagged and shall be placed only in containers designated for the disposal of garbage and recyclable materials shall be placed only in containers designated for recycling loose and not bagged. All garbage and recyclable materials shall be stored in such containers on the premises where generated until disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this section and this chapter. (2)  Ownership . Ownership of the containers will be retained by the city, and the containers shall not be removed from the residence to which they are assigned. (3)  Reasonable care . All persons shall use reasonable care in the handling of the containers supplied by the City of Atlanta and shall be responsible for the repair or replacement of containers the damage or destroy through their own negligence. The City of Atlanta shall be responsible for ordinary wear and tear. Any residential container provided by the city that becomes lost or stolen shall be replaced by the city. (4)  Identification . Where one or more family occupies a dwelling, the collection containers shall be marked to indicate the family using the particular collection container. The collection containers may be identified by putting the dwelling number thereon having control of the disposal of the garbage and recycling in the household. When containers are so identified, the container may be used only by the identification thereon. (5)  General requirements . a.  All collection containers used in the city shall be non-absorbent, water-tight, durable, easily cleanable, and designed for safe handling. In any case where the provisions of this section permit the storage of garbage in plastic bags, the bags shall have sufficient size and strength to hold the garbage and shall be designed for the containment of solid waste. b.  Except when garbage or recyclable materials is being placed into or removed from the container, the garbage and recyclable materials generator shall keep every collection container closed or sealed to prevent leakage from the container of any garbage, recyclable materials, or other solid waste or of any offensive vapors, gases or odors. c.  The garbage and recyclable materials generator shall not cause or permit any garbage or recyclable materials container to be filled in any manner that causes or allows contents to overflow from the container. Containers shall not be overfilled in a manner that prevents closure of a lid or allows spillage of contents. If a lid cannot be closed, the material will be collected at a fee established under section 130-84, Rates and charges. If an overfilled bin is set out for pick up more than four times within a 12-month period, resident will be provided with an additional refuse bin at an annual service fee established under section 130-84, Rates and charges. d.  The garbage and recyclable materials generator shall not mix garbage or recyclable materials, or deposit residential garbage or recyclable materials in a container it is not designated for. e.  The garbage and recyclable materials generator shall keep the collection containers clean and sanitary, shall treat the containers in such manner and to such extent and with such substance as may be necessary to repel and keep away flies and rodents, and shall keep the containers odor-proof. Garbage shall be bagged before deposited in garbage containers. Recyclable materials shall not be bagged when deposited in recycling containers. f.  The garbage and recyclable materials generator shall not cause or permit garbage or recyclable materials to be so compacted or otherwise placed, kept or accumulated in any collection container in a manner that does not allow the contents of the container to fall out, by their own weight, upon the container being lifted and turned upside down. (6)  Location . Collection containers provided to residences as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be placed in the area between the sidewalk and curb or in an accessible place approved by the commissioner, which shall be no more than ten feet from the curb. Containers not located within this area will be considered as "not set out" and the city will not be required to collect. a.  No person shall place any garbage or recyclable materials container in any place or in any manner such that the container impedes normal vehicular traffic, public transportation, or pedestrian or wheelchair access to public rights-of-way. b.  Containers shall not be placed at the curbside before 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the collection day and shall be removed from the curbside before 9:00 a.m. the day following the collection day. c.  Exceptions to this subsection may be granted by the commissioner or authorized designee for persons with physical limitations that prevent placement of the collection containers at the curb, provided these persons submit a written request for the collection. d.  The department of public works will collect bagged extra garbage placed outside of the enclosed, city-provided container. Any bagged, extra garbage must be placed within a 32-gallon or smaller plastic bags. If bags are set out more than four times within a 12-month period, resident will be provided with an additional bin at no charge but will be subject to an additional annual service fee established under section 130-84, Rates and charges. e.  Extra recyclable materials shall not be placed for collection in plastic bags of any kind, but may be placed in reusable containers not larger than 32 gallons or 35 pounds in weight in a linear area not to extend beyond a total often feet and four feet wide. (7)  Contamination of recyclable material . Inspections will be conducted at random on recyclable materials containers through the "tag" program. The city will randomly select a route to inspect. Inspectors will be looking inside the recyclable material containers for contaminates that will limit the ability to market recyclables, such as food, diapers, and household trash, that are not acceptable inside the container. The containers will be emptied if the contamination visual inspection determines that contaminants do not represent a significant risk or detriment to the collection and processing of material. If contaminants are determined to represent significant risk or detriment, the container will be "tagged" and will not be emptied. After a container has been "tagged" three times, the customer will be charged the rates as set forth in section 130-84. (8)  Time of collection . The commissioner of public works or authorized designee shall provide a schedule to each residence receiving garbage, recyclable materials and yard trimmings collection services from the city that shall indicate the days on which collection will be made. (c)  Back yard collection service . (1)  Application . Within the month of December of each year, citizens may make written application to receive back yard garbage and recycling removal service to commence in the first week of the month succeeding that in which application is made. Individual citizens may arrange for this back yard garbage and recycling removal service by making written application to: Office of Solid Waste Services 55 Trinity Avenue Suite 4800 Atlanta, Georgia 30303 (2)  Payment . Any application for back yard garbage and recycling removal service shall be accompanied with the payment in conformity with section 130-84(d) which shall cover the cost of such service to be rendered for a one-year period until the following December 30. (3)  Exception . All persons having physical limitations which prevent placement of garbage and recyclable materials containers at the curb are entitled to receive back yard garbage and recycling collection service without charge, provided the following requirements are met: a.  Age only criteria. Any residence where there are no persons between the ages of 12 and 70 capable of placing garbage or recycling at the curbside. b.  Physical condition criteria. Each person between the ages of 12 and 70 at a residence not capable of placing garbage or recycling at the curbside must present a certificate from a physician licensed to practice medicine by the State of Georgia stating that such person is physically incapable of placing garbage or recycling at the curbside. (4)  Waiver of fee . Those persons qualifying under subsection (c)(3) of this section will not be required to pay the fee otherwise required for back yard garbage and recycling collection. (5)  Recertification . Annually, all persons qualifying for back yard garbage and recycling collection service under subsection (c)(3) of this section must be recertified as to physical condition preventing the placing of garbage or recycling at the curbside. (d)  Dangerous accumulation prohibited . No person shall keep or accumulate, or permit to be kept or accumulated, any solid waste in or upon any premises or location in the city owned, leased or rented by such person or in such person's possession or control, in such manner that: (1)  Creates a fire hazard dangerous to person or property; (2)  Becomes unreasonably offensive or dangerous to the public peace, health or safety; (3)  Promotes the propagation, harborage, or attraction of rodents, vermin or pests; or (4)  Becomes a public or private nuisance. (e)  Improper placement of garbage or other non-recyclable materials in recycling receptacles and containers. It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of the owner of any single family residential property to improperly place or allow any tenant to improperly place contaminating materials, such as garbage, debris or other solid waste that is not recyclable in collection receptacles and containers designated for recycling collection by the city. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 18, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2015-08(15-O-1045), § 4, 2-26-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-40(18-O-1514), § 1, 9-13-18 ; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 6, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-38. - Removal of residential garbage and recyclable materials from multi-family dwellings. (a)  Generally . No collection of garbage, recyclable materials or other refuse matter shall be made by the department of public works from any premises where the refuse matter is the result of: (1)  Business or manufacturing in which the occupant may be engaged; (2)  A lot that has been cleaned for the erection of a building; or (3)  Material that is the result of repairs or rebuilding or any admixture that contains building material. (4)  Yard trimmings may be stored in containers on the premises and set out for separate curbside collection, but shall not be mixed with garbage for disposal. (b)  Limitation on multifamily dwellings . The department of public works shall not be required to collect garbage or other solid waste from multi-family dwellings, including public housing, containing six or more residential units, Exceptions shall be approved and permitted by the commissioner of public works or his designee. (c)  Collection containers for garbage and recyclable materials . (1)  Required . Any and all garbage generated within or upon any multi-family residential premises in the city shall be placed in garbage receptacles or containers authorized by this section or those supplied by the city through the curbside collection service of the city, and shall be stored in such containers on the premises where generated until disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this section. (2)  Ownership . Ownership of any containers provided by the City of Atlanta as a part of its municipal solid waste collection will be retained by the city, and the containers shall not be removed from the residence to which they are assigned. (3)  Reasonable care . All persons shall use reasonable care in the handling of the containers supplied by the City of Atlanta and shall be responsible for the repair or replacement of containers they damage or destroy through their own negligence. The City of Atlanta shall be responsible for ordinary wear and tear. Any residential container provided by the city that becomes lost or stolen shall be replaced by the city and shall be paid for by the owner of the residence to which the container is assigned. (4)  Identification . Where more than one family occupies a dwelling, any garbage and recyclables containers provided by the city shall be marked so as to indicate the family using the particular garbage container. The container may be identified by putting the dwelling number on the container for the garbage in the household. When containers are so identified, the container may be used only by the person whose name or other identification is shown thereon. (5)  General requirements . a.  All garbage and recyclable material containers used in the city shall be non-absorbent, water-tight, durable, easily cleanable, and designed for safe handling. In any case where the provisions of this section permit the storage of garbage in plastic bags, the bags shall have sufficient size and strength to hold the garbage and shall be designed for the containment of solid waste. b.  Except when garbage or recyclables material is being placed into or removed from the container, the garbage generator shall keep every garbage container closed or sealed so as to prevent leakage from the container of any garbage or other solid waste or of any offensive vapors, gases or odors. c.  The garbage and recyclable material generator shall not cause or permit any garbage container to be filled in any manner that causes or allows garbage to overflow from the container. d.  The garbage generator shall keep the garbage container clean and sanitary, shall treat the garbage container in such manner and to such extent and with such substance as may be necessary to repel and keep away flies and rodents, and shall keep the garbage container odor proof. e.  The garbage generator shall not cause or permit garbage to be so compacted or otherwise placed, kept or accumulated in any garbage container in a manner which does not allow the contents of the garbage container to fall out, by their own weight, upon the container being lifted and turned upside down. (6)  Extra garbage prohibited . Any containerized or uncontainerized extra garbage must be contained within the enclosed container provided for the collection of garbage through the curbside collection program of the City of Atlanta. The department of public works shall not be required to collect any containerized or uncontainerized extra garbage placed outside of the enclosed container provided for the collection of garbage through the curbside collection program of the City of Atlanta. (7)  Location . Containers provided to residences as provided in subsection (b) of this section shall be placed in the area between the sidewalk and curb or in an accessible place approved by the commissioner. a.  No person shall place any garbage container in any place or in any manner such that the container impedes normal vehicular traffic, public transportation, or pedestrian or wheelchair access to public rights-of-way. b.  Containers shall not be placed at the curbside before 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the collection day and shall be removed from the curbside before 9:00 a.m. the day following the collection day. c.  Exceptions to this subsection may be granted by the commissioner for persons with physical limitations which prevent placement of the garbage receptacles at the curb, provided these persons submit a written request for the collection. (8)  Time of collection . The commissioner of public works or his designee shall provide a schedule to each residence receiving garbage collection service from the city that shall indicate the days on which collection will be made. (d)  Containers provided by the city for use at multi-family dwellings including apartment houses, townhouses, condominiums and public housing. (1)  Sufficient number required . Upon the premises of any multi-family dwelling not permitted for collection by the City of Atlanta, the owners of any multi-family dwelling, including public housing, condominiums and townhouses consisting of six or more living units, shall furnish commercial containers in sufficient number to adequately contain the garbage and refuse disposal at the location. The type, size, number and location of these containers required shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner, but in no instance shall a container be less than a four-yard commercial container. (2)  General requirements for solid waste disposal and recyclable material containers privately operated solid waste contractors . All garbage and recyclable material containers used and maintained in the city shall be non-absorbent, water-tight, durable, easily cleanable, and designed for safe handling. In any case where the provisions of this section permit the storage of garbage in plastic bags, the bags shall have sufficient size and strength to hold the garbage and shall be designed for the containment of solid waste. Recycling material shall not be in plastic bags when deposited in recycling containers. (3)  Maintenance of containers used at multi-family dwellings . a.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any multi-family dwelling, including public housing management, to maintain all garbage and recyclable material containers serving the owner's property in a clean and sanitary manner. All garbage and recyclable material containers serving the owner's property must be kept free of obnoxious odors, maggots, insects and rodents or any other conditions which may render them unhealthy to the occupants of the apartments or to the neighborhood or to the surrounding community. b.  It shall further be the responsibility of the apartment house owner, including public housing management, to see that all containers serving the owner's property are kept in good repair at all times and that the doors and lids of the containers be properly closed when not in use. Except when garbage is being placed into or removed from the container, the garbage generator shall keep every garbage container closed or sealed so as to prevent leakage from the container of any garbage or other solid waste or of any offensive vapors, gases or odors. c.  The garbage generator shall not cause or permit any garbage container to be filled in any manner that causes or allows garbage to overflow from the container. It shall further be the responsibility of the apartment house owner, including public housing management, to see that the area surrounding all containers serving the owner's property is kept free of garbage and trash. d.  Any dumpster located on the premises of any multi-family residential premises shall be screened on three sides by planting materials, a fence or wall of a height not less than six feet tall and not more than eight feet, from the public view of any public right-of-way and any abutting properties. Any variance to the requirements of this subsection shall be approved by the commissioner of public works or authorized designee. (e)  Recycling containers provided for use at apartment houses, townhouses, condominiums, public housing, and other multifamily dwellings. (1)  The owners of any multi-family dwelling, including public housing, consisting of six or more living units, or the owners' association of condominiums or townhouses consisting of six or more living units, shall use containers for the collection of recyclables, including, at a minimum, glass, plastics, paper and metal cans. The capacity of the containers shall be adequate to hold the recyclable material of residents of the multi-family dwelling and shall be of a size not less than three gallons multiplied by the number of living units. (f)  Plans of apartment houses to show locations of containers . Plans and specifications for the construction of all multi-family dwelling permitted after the passage of this ordinance shall be required to set aside space for solid waste containers and recycling containers used for the collection of solid waste and recyclable materials on the premises. Any applicant for a non-residential building permit shall submit plans to the commissioner of public works or his designee, providing the locations of all space designated for solid waste containers and recycling containers. The approval of the commissioner shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit by the director of the bureau of buildings. (1)  The location of any space for each of these containers must be indicated on any submitted plans even if containers are not proposed as the primary method of solid waste collection. (2)  As a condition for the approval of any building permit for any new multi-family dwelling, all plans submitted by the applicant to the commissioner of public works must demonstrate that the space allocated for any proposed development shall be of a size necessary to locate and service containers to contain any solid waste as prescribed in section 130-38(d)(1) and recyclable materials as prescribed in section 130-38(e)(1) generated on the premises. (3)  The location of any solid waste container and/or recycling container cannot in any way impede normal vehicular traffic, public transportation, or pedestrian or wheelchair access to public rights-of-way. (4)  Each owner or association shall be required to submit, or cause to be submitted on their behalf by a management company or other representative, an annual report to document the amount of recyclable materials collected, as well as any other reports reasonably requested by the city. Reports shall contain at a minimum the following information: a.  Name of owner, association or person or entity responsible for the supervision of the recycling program; b.  Address of building(s); c.  Number of living units; d.  Name and address of company providing collection services; e.  The frequency of collection and the size and average number of recycling containers located on the property. f.  The report shall be delivered on or before January 30 of the following year to: Office of Solid Waste Services 55 Trinity Avenue Suite 4800 Atlanta, Georgia 30303 (5)  In the case of conversions of existing apartment complexes to condominiums pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-3-87 et seq. and retrofits of other existing buildings into multi-family living units a request can be made to the commissioner of public works for a waiver from the recycling requirements in section 130-38(e)(1). No waiver shall be granted unless an applicant can prove that it is physically impossible or economically unreasonable to add additional space on the site that could hold containers required by section 130-38(e)(1). (g)  Enforcement and penalties . The commissioner of public works, or authorized designee, shall give written notice to the owner or the owner's association in the case of condominiums and townhouses if the owner or agent of the owner of any multi-family dwelling, including an owner of public housing, is found in violation of any provisions of this section. The written notice shall state that the owner or owner's association shall abate the violation within 90 calendar days of the date of the notice. The commissioner of public works shall provide a written report of such notices to the city utilities committee each quarter. (1)  Each day's failure or refusal to comply with the order, after expiration of the time allowed in which to remove or abate the nuisance, shall constitute a separate offense. (h)  Removal of tenant property . Owners or agents of the owner shall be responsible for items removed from real properties rented or leased to others and placed in residential yards, rights-of-way, or adjacent commercial structures. (1)  Any such items remaining on or within the public right-of-way for a period of three days or more following removal from any real property rented or leased to others may be removed by the department of public works. (2)  Recovery of costs . Any owner or agent of the owner of any multi-family residential dwelling within the City of Atlanta shall be liable to the city for the total amount of all costs and expenses incurred by the city in removing such items placed in the right-of-way or otherwise abating any violation of this section. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2007-70(07-O-1335), §§ 1—6, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-40(18-O-1514), § 2, 9-13-18 ; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 7, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-39. - Containers left on streets. (a)  Prohibited . Containers containing garbage or other refuse shall not be left for collection upon any street, sidewalk, avenue or other public place, except as specifically provided in section 130-36, 130-37 or 130-38. (b)  Any solid waste or recycling container shall not: (1)  Obstruct any portion of the storm drain system of the City of Atlanta; or (2)  Obstruct the flow of stormwater into the storm drain system of the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 8, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-40. - Removal of bulky items, mixed debris piles and rubbish. (a)  Generally . No collection of bulky items, mixed debris piles and rubbish shall be made by the department of public works from any resident, business or dwelling where the bulky items, bulk yard trimmings or rubbish is the result of or includes: (1)  Business or manufacturing in which the occupant may be engaged; (2)  A lot that has been cleaned for the erection of a building; or (3)  Material that is the result of repairs or rebuilding or any admixture that contains and construction and demolition waste. (4)  Debris or items that have been removed from any real property rented or leased to others by any owner or the agent of any owner. (b)  It shall be mandatory for each occupier of residential property in the city to prepare and place any bulky items, bulk yard trimmings or rubbish for removal by city personnel in accordance with the following provisions of this article: (1)  tree waste and junk waste should be placed adjacent to the front curb in a location easily accessible to the collection vehicle after the hours of 7:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled collection day; (2)  tree waste and junk waste should not be stacked under low overhead electrical wires or other cabling, signs or mailboxes; next to fences or posts; or on top of water meters, gas meters, fire hydrants or other exposed utility components; (3)  materials should not be placed in the street, on the sidewalk, or other rights-of-way, or in any manner which would interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic; (4)  tree waste or junk waste collection is limited to occupied residential units and residential vacant land only if the waste generated is in connection with the maintenance of the property. (c)  The commissioner of public works or authorized designee may determine items eligible for pickup under the City of Atlanta's program for collection of bulky items, mixed debris piles and rubbish. The office of solid waste services may decline to accept such items that contain or have been contaminated by hazardous wastes, household hazardous wastes or other materials not defined here. The following restrictions are associated with items authorized for pickup: (1)  No more than eight cubic yards (about the size of a minivan) of junk waste or tree waste may be placed at the curb for collection; (2)  A maximum of four cubic yards of building material (not to include roofing shingles, brick, plaster, or concrete) generated by the resident in connection with the maintenance of the residential property may be collected by the department of public works; (3)  Appliances containing refrigerant must have a tag attached to them certifying a qualified technician has removed the refrigerant; (4)  The department of public works is not allowed to collect any material generated by contractors who were retained by a resident to perform work on his or her residential property. It is the responsibility of the contractor to remove all debris that may arise from the contractor's activities. These contractor-related activities include, but are not limited to: trimming and removal of trees, remodeling, new construction and roofing. (5)  If authorized items placed for collection are mixed with restricted items, department personnel shall not be obligated to sort the materials and may refuse the entire load; (6)  Department personnel collection services are not available to multi-residential structures of more than six units. (d)  Collection schedules . The commissioner of public works or an authorized designee will establish a procedure by which residents may contact the department of public works to request the pickup and removal of bulky items, mixed debris piles, and rubbish. Twelve times per year call-in scheduling service is provided to single-family residential customers. Requests by single-family residential customers for collection of bulk materials for disposal that exceed the 12 times per year call-in scheduling service shall be charged the fee established under section 130-84 for additional bulk material disposal. Setting out bulk materials without scheduling a pick-up will be considered illegal dumping and a violation of city Code. (e)  Bulky items, mixed debris piles and rubbish shall not be placed at the curbside before 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the appointed pick-up period. (f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place bulky items, mixed debris piles and/or rubbish for removal by city personnel which are not prepared, placed and separated as required by this ordinance. (1)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner or his designee to notify the property owner or occupant, in writing, to remove all bulky items, mixed debris piles and/or rubbish not prepared and placed as required by this section, at the property owner's or occupant's expense, or to prepare them in accordance with this article. (2)  Upon failure of the property owner or occupant to remove or prepare such bulky items, mixed debris piles and/or rubbish within the time set forth in the notice, the property owner or occupant shall be subject to penalties (g)  Requirements for outdoor events . Under certain conditions, the City of Atlanta may offer special collection for neighborhood and community cleanup events. A neighborhood or community recognized by the Planning Department of the City of Atlanta may apply to the commissioner to be approved for special collection if the event: (1)  Is the only such request from the neighborhood or community for the calendar year; (2)  Supports the goals of the city for cleaner neighborhoods and a cleaner environment; (3)  Does not supplant any current or existing agency responsibilities or activities; (4)  Provides a benefit to the community or neighborhood and the city; and (5)  Complies with any other guidelines established by the commissioner of public works or authorized designee. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 7, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 17, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 9, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-41. - Cardboard containers and similar articles.     Pasteboard boxes, cardboard boxes or other similar containers desired to be collected for recycling shall be prepared in the following manner: (1)  Cardboard boxes or other similar containers shall be flattened, cut if necessary and tied in bundles not exceeding 35 pounds and having no dimension exceeding 36 inches; (2)  The bundles shall be stacked in a manner that would permit convenient removal and placed in a location designated by the commissioner; (3)  Garbage, bits of paper and other debris shall not be placed in such containers or bundles. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 10, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-42. - Night garbage collection. (a)  Authority. Whenever the commissioner shall decide that the best interest of the public will be served by collection of garbage or refuse from certain areas in the city at night, the commissioner shall order the department of public works to make those collections. (b)  Notice. The commissioner at the same time shall notify the occupants of all places of business within the designated area to place their refuse bags and bundles on the margin of the sidewalks between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:30 p.m. each day or in an assigned area and according to a time schedule as determined necessary by the commissioner. All persons so notified shall comply with the order of the commissioner and shall place the bags and bundles as designated within these hours. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-43. - Removal of solid waste from commercial or industrial properties. (a)  Permit for collection by the city. No collection of garbage or other refuse matter shall be made by the City of Atlanta through its curbside collection program from any commercial or industrial premises without a special permit from the commissioner of public works. All garbage to be collected by the city from permitted commercial and industrial service units shall be contained and placed according to any provisions provided by the special permit issued by the commissioner of public works. (b)  Dangerous accumulation prohibited. No person shall keep or accumulate, or permit to be kept or accumulated, any solid waste in or upon any commercial or industrial premises or location within the city owned, leased or rented by such person or in such person's possession or control, in such manner that: (1)  Creates a fire hazard dangerous to person or property; (2)  Becomes unreasonably offensive or dangerous to the public peace, health or safety; (3)  Promotes the propagation, harborage, or attraction of rodents, vermin or pests; or (4)  Becomes a public or private nuisance. (c)  Private collection required. The owner or agent of the owner of any commercial and industrial premises not permitted to receive garbage collection service from the City of Atlanta shall contract with a private contractor for the collection, transportation and disposal of all solid waste generated upon the premises. (d)  Acceptable containers. Garbage to be collected by private garbage collection firms operating under a permit granted by the City of Atlanta shall be placed in plastic or other impervious containers subject to the following requirements: (1)  General requirements. a.  All garbage containers used in the city shall be non-absorbent, water-tight, durable, easily cleanable, and designed for safe handling. In any case where the provisions of this section permit the storage of garbage in plastic bags, the bags shall have sufficient size and strength to hold the garbage and shall be designed for the containment of solid waste. b.  Except when garbage is being placed into or removed from the container, the garbage generator shall keep every garbage container closed or sealed so as to prevent the escape or leakage from the container of any garbage or other solid waste or of any offensive vapors, gases or odors. c.  The garbage generator shall not cause or permit any garbage container to be filled in any manner that causes or allows garbage to overflow from the container. d.  The garbage generator shall keep the garbage container clean and sanitary, shall treat the garbage container in such manner and to such extent and with such substance as may be necessary to repel and keep away flies and rodents, and shall keep the garbage container odor proof. e.  The garbage generator shall not cause or permit garbage to be so compacted or otherwise placed, kept or accumulated in any garbage container in a manner which does not allow the contents of the garbage container to fall out, by their own weight, upon the container being lifted and turned upside down. (2)  Maintenance of containers used at commercial and industrial premises. a.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any commercial or industrial premises, to maintain all garbage and trash containers serving the owner's property in a clean and healthful manner, free of obnoxious odors, maggots, insects and rodents or any other conditions which may render them unhealthy to those upon the premises or to the surrounding community. b.  It shall further be the responsibility of the owner of any commercial or industrial premises, to see that all containers serving the owner's property are kept in good repair at all times and that the doors and lids of the containers be properly closed when not in use. c.  It shall further be the responsibility of the owner of any commercial or industrial premises, to see that the area surrounding all containers serving the owner's property is kept free of garbage and trash. d.  After January 1, 2004, any dumpster or solid waste container and any such accessory use or structure located on the premises of any commercial or industrial premises shall be screened on three sides by planting materials, or a fence or wall of a height not less than six feet tall and not more than eight feet, from the public view of any public right-of-way and any abutting properties. Any variance to the provisions of this subsection shall approved by the commissioner of public works or his designee. (3)  Number of receptacles. Stores, restaurants, hotels, warehouses, institutions, manufacturing and processing plants and all other commercial and residential premises within the limits of the city shall provide a sufficient number of containers, rooms or refrigerators to contain any accumulation of solid waste generated on the property. (4)  Location of containers. All new commercial or industrial construction permitted after the passage of this ordinance shall be required to set aside space for solid waste containers and recycling containers used for the collection of solid waste. Any applicant for a non-residential building permit shall submit plans to the commissioner of public works or his designee, providing the locations of all space designated for solid waste containers. a.  The location of any space for each of these containers must be indicated on any submitted plans even if containers are not proposed as the primary method of solid waste collection. b.  As a condition for the approval of any commercial or industrial building permit, all plans submitted by the applicant must demonstrate that the space allocated for any proposed development shall be of a size necessary to locate and service a sufficient volume of containers to contain any solid waste generated on the premises. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-44. - Removal of solid waste and recyclable materials at outdoor events. (a)  Outdoor events on private property . The owner of any outdoor event property shall clear and remove all solid waste from the outdoor event property after the outdoor event ends, to the satisfaction of the chief of staff, in consultation with the commissioner of planning. (1)  If the outdoor event had fewer than 20,000 attendees, the property owner shall clear and remove all solid waste within 24 hours of the conclusion of the outdoor event. (2)  If the outdoor event had 20,000 or more attendees but fewer than 49,999 attendees, the property owner shall clear and remove all solid waste within 48 hours of the conclusion of the outdoor event. (3)  If the outdoor event had 50,000 attendees or more, the property owner shall clear and remove all solid waste within 72 hours of the conclusion of the outdoor event. (b)  Outdoor events on public property . (1)  The permit holder for any outdoor event on public property shall clear and remove all solid waste from the outdoor event property after the outdoor event ends, according to the following guidelines: a.  If the outdoor event had fewer than 20,000 attendees, the permit holder shall clear and remove all solid waste within 24 hours of the conclusion of the outdoor event. b.  If the outdoor event had 20,000 or more attendees but fewer than 49,999 attendees, the permit holder shall clear and remove all solid waste within 48 hours of the conclusion of the outdoor event. c.  If the outdoor event had 50,000 attendees or more, the permit holder shall clear and remove all solid waste within 72 hours of the conclusion of the outdoor event. (2)  Following any outdoor event on property belonging to the city, solid waste shall be cleared and removed from the outdoor event property according to the following provisions: a.  Where property belonging to the city has been used as a outdoor event property, and said property is a designated city park, the permit holder shall clear and remove all solid waste from the outdoor event property after the outdoor event ends, to the satisfaction of the chief of staff, in consultation with the commissioner of parks. b.  Where property belonging to the city has been used as outdoor event property, and said property is not a designated city park, the permit holder shall clear and remove all solid waste from the outdoor event property after the outdoor event ends, to the satisfaction of the chief of staff, in consultation with the commissioner of public works. (c)  The chief of staff may grant an extension of time in which to clear and remove solid waste, pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) above, where the property owner or the permit holder applies for an extension of time in writing, providing a detailed reason for the request, and where the chief of staff determines that inclement weather or other circumstances outside of the property owner's or permit holder's control make enforcement of the timeframes set forth in sections (b) and (c) above unreasonable or unrealistic. The chief of staff shall provide his response to the property owner's or permit holder's request in writing, and shall provide the reasoning for his or her decision therein. (d)  Recycling required . As a part of requirements to clear and remove all solid waste from a outdoor event property, recycling shall be provided at all outdoor events according to the following provisions: (1)  A property owner of any outdoor event property shall provide a sufficient number of containers for the separate recovery, collection, and removal of recyclable materials, including, but not limited to metal containers, glass, and plastics #1 through #5 and #7, during any outdoor event. At a minimum, the property owner shall have recyclable material containers next to each and every trashcan located on the outdoor event property during the outdoor event. Separate recovery, collection, and removal of glass shall not be required where glass is prohibited on the outdoor event property during the outdoor event, but only if said prohibition is established in writing prior to and at the entrance to the outdoor event and is enforced. (2)  Where property belonging to the city has been used as outdoor event property, the permit holder shall provide a sufficient number of containers for the separate recovery, collection, and removal of recyclable materials, including, but not limited to metal containers, glass, and plastics #1 through #5 and #7, during the outdoor event. At a minimum, the permit holder shall have recycle containers next to each and every trashcan located on the outdoor event property during the outdoor event. Separate recovery, collection, and removal of glass shall not be required where glass is prohibited on the outdoor event property during the outdoor event pursuant to the City Code of Ordinances or other city legislation. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 3-9-04; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 7, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 11, 11-14-18 ) Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. 
Sec. 130-45. - Same—Construction and demolition wastes. (a)  Disposal procedures. The commissioner of public works or his designee shall establish and publicize standards and guidelines for the proper disposal of construction and demolition wastes generated by residents, through the curbside collection program of the City of Atlanta. (b)  Specifically prohibited. It is specifically prohibited to improperly dispose of any construction and demolition waste through the municipal curbside collection system except for small projects performed by a homeowner that results in project debris capable of fitting into a 96 gallon garbage container without protruding out of the top. Alternatively, small project debris may be placed in a personal container no more than 32 gallons and no heavier than 35 pounds. (c)  Removal and disposal. The generator of construction and demolition waste shall be responsible for the proper removal and legal disposal of all construction and demolition waste. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-46. - Household hazardous materials. (a)  Generally . No person or business shall improperly dispose of any household hazardous materials through the municipal curbside collection system. (b)  The generator of household hazardous waste shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of all household hazardous materials. (c)  Disposal procedures . The commissioner of public works or authorized designee shall establish and publicize standards and guidelines for the proper disposal of household hazardous materials through the curbside collection program of the City of Atlanta. (d)  City disposal events . The commissioner of public works or authorized designee may establish and publicize drop-off events for household hazardous materials that will allow City of Atlanta residents with proper proof of residency to properly dispose or discard household hazardous materials. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 12, 11-14-18 ) 
Secs. 130-47—130-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION OR TRANSPORTATION 
Sec. 130-51. - Collection and transportation of residential garbage and other solid waste. (a)  Single-family residential garbage. No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of single-family residential garbage and other solid waste generated by another person within the City of Atlanta without first obtaining a permit to do so, unless considered a self-hauler according to the provisions of this chapter. (b)  Multi-family residential garbage. (1)  No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of multi-family residential garbage and other solid waste generated upon any multi-family premises containing less than six (6) residential units, or other multi-family residential premises permitted by the city for service by the curbside collection service of the City of Atlanta, without first obtaining a permit to do so, unless considered a self-hauler according to the provisions of this chapter. (2)  The owner or agent of the owner of any multi-family dwellings containing six (6) or more residential units shall contract with a private contractor, permitted according to the provisions of section 130-52(a), for the collection, transportation and disposal of all solid waste generated upon the premises, unless an exception has been permitted by the commissioner for service by the curbside collection program of the City of Atlanta. (3)  All vehicles and equipment used by any private contractor for the collection and transportation of solid waste from any multi-family residential premises shall be operated and maintained according to the provisions of section 130-52(b), (c) and (d). (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-52. - Collection and transportation of commercial and non-residential solid waste. (a)  Permit required. No person shall engage in the collection or transportation of multi-family residential and non-residential solid waste without having applied for permission therefor and received the approval of the commissioner, in the form of a written permit. Every person or business obtaining permission shall conform to the rules of the department of public works and the provisions of this article. Upon violation of the rules, the permit shall be revoked by the commissioner. (b)  Vehicles and equipment. Vehicles and equipment used by any private contractor for solid waste collection and disposal within the City of Atlanta shall be maintained to prevent a sanitary nuisance or safety hazard according to but not limited to the following provisions: (1)  Vehicles and equipment shall be frequently washed thoroughly with suitable disinfectant and deodorant, and all vehicles shall be washed on the outside. (2)  Any waste collection vehicles used by a private contractor for solid waste collection and disposal within the city shall not be allowed to stand unattended on a public or private street. The equipment shall be operated so as to minimize interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. (3)  Collection shall be made and the equipment operated and maintained in a manner so as to prevent the dropping or scattering of solid or liquid wastes anywhere except in a lawful solid waste management or disposal site. All waste spilled or scattered from vehicles or equipment shall be immediately picked up or collected by the operator of the vehicle or equipment. Collection vehicles used by any private contractor within the city shall consist of trucks with leak-resistant packer or enclosed bodies and dumpsters shall be covered and leak-resistant, all in good repair. (4)  All vehicles used for solid waste collection by a private contractor within the city shall be operated and maintained in such condition that the vehicle does not exceed a noise level, during stationary compaction, where it is plainly audible at a distance of 200 or more feet from the vehicle. (5)  All vehicles used for non-residential solid waste collection shall be prominently marked with the name of the business and vehicle number on driver and passenger sides. The vehicle number shall also be marked on the front and rear of the vehicle. (c)  Collection times. Collection of non-residential solid waste shall be scheduled by agreement between the private contractor and the commercial or industrial customer, subject to any rules of the bureau of solid waste services and section 74-187(b)(4) of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. (d)  Provision of service. Every private contractor may provide collection services to any customer who requests the services of the private contractor and agrees to the terms and conditions of the service agreement between the private contractor and the customer. a.  Any private contractor may refuse service to any customer for failure to pay a just bill or for any substantial refusal to comply with any rules of the bureau of solid waste services applicable to the customer. b.  Any private contractor refusing service to any customer shall remove any solid waste and solid waste container no more than seven days following the cancellation, interruption, or refusal of service. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Secs. 130-53—130-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOLID WASTE PROCESSING AND DISPOSAL FACILITIES 
Sec. 130-59. - Statement of policy.     The City of Atlanta, in exercising the powers granted to it by the State of Georgia, reserves the right to define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. Furthermore, it is the right of the city to regulate or restrict through permits, fees, codes, review boards, or otherwise the construction, use, and maintenance of real or personal property and the emission and disposal thereon or therefrom of any substance that tends to pollute land, water, or air. Therefore, it is the purpose of this division to provide in part the regulation necessary to achieve these policy objectives. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-60. - Permit for use.     Any person or business shall be allowed to dispose of solid waste at one of the disposal facilities or transfer stations operated by the city, provided the person: (1)  Applies for a permit to dispose of solid waste at one of the disposal facilities or transfer stations; (2)  Meets the standards established by the commissioner; (3)  Is issued a permit; and (4)  Pays the fee established by the city. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-61. - Use without permit.     Any person who is a resident of the city shall be allowed to dispose of solid waste, generated upon the residential property of the person, at any transfer stations operated by the city, without permit, subject to the charges established by the City of Atlanta and any restriction set forth in this article. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-62. - Hazardous material disposal. (a)  No person shall make final disposal or disposition of any hazardous material within the limits of the city. (b)  No person shall operate or maintain any hazardous material disposal facility within the limits of the city. (c)  Any person or business found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to the following penalties: (1)  A fine of $1,000.00 and period of imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed six months, and a probationary period not to exceed one year. (2)  In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. (3)  Recovery of costs. In addition to the other penalties provided in this section, any person found in violation of this section shall be liable to the city for up to three times the amount of all costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating a nuisance. (4)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the City of Atlanta may seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-63. - Privately operated solid waste disposal facilities. (a)  Permit required . Any person desiring to establish and operate a solid waste disposal facility within the limits of the city must first obtain an annual solid waste disposal facility operating permit from the commissioner of public works, with the approval of the city council. (1)  The permit shall be renewable annually and must be obtained prior to the issuance of a business license. An annual permitting fee of $6,500.00, for the purpose of ensuring that a solid waste disposal facility meets the applicable rules as set forth in this section and as set forth by federal and state authorities. (2)  Inspections of solid waste disposal facilities shall be performed quarterly at a minimum and additionally as determined necessary by the commissioner of public works. (b)  Permitted locations . Within the limits of the City of Atlanta, solid waste disposal facilities are permitted only in areas with a Zoning Classification of I-1 or I-2, subject to the development standards listed below. The establishment and operation of any solid waste disposal facility must comply with any and all standards and provisions provided by the Environmental Protection Division of the State of Georgia. Prior to the issuance of any solid waste disposal facility operating permit as required in subsection (a) of this section, all applications must first receive approval from the commissioner of the department of planning and community development. (1)  Proposed land use and mitigation plan. Prior to the issuance of a solid waste disposal facility operating permit, there must be a proposed land use and mitigation plan (hereinafter referred to as "the plan") submitted to the commissioner of the department of planning and community development that specifies the anticipated future use of the property upon the cessation or termination of garbage disposal activities, which anticipated use must not be inconsistent with comprehensive development plan as adopted by the city council. a.  The plan must include provisions for the property owner to create a reserve fund, to be held by the property owner, to finance the initial capital expenses of mitigation and establishing the anticipated future use of the property. b.  The plan shall include estimates of the amount of such capital expenses, based upon the present costs of such capital expenses and a presumed annual inflationary rate of five percent, and a timetable showing the expected life of the solid waste disposal facility. 1.  The commissioner of the department of planning and community development and the commissioner of public works must determine that the cost estimates presented by the applicant are reasonable estimates of the present cost of any proposed capital expenses. 2.  The applicant must estimate present capital expenses in an amount no less than $1,000.00 times the number of acres in the proposed solid waste disposal facility site. (2)  For each property, the proposed land use and mitigation plan shall include a site compatibility report containing information including but not limited to the following: a.  A description, survey, ownership and present zoning of the land involved. b.  An engineering plan prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia, which shall contain: 1.  Operation plan. An operation plan shall provide written instructions for the daily operation of the facility. The plan shall be revised when operational procedures change and such revisions shall be filed with the commissioner of public works no less than 30 days before taking effect. The plan shall include detailed procedures where applicable: i.  Identification of persons responsible for operation and maintenance of the facility, including ownership of facility and corporate structure; ii.  Contingency operations, alternate waste handling and disposal methods in case of emergency such as a natural disaster or equipment failure; iii.  Methods for controlling the type of waste received at the site. The report shall specify inspection procedures, number and location of spotters if applicable, and procedures to be followed in prohibited wastes are discovered; iv.  Weighing incoming waste; v.  Vehicle traffic control and unloading; vi.  Method and sequence of filling waste; vii.  Waste compaction and application of cover; viii.  Operations of gas, leachate, and storm water controls; ix.  Groundwater monitoring. 2.  The availability of and equipment for use of a water supply. 3.  The type and capacity of equipment to be used. 4.  Plans for fire, nuisance, water pollution, odor and vermin control. 5.  A diagram and written description of the locations and extent of dikes, earthwork and fill operations. 6.  A hydrological survey. c.  Such other information as the commissioner of public works may reasonably require including but not limited to the business address of the applicant. d.  A processing fee of $2,000.00 shall accompany the report of each applicant. e.  Proof of financial ability to perform under the terms and conditions of the proposed permit. (3)  Generally. Any applicant for a solid waste disposal facility operating permit shall demonstrate compliance with the following site limitation provisions: a.  Operations impact buffer zone . An operations impact buffer zone (hereinafter referred to as the impact buffer) shall be maintained upon the premises to minimize the impact of landfilling and disposal operations on surrounding neighborhoods and communities. 1.  Office uses must be a minimum of 100 feet from any abutting property line. 2.  All other activities on the solid waste disposal facility site must be located a minimum of 250 feet from any abutting real property lines and a minimum of 500 feet from the real property line of either any existing residence, or any residence under construction at the time landfilling or disposal operations begin anywhere on the landfill site. 3.  Roads for access to the site may cross the impact buffer so long as roads are located a minimum of 100 feet from the real property line of either any existing residence, or any residence under construction at the time landfilling or disposal operations begin anywhere on the solid waste disposal facility site. 4.  Monitoring wells may be located within the impact buffer, so long as monitoring wells are located a minimum of 250 feet from the real property line of either any existing residence, or any residence under construction at the time landfilling or disposal operations begin anywhere on the solid waste disposal facility site. b.  Vegetative buffer . A vegetative buffer must be provided between the solid waste disposal facility and any abutting real property line or public street right-of-way. Existing trees and vegetation must be maintained and preserved within 100 feet of any abutting real property lines and any public street right-of-way. Where the natural growth within 100 feet of the abutting real property line or public right-of-way does not effectively screen the solid waste disposal facility site from the view from abutting properties or right-of-way, then screening must be provided. c.  Vehicular access . All applicants for a solid waste disposal facility operating permit must demonstrate compliance with the following traffic and vehicular access provisions: 1.  Vehicular access to the facility must be paved and may be provided from any street that is not a residential local or residential collector street. Any access point to the facility must be a minimum of 500 feet from the real property line of any residential property. 2.  A metal fence and gate must be constructed at the entrance to the facility and must be closed and locked when the solid waste disposal facility is not in operation. The entrance to the facility must have an operator or attendant in attendance at all times when the facility is in use. 3.  All driveways which serve the site must be wide enough to accommodate two-way traffic at all times and an area on the site must be provided to accommodate vehicles entering the site so that no traffic waiting to enter the site will be backed up on any public right-of-way. 4.  Vehicular access to the facility must be of a nature sufficient enough so as to ensure that the normal flow traffic on any street or public right-of-way will not be obstructed or impacted by vehicles entering and exiting the facility. d.  Fences . All solid waste disposal facilities shall be enclosed with a fence not less than eight feet tall and no more than ten feet tall, with openings therein not less than those in two-inch mesh wire or some other similar fencing material or device, which shall first be approved by the commissioner of public works and the commissioner of the department of planning and neighborhood development. The fencing shall be adequate to prevent paper and similar or related refuse or waste from blowing from the solid waste disposal facility onto neighboring or nearby property. (c)  Host fee reserve fund . There is established the host fee reserve fund (hereinafter referred to as "the fund"). This fund shall be administered by the chief financial officer and the commissioner of public works. (1)  The owner must place funds in a reserve fund annually, in amounts equal to (a) the estimate of the present costs of the capital expenses increased by the presumed annual inflationary rate of five percent, divided by (b) the number of years the solid waste disposal facility is anticipated to be open. (2)  The first such annual payment into the fund must be made by the property owner prior to commencement of solid waste disposal facility operations, and evidence of such payment in the form of a notarized statement by the property owner, must be presented to the commissioner of public works prior to the commencement of solid waste disposal facility operations. (3)  On or before each subsequent anniversary date of such notarized statement, the property owner must make the required annual payment into the reserve fund and present to the commissioner of public works a notarized statement from the property owner showing that the payment has been made for the next year of operations of the solid waste disposal facility, and showing the total amount held in the reserve fund. In addition, if the property owner prepares annual financial statements, a copy of the annual financial statement, showing the amount held in the reserve fund, must be sent annually to the commissioner of public works and the chief financial officer during each year the solid waste disposal facility is in operation. (4)  In the event that the landfill and disposal operations at the site cease prior to the estimated number of years of operation as shown on the submitted timetable, prior to ceasing operations, the property owner must pay all remaining amounts into the fund and present to the commissioner of public works and the chief financial officer a notarized statement showing that such payment has been made and showing the total amount in the fund. (5)  With the cessation of landfill and disposal operations at any solid waste disposal facility permitted under this section, and following the final deposit of all mandatory funds, the entire balance of the host fee reserve fund shall be assigned to the City of Atlanta for the express purpose of financing all expenses associated with the mitigation and establishment of any future use of the property. (d)  Authority of the commissioner; revocation of permits . All other phases of the operation of a solid waste disposal facility not specifically mentioned in this section shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner. (1)  Any and all permits to establish and maintain solid waste disposal facility granted under this section shall be subject to revocation in the discretion of the commissioner, with the approval of the mayor. (2)  With the cessation of landfill and disposal operations at any solid waste disposal facility due to the revocation of any solid waste disposal facility operating permit, the operator of the facility shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (c)(4) and (5) of this section. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 13, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-64. - Privately operated solid waste transfer stations, processing and handling facilities. (a)  A solid waste transfer station is a facility that receives and temporarily stores solid waste as defined by this ordinance at a location other than the generation site, and which facilitates the transfer of accumulated solid waste to another facility for further processing or disposal. This term includes any solid waste handling facility, but does not include recovered materials processing facilities, nor portable storage containers used for the collection of municipal solid waste. (b)  Permit required. Any business or person desiring to establish and operate a solid waste transfer station or processing facility within the limits of the city must first obtain a solid waste transfer station operating permit from the commissioner of public works. (1)  The permit shall be renewable annually, subject to the approval of the city council, and must be obtained prior to the issuance of a business license. An annual permitting fee of $6,500.00, for the purpose of ensuring that a transfer station or processing facility meets the applicable rules as set forth in this section and as set forth by federal and state authorities, shall be paid by the applicant. (2)  Inspections of solid waste transfer stations and processing facilities may be performed quarterly, or as determined necessary by the commissioner of public works or authorized designee. (c)  Permitted locations. Within the limits of the City of Atlanta, solid waste transfer stations and processing facilities are permitted only in areas with a Zoning Classification of I-1 or I-2, subject to the development standards listed below. The establishment and operation of any transfer station or processing facility must comply with any and all standards and provisions provided by the Environmental Protection Division of the State of Georgia. (d)  A solid waste transfer station operating permit shall be issued by the commissioner of public works when an application meets all requirements of this code section. Prior to the issuance of any solid waste transfer station operating permit (hereinafter referred to as "the permit") as required in subsection (a) of this section, all applicants must first receive approval of a special land use permit from the commissioner of the department of planning and community development, according to the procedures established by the City of Atlanta. (1)  For each property, a site compatibility report shall accompany each permit application. The site compatibility report shall contain information including but not limited to the following: a.  A description, survey, ownership and present zoning of the land involved. b.  An engineering plan prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia, which shall contain: 1.  Operation plan. An operation plan shall provide written instructions for the daily operation of the facility. The plan shall be revised when operational procedures change and such revisions shall be filed with the commissioner of public works no less than 30 days before taking effect. The plan shall include detailed procedures where applicable: i.  Identification of persons responsible for operation and maintenance of the facility, including ownership of facility and corporate structure; ii.  Contingency operations, alternate waste handling and disposal methods in case of emergency such as a natural disaster or equipment failure; iii.  Methods for controlling the type of waste received at the site. The report shall specify inspection procedures, number and location of spotters if applicable, and procedures to be followed in prohibited wastes are discovered; iv.  Weighing incoming waste; v.  Vehicle traffic control and unloading; vi.  Vehicle traffic control and loading; vii.  Operations of odor controls; viii.  Operations of storm water controls; ix.  Groundwater and wastewater discharge monitoring. 2.  The availability of and equipment for use of a water supply. 3.  The type and capacity of equipment to be used. 4.  Plans for fire, nuisance, water pollution, odor and vermin control. 5.  A diagram and written description of any supplemental or accessory transportation operations, 6.  A hydrological survey. c.  Such other information as the commissioner of public works may reasonably require including but not limited to the business address of the applicant. d.  A processing fee of $2,000.00 shall accompany the report of each applicant. e.  Proof of financial ability to perform under the terms and conditions of the proposed permit. (2)  Generally. Any applicant for a solid waste transfer station operating permit shall demonstrate compliance with the following site limitation provisions: a.  All on-site processing and transferring of solid waste will be conducted entirely within an enclosed building or buildings. 1.  An enclosed building for these purposes is one in which the walls, doors and roof are made of solid materials but may contain accessory structural elements such as windows, properly filtered and controlled ventilation openings, and skylights, each element not exceeding an area of 100 square feet. 2.  Doors to any building shall remain closed except to temporarily allow transport vehicles to enter and exit the building. 3.  All solid waste transfer stations and processing facilities shall have an operator in attendance at all times when the facility is in operation. b.  Operations impact buffer zone. An operations impact buffer zone (hereinafter referred to as the impact buffer) shall be maintained upon the premises to minimize the impact of transfer and processing operations on surrounding neighborhoods and communities. 1.  The structure within which solid waste transfer or processing operation occur shall be located a minimum of 250 feet from any abutting real property lines and a minimum of 250 feet from the real property line of any residential property existing at the time the initial application for a permit, as required by section 130-64(b), is received by the commissioner of public works. 2.  All other activities and structures shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any abutting real property line, and a minimum of 250 feet from the real property line of any residential property existing at the time the initial application for a permit, as required by section 130-64(b), is received by the commissioner of public works. 3.  Access roads upon or within the site may cross the impact buffer so long as any roads are located a minimum of 100 feet from the real property line of any residential property existing at the time the initial application for a permit, as required by section 130-64(b), is received by the commissioner of public works. 4.  Rail lines and railways upon or within the site may cross the impact buffer so long as any such rail lines and railways upon or within the site are located a minimum of 100 feet from the real property line of any residential property existing at the time the initial application for a permit, as required by section 130-64(b), is received by the commissioner of public works. c.  Vegetative buffer. A vegetative buffer must be provided between solid waste transfer station or processing facility and any abutting real property line or public street right-of-way. 1.  Existing trees and vegetation must be maintained and preserved within 50 feet of any abutting property line of any real property lines of any property zoned industrial and any public street or right-of-way, and within 75 feet of any abutting real property lines of any property not zoned industrial. 2.  Where any portion of any property line of a lot containing a solid waste transfer station or handling facility is within 250 feet of any residential property, any existing trees and vegetation must be maintained and preserved within 50 feet of the real property line. 3.  Where the natural growth within the proscribed distance of the abutting real property line or public right-of-way does not effectively screen the site from the view from abutting properties or right-of-way, then screening shall be provided, subject to the approval of the commissioner of public works or authorized designee. d.  Vehicular access. All applicants for a solid waste transfer station operating permit must demonstrate compliance with the following traffic and vehicular access provisions: 1.  Access for motor vehicles to the facility must be paved and may be provided from any street that is not a residential local or residential collector street. Any access point to the facility must be a minimum of 250 feet from the real property line of any residential property. 2.  A metal gate shall be installed on the site to prevent unauthorized motor vehicles from entering the facility, and shall be closed and locked when the facility is not in operation. The entrance to the facility must have an operator or attendant in attendance at all times when the facility is in operation. 3.  All driveways which serve the site must be wide enough to accommodate two-way traffic at all times and an area on the site must be provided to accommodate vehicles entering the site so that no traffic waiting to enter the site will be backed up on any public right-of-way. 4.  Vehicular access to the facility must be of a nature sufficient enough so as to ensure that the normal flow traffic on any street or public right-of-way will not be obstructed or impacted by vehicles entering and exiting the facility. e.  Fences. All solid waste transfer stations or processing facilities shall be enclosed with a fence not less than eight feet tall and no more than ten feet tall, with openings therein not less than those in two-inch mesh wire or some other similar fencing material or device, which shall first be approved by the commissioner of public works and the commissioner of the department of planning and neighborhood development. The fencing shall be adequate to prevent paper and similar or related refuse or waste from blowing from the facility onto neighboring or nearby property. f.  Solid waste transfer stations and processing facilities must be served by public water and sewer facilities. g.  Where a lot containing a solid waste transfer station or processing facility is within 500 feet of any residential property, the facility may not accept waste earlier than 7:00 a.m. or later than 6:00 p.m. on any day. (e)  Authority of the commissioner; suspension or revocation of permits. (1)  All other phases of the operation of a solid waste transfer station or processing facility not specifically mentioned in this section shall be subject to the authorization of the commissioner of public works. Such authorization shall not be unreasonably withheld. (2)  Any and all permits to establish and maintain solid waste transfer stations or processing facilities granted under this section shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the commissioner for violations of the operations plan submitted in support of the application, or for a violation of other provisions of this code section when such violation poses an imminent danger to the health and safety of the occupants of adjoining properties. (3)  Any proposed suspension or revocation of a permit issued under this code section shall be provided in writing by certified mail to the operator of the facility, who shall be provided no less than ten business days to remedy the violation. (4)  In the event the permit is suspended or revoked, the operator of the facility shall have the right to appeal such suspension or revocation to the license review board and mayor. (5)  During the pendency of such appeal, the facility may continue to operate, provided any conditions the commissioner determines reasonably pose an imminent threat to human health and safety are abated. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 14, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-65. - Environmental damage insurance policy. (a)  Required for private landfill facilities and transfer stations. The commissioner of public works shall require, as a pre-condition of an annual operating permit required under sections 130-63 and 130-64 of this Code, all solid waste sanitary landfill facilities and all solid waste transfer stations or processing facilities which are not operated by governmental agencies to obtain and maintain in force an environmental damage insurance policy, a security bond, a self-insurance certificate or a trust fund certificate in the amount of $1,000,000.00. (b)  Indemnification. The owners of solid waste sanitary landfill facilities, solid waste transfer stations or processing facilities shall indemnify the city against all claims of damages and responsibilities for cleanup due to environmental degradation of the air, land, surface water and groundwater within the jurisdiction of the city caused by the facility during the period which such owner owned the solid waste landfill, solid waste transfer station or processing facilities. (c)  Proof of insurance. The owner of a solid waste transfer station or processing facility shall show proof of insurance, self-insurance, a trust fund certificate or a security bond before the owner is issued the annual operating permit by the city. (d)  Conflict with federal or state requirements. The requirement for obtaining and maintaining in force an environmental damage insurance policy, a security bond, a trust fund certificate or a self-insurance certificate shall not be construed as usurping the financial requirements established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the state environmental protection division for closure and postclosure care of the facilities. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Secs. 130-66—130-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES 
Sec. 130-76. - Annual review. (a)  Annual review . All fees and charges levied in conjunction with the delivery of services by the City of Atlanta through its solid waste management system shall be reviewed by the commissioner of public works or authorized designee. (b)  Annual solid waste services report . No later than the first city council meeting in January of each year, the commissioner shall file with the municipal clerk an annual report of solid waste services in the City of Atlanta. The report shall include information including, but not limited to the following: (1)  Any information required by the Atlanta City Council, including, but not limited to the following: a.  The amount of solid waste collected, processed, and disposed of in the City of Atlanta; b.  The progress on the reduction in solid waste, as evidenced by the amount of solid waste disposed at disposal facilities, in the previous year; c.  Recycling and composting activities in existence; and d.  Public information and education activities during the previous year. (2)  Any recommended change to the fees and charge levied in conjunction with the delivery of services by the City of Atlanta through its solid waste management system, determined according to the provisions of section 130-77; (3)  Specific information regarding the curbside collection program of the City of Atlanta: a.  The number of single-family residential, multi-family residential units, commercial, and industrial serviced by the City of Atlanta; b.  The volume of recovered materials collected by the City of Atlanta through its curbside collection program; c.  The volume of yard trimmings collected and disposed from customers by the City of Atlanta; d.  The number of service calls delivered by the bureau of solid waste services for the collection of bulky items, mixed debris piles, and rubbish; (4)  Any other information deemed necessary by the city council. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 15, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-77. - Solid waste service fees. (a)  Established. It is determined necessary for the protection of public health, welfare and convenience of the city to fix and collect solid waste service charges upon the owner of each lot within the city. (b)  Determination of amounts. For the purposes provided in subsection (c) of this section, there is charged and assessed to the owner of each lot within the city a solid waste service charge and assessment payable as provided in this subsection and in the amount determinable as follows: (1)  The solid waste service charge shall be recommended annually by the commissioner, subject to the approval of the council, to provide sufficient revenue for operation of the solid waste collection and disposal system, to pay debt requirements and to provide necessary reserves for debt and improvements as set forth in the annual budget. The solid waste service charge shall be made effective January 1 of each year. (2)  No person disposing of waste materials at any solid waste disposal facilities or transfer stations operated by the city, either under a permit or without a permit, shall be relieved from any solid waste service charge assessed by the city. (3)  Senior citizen discount. The solid waste services charge made effective January 1 of each year shall provide for a 30 percent exemption from solid waste services fees for residential customers who are 65 years of age or over and who have an annual household income of $39,000.00 or less. (c)  Uses of proceeds. The revenue received from the collection of the charges as authorized in this section, together with all such other revenue derived from the operation of the city's solid waste collection and disposal system, shall be deposited with the chief financial officer and credited to the solid waste enterprise fund and shall be used for the following purposes: (1)  The operation and maintenance of the solid waste collection and disposal system and incidental expenses connected therewith; (2)  To pay debt requirements on revenue bonds issued to provide funds for the construction, improvement or repair of the solid waste collection and disposal system facilities used in connection with the operation of the system; (3)  To purchase or lease property; and (4)  To provide funds for the necessary reserves for debt and improvements. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-78. - Commercial and industrial surcharge. (a)  Established. All owners of commercial and industrial property or occupants, tenants or lessees when not owner-occupied receiving solid waste collection service from the city shall be charged and assessed a surcharge in addition to any other solid waste service charge if the amounts of these wastes are greater than normal residential amounts. (b)  Determination of amounts. The rates of surcharge established in subsection (a) of this section shall be determined annually by the commissioner and shall be based on the current cost of collection and disposal. A schedule of the surcharges shall be filed with the municipal clerk by the commissioner not later than the second week following adoption of the annual budget and shall be made effective January 1 of each year. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-79. - Junked automobile removal charge. (a)  Established. Any owner of a junked automobile removed by the city shall be charged and assessed a fee for the removal of the automobile. (b)  Determination of amounts. The charge established in subsection (a) of this section shall be determined annually by the commissioner based on the current cost of removal of junked automobiles. The charge for removal of automobiles shall be filed with the municipal clerk by the commissioner not later than two weeks following adoption of the annual budget and shall be made effective January 1 of each year. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-80. - Charges for disposal of solid waste at city facilities. (a)  Established. Any person disposing of solid waste at one of the city's solid waste disposal facilities, except those specifically exempt by section 130-57, will be charged a fee for disposal of solid waste. (b)  Determination of amounts. The charge established in subsection (a) of this section shall be determined annually by the commissioner based on the current costs of disposal of solid waste. The schedule of charges for disposal of solid waste shall be filed with the municipal clerk by the commissioner not later than two weeks following adoption of the annual budget. A schedule of these charges will also be posted at the city disposal facilities and shall be made effective January 1 of each year. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-81. - Reserved. 
Sec. 130-82. - Fees for recycling. (a)  A fee of $88.00 per year is established for the provision of recycling services for each single-family residence and for each unit of duplex, triplex and quadruplex residences. (b)  All citizens who have less than $8,000.00 of income per year are exempted from this fee. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2010-36(10-O-0905), § 1, 6-29-10) 
Sec. 130-83. - Billing and collection. (a)  Solid waste service charge. (1)  The assessment of solid waste service charges as set forth in this division shall be made by the city and collection of the assessments may be undertaken by the city or through intergovernmental agreements or contracts with private entities as approved by applicable law. (2)  The assessment of solid waste charges shall be made on July 1 of each year at the rates then in place and such assessment shall be for 12 months of service and shall be payable not more than 90 days from the date of mailing of the assessment. (3)  All assessments paid after the due date shall bear interest at the rate of 1 percent per month from the date the assessment is due until the date the assessment is paid. For the purposes of this subsection, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. (4)  Assessments for properties beginning service after January 1 shall be charged a prorated fee based on the number of days between the date that service begins and the date of the next annual assessment. The due date of such prorated assessments shall be the later of 90 days from the date that service begins or 90 days from the date of mailing of the prorated assessment. All prorated assessments paid after the due date shall bear interest at the same rate as annual assessments. (5)  A minimum assessment of $5.00 shall be applied to all billable residential units receiving solid waste services. (b)  Commercial and industrial surcharge. (1)  The assessment and collection of commercial and industrial surcharges as set forth in this division shall be made by the city. The assessment and collection of annual charges shall be made quarterly with the first installment due and payable on January 1. The first installment shall be based on charges established for the previous year. If the charges are revised as provided for in this division, the remaining installments will be revised to reflect the revised annual rate. (2)  The tenant occupying or the owner of the commercial and industrial property, as the case may be, shall submit to the city on forms furnished by the city an estimate of the volume of solid waste, either bags or industrial containers with cubic yard sizes, required to be removed during a one-week period and an estimate of the number of collections per week required to remove that waste. The estimates shall be submitted to the city at least 1½ months prior to the quarterly billing period. The quarterly surcharge shall be based on the estimate so furnished. (3)  At any one time during any calendar quarter, if a revised estimate is received by the city on a date which is at least 17 days before the end of the quarter, each industrial and commercial occupant or owner shall have the right to revise the estimate previously submitted to the city so as to amend, modify or change the estimate as to the type of service, the number of pickups per week or the volume of service per pickup. (4)  Solid waste collection service by the city may be instituted at any time during the calendar quarter upon the industrial and commercial occupant or owner submitting to the commissioner of public works the estimate as provided in this subsection and a requested date of the commencement of the service. (5)  Upon the cessation of any industrial or commercial business, by written notice, any industrial and commercial occupant or owner may discontinue solid waste collection service by the city upon giving written notice of the date the service is to be terminated, provided that the notice is received by the bureau of solid waste services not later than the 15th day of the calendar month preceding the next calendar quarter billing period. The termination date of the service must be subsequent to the date the notice is received by the city. (6)  The commissioner of public works shall from time to time, for periods of one week or longer, audit the volume of solid waste being removed from these properties and the number of pickups required for removal and shall thereafter adjust by decreasing or increasing the amount of the surcharge for the property audited so that the surcharge shall conform and be based upon the results of the audit. (c)  Junked automobile removal charge. The assessment and collection of junked automobile removal charges as set forth in this division shall be made by the city. The assessment of these charges for the removal of these automobiles shall be made when the automobile is removed by the city. Payment shall be due and payable within 14 days of the assessment. (d)  Charges for disposal of solid waste at city facilities. The assessment and collection of charges for disposal of solid waste at city facilities as set forth in this division shall be made by the city. Payment of disposal charges shall be made by coupons purchased from the city before the waste is dumped at the disposal facility. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2009-28(09-O-0797), § 1, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2009-34(09-O-0847), § 1, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 130-84. - Rates and charges.     The following rates and charges are hereby established for solid waste collection and shall become effective April 1, 2019: (1)  Residential rate : $365.81 per year (2)  Duplex or triplex rate : $365.81 per year for each separate living unit in excess of one. (3)  Apartments, condominiums, townhouse, public housing or any other multi-family dwelling rates: A flat charge of $400.00 per year per parcel or one of the following charges, as appropriate. a.  $365.81 per year, for each dwelling unit where the garbage from apartments, condominiums, townhomes, public housing or any other multi-family dwellings (less than six units) is collected from individual containers, garbage cans or bags; b.  $281.53 per year for each dwelling unit where the garbage from apartments, condominiums, townhomes, public housing or any other multi-family dwellings (less than six units) is collected from industrial containers; c.  Where the multi-family dwelling units or apartments are located in building structures with incinerator[s], duly installed and operating therein in accordance with all laws and regulations applicable to incinerators, depositing only incinerator refuse, and if the collection is from industrial containers grouped together, as hereinafter defined, the amount shall be $53.82 per year for each dwelling unit; if such containers are not grouped together, then the amount shall be $122.79 per year for each dwelling unit; for the purpose of this section, industrial containers are grouped together when such containers are located physically adjacent with only sufficient space between such containers to permit access and pickup by the city collection equipment without the movement or shifting of any of said containers in order to gain access to any other of said containers; d.  $54.87 per year for each dwelling unit to which collection and removal services are made available to collect garbage from apartments, condominiums, townhomes, public housing or any other multi-family dwelling units. (4)  Residential backyard removal : $1,145.69 per year. (5)  Mobile home parks: a.  Individual garbage cans: $193.35 per year. b.  Installed industrial containers: $479.42 per year. See subsection (7). (6)  Commercial and industrial rates : a.  For commercial and industrial establishments located within high-density commercial, high-density mixed use, low-density commercial, low-density mixed use, medium-density mixed use, mixed-use, mixed use - high density, mixed use - low density, industrial, office/institutional and office/institutional/residential land use zones, the following Tier 1 rates shall apply: 1.  Commercial parcels from 1—100 feet: $1,000.00 2.  Commercial parcels from 101—200 feet: $2,000.00 3.  Commercial parcels from 201—450 feet: $4,500.00 4.  Commercial parcels from 451—700 feet: $7,000.00 5.  Commercial parcels from 701—850 feet: $8,500.00 6.  Commercial parcel greater than 850 feet: $12,000.00 b.  For commercial and industrial establishments located outside of the above-listed land use zones, the following Tier 2 rates shall apply: 1.  Commercial parcels from 1—100 feet: $500.00 2.  Commercial parcels from 101—200 feet: $1,000.00 3.  Commercial parcels from 201—450 feet: $2,250.00 4.  Commercial parcels from 451—700 feet: $3,500.00 5.  Commercial parcels from 701—850 feet: $4,250.00 6.  Commercial parcel greater than 850 feet: $6,000.00 (7)  Public property charge for services that have been contracted : A flat charge of $479.42 per year for each parcel. For public housing charges, see subsection (3)a.—d. For government buildings garbage collection, see surcharges, subsection (6). (8)  Residential vacant land : A flat charge of $500.00 per year per parcel. A vacant lot adjacent to a primary residence upon which an owner receive a homestead exemption shall be entitled to an annual charge of $150.00 per parcel in lieu of the $500.00 per parcel charge, provided the owner submits the proper documentation to the commissioner of public works. All vacant parcels with an outstanding housing code violation shall be charged a flat charge of $100.00 per year. (9)  Building of public worship rate : A flat charge of $400.00 per year per parcel. In addition to the levy listed above, there shall be a charge of $208.59 per year for solid waste collection from individual containers, garbage cans or bags, or a charge of $183.37 per year if the solid waste collection is from industrial containers. (10)  Minimum; private landfill site and transfer station operations : A minimum of $1.10 per ton payable to the city by all private landfill site operations and transfer station operations and transfer station operation located within the city for refuse disposed, collected, handled, processed or reclaimed within the jurisdiction of the city. Fees must correspond with tonnage handled and will be payable quarterly and prior to issuance of annual permits. As required by O.C.G.A § 12-8-39, all user fees collected in accordance with this subsection shall be deposited in a local restricted account and used solely for solid waste management purposes. (11)  Special collections : Any property otherwise addressed in subsections (1) through (9) of this section, either requesting or requiring special collection equipment or methods where normal curbside collection or backyard collection of solid waste or recyclables is not feasible, shall be subject to an additional fee of $200.00 annually. (12)  Excess bagged garbage, excess yard trimmings and/or overfilled bins : $12.00 per bag/occurrence, (13)  Bulky waste : $325.00 per address for a one (1) truck capacity load for all calls exceeding the established maximum scheduled calls per year. (Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2009-28(09-O-0797), § 2, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 18, 11-14-18 ) 
Secs. 130-85—130-100. - Reserved. 
Chapter 134 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Finance, § 2-906 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 138; sewer construction and assessments, § 154-141 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 134-1. - Assessment and collection.     All matters related to the assessment and collection of all special assessments and liens related thereto as provided by law and assessed against any property within the city shall be done on behalf of the city by the revenue collection administrator duly designated by the chief financial officer, all in conformity with and as provided by the laws of this state relating to the assessment and collection of taxes due the city and the enforcement of liens relating thereto; provided, however, all sales related to such special assessments, collections and liens shall be conducted on the steps of the city hall at the time and in the manner otherwise specified by law. (Code 1977, § 7-4053) 
Secs. 134-2—134-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET IMPROVEMENTS 
Sec. 134-26. - Petitions. (a)  Generally. If the owners of the majority of the frontage of the land liable to assessment for street improvements shall petition the council for improvements, citing this section and designating by general description the improvement to be undertaken and the street or part thereof to be improved, and if after a public hearing as provided by the Charter and this Code or other ordinances of the city such improvements are approved, it shall thereafter be the duty of the council to proceed to cause such improvement to be made in accordance with the prayers of the petition and the best judgment of the council. All petitions for street improvements must be signed in ink by the owners of the property signed for or by their duly authorized agents. The petition shall state that property owners may be assessed for the cost of the improvement. (b)  Execution when city owns property. When the city owns property along the street whereon an improvement is desired, the mayor may sign the petition in the name of the city for the full frontage of the property owned by the city along the street. (c)  Right to withdraw signature. Any person shall have the right to withdraw such person's signature from a petition for the pavement or other improvement of a street or portion thereof, but the withdrawal must be in the handwriting of the withdrawing petitioner and shall state that it is the petitioner's own act, uninfluenced by persuasion. (d)  Effect of withdrawal of signature. Any person who has signed a petition for the pavement of a street or portion thereof or other improvement and withdraws such person's signature therefrom prior to adoption of an ordinance authorizing the pavement of the street or portion thereof will not thereafter be permitted to resign the same petition for pavement of that street or portion thereof. The person withdrawing the signature may sign any other paving petition, but the city will not approve the other petition unless the owners of the majority of frontage on the street, including the party who had withdrawn such party's signature from a previous petition, sign the petition. (e)  Misrepresentation to induce withdrawal of signers. Any person who appeals personally to signers of such petitions for the pavement of a street or a portion thereof or other street improvement to withdraw their names and in making such appeals misrepresents the facts, either as to the cost of the respective pavements or any other facts connected therewith, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and on conviction thereof shall be punished as provided by law. (Code 1977, § 9-3054) 
Sec. 134-27. - Authority of council for improvements not petitioned for. (a)  The council may cause improvements to be made, including paving or surfacing, sanitary sewers, sidewalks, curbs, curbs and gutters and driveways, to any one or more streets, alleys or public ways, including those designated, accepted or otherwise created, anywhere within the corporate limits of the city and assess the full cost of these improvements upon the real property abutting on each side of the street, alley or public way so improved. The improvements can be caused to be made by the council solely within its discretion and in the absence of a petition from abutting property owners for the improvements. (b)  The chief financial officer is authorized to permit deferred or installment payments of assessments and liens by the persons owning and living on property abutting those streets where improvements are made when financial circumstances of all or certain of those persons invite relief. Determination of eligibility for the deferred or installment payments shall be in accordance with standards and guidelines set forth in this section and subject to amendment by the council. (c)  The chief financial officer is authorized, upon council authorization for the work, to accept application and payment from property owners assessed for those improvements and to permit deferred or installment payments by an owner or occupier of property abutting the street, public alley or public way. (Code 1977, § 9-3055(a)—(c)) 
Sec. 134-28. - Completion of work; entering information in lien book.     The commissioner of public works shall immediately notify the chief financial officer of the completion of any street improvements which constitute a lien against abutting property, and this information shall be immediately entered in the lien book which shall be kept by the chief financial officer. A copy of the lien book shall be maintained in the appropriate county property records room. The date of entry of this completed work shall be deemed the date when the lien attaches to the abutting property. (Code 1977, § 9-3056(b)) 
Secs. 134-29—134-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS OR CURBING 
Sec. 134-51. - Council action; cash payment for work.     Council action shall be required for the construction of sidewalks or curbing in and along streets and portions of streets and the resolution or ordinance shall be sufficient authority for the construction of sidewalks or curbing, except the commissioner of public works is authorized to construct sidewalks or curbing after receiving cash payment in advance for the construction work. (Code 1977, § 9-3081) 
Sec. 134-52. - Assessment against and collection of costs from abutting owners.     The entire expense of construction of sidewalks and curbing shall be assessed against the property abutting on the streets where sidewalks are constructed and shall be collected from the owners thereof. (Code 1977, § 9-3083) 
Sec. 134-53. - Method of assessment. (a)  All assessments for construction of sidewalks and curbing shall be made on a property frontage basis by dividing the total cost of the construction by the total frontage abutting the construction to ascertain the cost per front foot and assessing each lot or parcel of abutting property according to its frontage on construction. (b)  When private alleys between adjoining lots intersect with sidewalks, the assessment for curbing and sidewalks at the point where the alley intersects with the sidewalk shall be divided between the lots on each side of the alley, treating the private alley as belonging equally to the two adjoining lots. Private alleys belonging to only one of the adjoining lots shall be treated as part of that lot in making the assessment for curbing and sidewalk. (Code 1977, §§ 9-3084, 9-3085) 
Sec. 134-54. - Collection of assessments. (a)  Billing. When curbing and sidewalks are laid under resolution or ordinance, an assessment schedule shall be made by the commissioner of public works, showing in detail the properties against which the assessments are made. When the assessment schedule is passed by the council, it shall then be transmitted to the chief financial officer, who shall make out bills against the persons liable and notify them of the assessments. (b)  Grants to qualified property owners. Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the mayor or the mayor's designee is authorized to make grants to city residents owning property abutting on the streets where sidewalks are constructed when the income and other circumstances of such persons falls within established guidelines certified to by the committee on city utilities of the council for the purpose of paying for the costs of the improvements. (Code 1977, § 9-3082(a), (c)) 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY ASSESSMENTS 
Sec. 134-55. - Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Program. (a)  The city adopted a Climate Action Plan, which provides a comprehensive plan for climate change mitigation through reducing the city's carbon footprint and greenhouse gas emissions 20 percent by 2020 and 40 percent by 2030, along with pledging to reduce energy and water use in commercial and residential buildings 20 percent by 2020 and 40 percent by 2030, using a 2009 baseline. To help reduce energy and water use in commercial and residential buildings within the city, the city has established the Clean Energy Atlanta PACE Program ("PACE program") to facilitate funding to commercial and residential property owners who desire to install energy efficiency, water conservation, and renewable energy improvements within the city. (b)  The PACE Program will provide for the imposition of non-ad valorem property assessments to be levied upon participating properties as may be agreed to by the property owner, the downtown development authority for the city and its program administrator. (c)  Each property owner choosing to participate in the PACE Program shall execute a PACE Assessment Contract with the downtown development authority, which shall be administratively acknowledged by a designated representative of the city's finance department and governed by the PACE program guidelines. ( Ord. No. 2017-46(16-O-1430), § 12, 6-12-17 ) 
Sec. 134-56. - PACE assessment roll.     The city's office of resilience and department of finance shall periodically file with the municipal clerk a report of the PACE assessment contracts which have been entered into with property owners, which report shall include the following, and such other information as required by the council including: (1)  The tax-parcel ID number(s) corresponding to the property on which eligible PACE improvements are to be installed; (2)  The principal component of each assessment contract entered into in the preceding 12 months; (3)  The term of the related assessment contracts; and (4)  A general description of the eligible PACE improvements financed during the preceding 12 month period. ( Ord. No. 2017-46(16-O-1430), § 12, 6-12-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-45(17-O-1424), § 5, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 134-57. - Levy of PACE assessment.     PACE Assessments shall be levied in the amount, and for the term specified in the PACE assessment roll by parcel as directed by the city's chief financial officer and as specified in individual assessment contracts. PACE assessments shall be billed and be payable in the same manner and on the same day as assessments for solid waste charges. ( Ord. No. 2017-46(16-O-1430), § 12, 6-12-17 ) 
Sec. 134-58. - Lien for PACE assessment and interest.     PACE assessments and each installment thereof, along with interest thereon and the expense of collection, are declared to be a lien against the parcel so assessed, from the date the amount of such assessment or any installment thereof shall become due and unpaid, co-equal and on a parity basis with other municipal taxes. A penalty for the payment of delinquent PACE assessments shall be assessed in the same manner as delinquent municipal taxes. ( Ord. No. 2017-46(16-O-1430), § 12, 6-12-17 ) 
Sec. 134-59. - Execution, levy and enforcement.     The city's chief financial officer shall cooperate with the applicable tax commissioner or such other entity designated to collect the assessments and shall direct and cause to be issued an execution against any property for the amount of the assessment, interest and any applicable penalty, in the same manner as the enforcement of a lien for municipal taxes. ( Ord. No. 2017-46(16-O-1430), § 12, 6-12-17 ) 
Sec. 134-60. - Transmittal of PACE assessment Information.     The city shall annually adopt a resolution authorizing the transmittal of information, including in electron format, to the applicable tax commissioner for the billing and collection of the PACE assessments. ( Ord. No. 2017-46(16-O-1430), § 12, 6-12-17 ) 
Chapter 138 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— General powers relative to streets and other public ways, § 1-102(c)(11), (c)(13)—(c)(15), (c)(20). Cross reference— Naming of public facilities and streets in honor of persons, § 2-2; vending machines on city property and in city facilities, § 2-3; abandonment of streets, § 2-1578; abandonment of easements, § 2-1579; restrictions on advertising structures near freeways or expressway systems, § 6-27; sidewalk photographers, § 30-1316 et seq.; special assessments, ch. 134; traffic, ch. 150. Land development code reference— Transportation impact fee, § 9-1001 et seq. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific grant of constitutional authority relative to streets, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; municipal street systems generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90.2 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, adopted March 14, 2001, amended article I in its entirety. Formerly, article I pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. To the extent permitted by law, the city may determine to apply all or certain provisions of this ordinance [Ord. No. 2001-22] to agreements, franchises, and licenses existing on the effective date of this ordinance [March 5, 2001]. This ordinance shall apply to all telecommunications providers, persons seeking to use the streets in the manner described in section 138-127 herein, and franchisees, permittees, and licensees after its adoption. 
Sec. 138-1. - Definitions.     For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.     Sec. 138-1.1. "Abutting property owner" means the owner(s) of property abutting and contiguous to the street or right-of-way in question.     Sec. 138-1.2. "Affected persons or groups" means any property owner, person or group that may presently use or may reasonably expect to make future use of the right-of-way in question for transportation or other standard purpose which shall constitute greater interest than that of the general public including all persons described in section 138-68 and any persons that have facilities located in such right-of-way.     Sec. 138-[1].3. "Bridge agreement" means an agreement arranging the terms for constructing, operating and maintaining a privately owned bridge in the public right-of-way.     Sec. 138-1.4. "Decorative sidewalk agreement" means an agreement arranging the terms for construction and maintenance of a decorative sidewalk in the public right-of-way.     Sec. 138-1.5. "Encroachment agreement" means an agreement arranging the terms under which an encroachment shall be allowed to exist within the public right-of-way.     Sec. 138-1.6. "Licensee" means any person which is a party to a revocable license issued by the city.     Sec. 138-1.7. "Permit" means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which is subject to the conditions set forth in chapter 138 of this Code.     Sec. 138-1.8. "Permittee" means any person who holds a permit issued by the city.     Sec. 138-1.9. "Person" means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city.     Sec. 138-1.10. "Petitioner" means the person requesting the abandonment and providing the required submittals. Only abutting property owners or their agents shall qualify as a petitioner to initiate the abandonment of any street or right-of-way.     Sec. 138-1.10.[1.] "Public right-of-way" or "right-of-way" means generally property of any interest therein, whether or not in the form of a strip, for or devoted to (a) public transportation purposes; or (b) the placement of utility easements and other traditional uses along a transportation route, whether by dedication, prescription or otherwise, as well as the spaces above and below.     Sec. 138-1.11. "Street" means the surface of, as well as the spaces below, any and all paved or unpaved public roads consistent with GA. Code Ann. § 32-1-3(24) 1998."Street" shall include the land area set aside for public uses as a travel way for vehicular traffic, pedestrian access, public utilities and other uses.     Sec. 138-1.12. "Tie-back agreement" means an agreement arranging the terms for placing and removing tie-back cables in the public right-of-way. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-2. - Interest of city.     Any work conducted in, on, or along any street, or public right-of-way in the city limits of Atlanta must be permitted by the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-3. - Authority to regulate assigned to commissioner of public works.     The authority and responsibility to regulate activities within public right-of-way is hereby assigned to the commissioner of public works. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-4. - Enforcement, penalties, violations. (a)  Authority. The primary authority and responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be vested in the commissioner of public works. Upon a determination that a person is in violation of this chapter, the commissioner of public works or his designee shall give notice or issue a citation that indicates they are in violation of a section in this chapter. Should the violation continue after receiving notice of violation, the commissioner of public works or his designee may cite the violator to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this chapter. Upon a finding that a section of this chapter has been violated, the violator shall be subject to one or more of the penalties: (1)  The revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise agreement for access to the public right-of-way after written notice and reasonable opportunity to cure. (2)  The issuance of a stop work order by the department of public works preventing work on the public streets, public right-of-way or any associated private projects of the city until the conditions outlined in the stop work order are met. (3)  A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 a day for a violation of a provision of this chapter. (4)  Imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months. (b)  Additional penalties. The imposition of any of the foregoing penalties shall not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit, franchise, other administrative sanctions or any other relief that may be granted under law. (c)  Continuous and repeated violations. (1)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. (2)  With respect to violations of this chapter that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues, it is a separate offense. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-5. - Alleys. (a)  The city is not and shall not be responsible for the maintenance of alleys, with the exception of three alleys (sometimes referred to as "public alleys") which have been historically maintained by the city. These three alleys are located in the central business district, connect major thoroughfares, are paved, and serve general transportation and public purpose. The alleys thus excepted are: (1)  Mortgage Place, N.W., from Carnegie Way to Ellis Street. (2)  Equitable Place, N.E., from Auburn Avenue to Edgewood Avenue. (3)  Cain Place, N.W., from International Boulevard to Harris Street. (b)  The city has no interest in, and shall not be responsible for any other alley within the city limits. Public service vehicles such as garbage trucks, fire safety vehicles, or police vehicles may make use of alleys in the provision of their service. However, none of these or other historic or present uses shall constitute public ownership of, interest in, or responsibility for said alleys. (c)  The city shall not maintain or improve any private alley provided however the city is an abutting property owner or the alley serves as access to a city facility. (d)  When the city shall need to acquire real property, right-of-way, or, easements within an alley, the city has and will, barring evidence to the contrary, assume the centerline of the alley to be the property line between abutting private properties, and shall consider the area within the alley to belong in equal proportions to the abutting property owners. Calculations as to the value of such property or property rights to be acquired shall be made accordingly. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-6. - Standard specifications adopted.     The street, sidewalk and concrete curb specifications, latest revision, copies of which are on file in the offices of the municipal clerk and commissioner of public works, are adopted. The commissioner of public works is authorized to perform updates and revisions, from time to time, in order to reflect changes in acceptable design standards and materials, and to reflect current construction costs. (Code 1977, § 9-3017; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-7. - Approval of design, construction, repair, maintenance or modification of subdivisions.     When design, construction, repair, maintenance or modification of subdivisions or the infrastructure under the jurisdiction of the commissioner of public works is proposed, the design, construction, repair, maintenance or modification shall be approved in writing by the commissioner of public works or the commissioner's designee pursuant to the standards and requirements of this chapter. (Code 1977, § 9-3001; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-8. - Street name changes; dedication of certain public places. (a)  Recognition of public interest. The city recognizes that, from time to time, a certain individual or organization may make historical, cultural or other important contributions to the city, the State of Georgia or the United States that merit recognition by renaming a Street or naming or dedicating a public place, such as a cross-walk, building, park, or other similar public place ("public place" or "public places") within the city in their honor. The city also recognizes that certain streets or public places within the city have already been named in honor of certain individuals or organizations that have made historical, cultural or other important contributions to the city, the State of Georgia or the United States. This section prescribes the procedures by which existing streets or public places within the city may be named or dedicated in honor of individuals and organizations, while preserving the integrity of those streets and public places that have already been historically connected or dedicated with the name of an individual or organization. (b)  Application procedure. (1)  Submission of application. If a citizen of the city desires to submit to the city a request to rename a street (a "street renaming") or name or dedicate ("dedication") a public place to a noteworthy individual or organization, that citizen must submit to the city's commissioner of its department of public works an application for the street renaming or dedication. The number of individuals required by this section must sign the application. (2)  Dedication proposals. Dedications may be proposed by an applicant in either of two manners. First, the applicant may select a dedication package ("package") offered by the city. Specific packages may be obtained by an applicant in the city's department of public works. Second, an applicant may design and propose to the city in an application a dedication, the amenities of which are not included in a package. If this option is pursued, the application must contain a detailed cost estimate for the implementation of the specific dedication. (3)  Street renaming. If an applicant proposes to rename an existing street, the application must contain a detailed cost estimate for the implementation of the street renaming, including all costs associated with producing and installing appropriate signage to effectuate the street renaming. (4)  Initial application fee; cost of available city packages; cost to implement dedication. a.  An initial $2,500.00 deposit to cover administrative and other associated costs concerning the city's consideration of the application for the street renaming or dedication, including advertising the proposed street renaming or dedication, must also accompany the application. Funds received will be deposited into the general fund of the city. b.  The city recognizes that street renamings often impose a significant hardship on residences and businesses located on the street in that maps, banking information, driver's license information, billing information, websites, yellow page information and other advertising information, letterheads and other stationary or residential/business materials, and other information relative to the affected residences or businesses will need to be changed as a result of a street renaming. Accordingly, applications for dedications, rather than street renamings, encouraged by the city and will receive priority in consideration. c.  If the street renaming or dedication is accepted by the city pursuant to legislation adopted by the city's council and approved by the mayor, in accordance with the City's Code of Ordinances, then the applicant will be further required to submit payment to the city in the amount of the cost of the installation of signage and/or other amenities associated with the street renaming or dedication. d.  All payments, other than the initial $2,500.00 application fee submitted by the applicant to the city concerning an accepted dedication will be deposited into a dedicated fund, account and Center Number 3P02 4xxxxx B00001. All payments, other than the initial $2,500.00 application fee, submitted by the applicant to the city concerning an accepted street renaming will be deposited into fund, account and Center Number 3P02 4xxxxx B00001. e.  The costs to implement an accepted street renaming or dedication will be determined by the city as follows: 1.  If the application involves a dedication and the applicant chooses to utilize one of the packages offered by the city for dedications, the cost will be that attributable to the specific package chosen; 2.  If the applicant proposes a dedication, the amenities of which are not included in a package, the cost will be either the cost set forth in the application (plus any additional costs estimated by the city not set forth in the application or the cost estimated by the city, as noticed to the applicant; 3.  If the application proposes a street renaming, the cost will be either the cost set forth in the application (plus any additional costs estimated by the city not set forth in the application) or the cost estimated by the city, as noticed to the applicant. f.  Costs to implement a street renaming or dedication must be paid to the city within three days of the applicant's receipt of notice from the city that the application has been accepted by the city and further setting forth the cost of the street renaming or dedication to be remitted to the city. (5)  Application form and additional contents of application. The application must be provided on forms furnished by the commissioner of the department of public works and must contain the following: a.  An agreement that the applicant will be responsible for all costs to the city associated with the street renaming or dedication, including, but not limited to signage costs, annual maintenance costs and other costs associated with the street renaming or dedication and their continued maintenance. This agreement will provide that the applicant will remit to the city monies to apply to the additional costs within three days of receiving written notification from the city of the additional costs. The obligation to pay continuing costs will remain in place as long as the street renaming or dedication exists; b.  An agreement to provide an appropriate performance bond or other form of security determined by the commissioner of the department of public works, in his/her discretion, to be sufficient to cover the financial responsibility of the applicant for costs associated with a street renaming or dedication; c.  If the application concerns a street renaming, it must be accompanied by a list of the names and addresses and signatures of 75 percent of the residents residing or businesses located on the street to which the street renaming applies in favor of the street renaming and whose address will change as a result of the street renaming; and d.  Any other terms that the commissioner of the department of public works may deem, from time to time, necessary to include in application forms provided to citizens wishing to implement a street renaming or dedication, including, but not limited to: 1.  A site plan of any planned improvements contemplated in connection with the street renaming or dedication, sealed by a Georgia registered engineer, architect or landscape architect, meeting the requirements of the city's department of public works; 2.  Specifications and details of any amenities associated with the street renaming or dedication; 3.  Narrative biography of individual, or organizational history to which the street renaming or dedication applies; and 4.  Proposed maintenance schedule for any improvements or amenities associated with the street renaming or dedication and a legal description of the specific property to which the street renaming or dedication applies. (c)  Qualification conditions applicable to proposed street renaming or dedication. Individuals or organizations for which a street renaming or dedication is proposed must meet the following minimum qualifications: (1)  If a living individual, he or she must have reached the age of 75 at the time of the application; (2)  If a deceased individual, the application must be submitted at least 30 days after the date of death; and (3)  If an individual or organization, he/it must be of local, national or international reputation. (d)  Consideration of application; effectuating the street renaming or dedication. (1)  Public works actions required. Upon a determination that the application is complete, the commissioner of public works, or his designee, shall do the following: a.  Provide notification of the application for a street renaming or dedication to, and collect and tabulate the responses, if any, from: 1.  City agencies and other public agencies, including police, fire, planning, traffic and transportation, bureau of buildings, water, MARTA, and the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT), Highways and Streets; 2.  All affected city public schools and impacted neighborhood planning unit(s) located on or in the vicinity of the proposed street renaming or dedication; and 3.  Any other persons the commissioner of the department of public works deems, in his/her discretion, should receive notice of the proposed street renaming or dedication. b.  Review existing records and make certain the street renamings or dedication's proposed name or similar name does not exist, as well as determine for whom the street or public place is currently named; c.  Post appropriate signage notifying the public of the proposed street renaming or dedication; d.  Advise the applicant for the street renaming or dedication on the feasibility of the street renaming or dedication; e.  Advise the applicant if the proposed street renaming or dedication is not feasible, as well as what the applicant must do to make the street renaming or dedication feasible; f.  Refund of the fee paid by the applicant for the street renaming or dedication, if the commissioner of public works does not recommend the street renaming or dedication. If a proposed dedication or street renaming is denied, this refund will be automatic. (2)  Submission of ordinance; waiver of street renaming or dedication conditions by council. Upon a determination by the commissioner of public works that the conditions outlined in this section for a street renaming or dedication have been fulfilled and that the street renaming or dedication is in the best interests of the city, the commissioner of public works shall submit to the city's council an ordinance to legislatively implement the street renaming or dedication, which ordinance must specifically indicate that such conditions have been met. (3)  City's committee of purview. The city's committee of purview shall not consider an ordinance for a street renaming or dedication unless the conditions outlined in this section have been met. (4)  Advertisement; hearing. Prior to considering a street renaming or dedication ordinance, a legal advertisement must be published in at least one of the daily papers circulated for readership in the city, which advertisement will notify the public that a hearing on the proposed street renaming or dedication will be held by the city's committee of purview on a day certain, which date will be not less than seven days from the date of the paper in which the advertisement appears. The advertisement will give notice of the introduction of the ordinance, the street renaming or dedication and the time and place of the hearing on the ordinance before the city's committee of purview. The council staff of the city's committee of purview, through the municipal clerk's office, will be responsible for placing the advertisement in an appropriate publication in a timely manner. The municipal clerk will be authorized to place the required advertisement upon receipt from council staff written notification that the application is complete and that all conditions of this section concerning the specific street renaming or dedication have been satisfied by the applicant. At the hearing, any person opposed to the street renaming or dedication will be allowed a reasonable time within which to present such person's views and opposition to the street renaming or dedication, after which the city's committee of purview will make its recommendation to the council on the ordinance. Thereafter, the council shall have full power and authority to adopt or reject the street renaming or dedication and the ordinance. (5)  Final notices of dedication. Upon the adoption of the section by the council after the hearing before the city's committee of purview, and upon approval of the ordinance by the mayor, notice of the street renaming or dedication must be given by the municipal clerk as follows: a.  If a street renaming is involved, notice must be provided to all property owners located on the street; b.  If a dedication is involved, notice must be given to all property owners within 300 feet of the public place to which the dedication applies; and c.  Notice of the street renaming or dedication must be given to the U.S. Postal Service. (6)  Implementing a street renaming or dedication; term of street renaming or dedication. The bureau of traffic and transportation or the appropriate city agency must take all actions necessary to fully implement the street renaming or dedication (e.g. fabricating and installing appropriate signage) within 60 days of the effective date of the applicable street renaming or dedication ordinance. (7)  Duration of dedication; failure to maintain dedication. A dedication will be valid for a period of three years. Within 90 days of the expiration of a dedication, the applicant may renew the dedication by paying to the city established maintenance costs for the dedication for the next three years. If an applicant fails to maintain a dedication for a period of six months, the dedication will lapse and the city may remove all amenities associated with the dedication. All costs associated with the removal and restoration of a dedication site will be paid by the applicant within three days of receipt of an invoice from the city. (8)  Continuity of dedication. Dedications that have not expired and are current in terms of payment of costs may not be withdrawn by the city in favor of a subsequent applicant. (9)  Maintenance of dedication by third-party. Costs associated with a street renaming or dedication may be paid by the city to a third party agency with which the city has an agreement for the maintenance of the street renaming or dedication. Accordingly, when calculating costs for a street renaming or dedication, the city may include in those costs any administrative or other fee charged by the third party agency pursuant to its agreement with the city. (e)  Urban design commission review and comment. All street renamings and dedications located in the City of Atlanta must be reviewed by the urban design commission and be the subject of a regularly scheduled commission meeting. In advance of such a meeting, neighborhood associations, historical groups, historic preservation groups, and other interested parties will be notified that the street renaming or dedication has been placed on the commission's agenda. After the meeting, written findings regarding the street renaming or dedication must be forwarded to the city's commissioner of its department of public works and must be received by the commissioner before the commissioner is authorized to submit to the city council legislation authorizing the street renaming or dedication. (f)  Georgia Department of Transportation street renamings. If the State of Georgia implements a street renaming for a street within the municipal limits of the city, but does not have the appropriate signage installed effectuating the street renaming, the council member of the affected district or post may introduce an ordinance to effectuate the street renaming pursuant to the city's legislative process. (g)  Maintenance of street renaming or dedication records. The municipal clerk must maintain a record of all street renamings and dedications and, including records reflecting the prior name of the street or public place, as well as the new name and the effective date of the name change. (h)  Street name continuity. All applications for a street renaming must propose the change of the street name for the entire length of the street. An application proposing to change the name of only a portion of a street must be rejected by the commissioner of public works. (i)  Maintenance of a street renaming or dedication. If the maintenance of the signage or other street renaming or dedication amenities require a higher standard of maintenance than that provided by the department of public works or other appropriate city department, the applicant will be required to enter into a maintenance agreement with the city, or third party designee of the city, secured by a performance bond issued by a surety authorized to do business in the State of Georgia by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner, in a penal amount to be determined by the commissioner of public works. (Code 1977, § 1-202(d); Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2003-12, § 1, 2-12-03; Ord. No. 2007-80(07-O-2503), § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2017-62(17-O-1612), § 1, 10-16-17 ) 
Sec. 138-9. - Vacating and abandoning streets. (a)  In order to initiate a petition for the abandonment of any street or portion of any street, the petitioner or petitioners shall submit a petition to the commissioner of public works, which shall consist of the following: (1)  Name and addresses of petitioners; and a statement that the petitioner owns or is the agent of one who owns property that abuts the parcel under consideration. (2)  Survey or plat of the area to be abandoned, prepared by a registered surveyor in a manner suitable for filing, and reviewed and approved by the department of public works. The plat shall show the right-of-way divided on a pro-rata basis among the abutting property owners; (3)  Legal description and area in square feet of each parcel of the subdivided right-of-way to be abandoned; (4)  Name and mailing address of each abutting property owner(s) property tax identification numbers, deed book and page number of all recorded deeds and plats for each abutting property; (5)  A fee of $2,500.00 for abandoned streets abutting the development of residential subdivisions or commercial or industrial tracts, or a fee of $2,000.00 for abandoned streets abutting individual residential lots, which fees shall be applied to the cost of the appraisal of the parcel and advertisement of the proposed abandonment which shall be deposited in account number 3P02491102M22F03349999. (6)  A signed certification of intent from the petitioners and each abutting property owners that they intend to acquire title and compensate the city for the fee simple fair market value of the pro-rated portion of the right-of-way abutting their property, if abandoned, in exchange for the consideration of the petition and acknowledgment that if the property owner fails to acquire title and complete the transfer after the abandonment, the city may place a lien upon the property in an amount equivalent to the fair market value; and (7)  If a property owner is unwilling to acquire his pro-rata share of the right-of-way to be abandoned, that property owner may agree that his share may be paid for and/or acquired by another abutting property owner as long as the right-of-way in question is contiguous to the property to which it is to be joined; and (8)  Any other information deemed necessary or appropriate by the commissioner of the department of public works. (b)  Upon a determination that the petition is complete or legislation has been introduced by a member of the council, the commissioner of public works or his designee shall do the following: (1)  Notify all abutting property owners and others known affected persons or groups by certified mail of the petition to abandon said street and of their right to respond to the petition. Those notified shall be allowed 30 days to respond. (2)  Notify of the petition to abandon the street(s) and receive responses from: City agencies and other public agencies, including police, fire, planning, traffic and transportation, water, MARTA, the Georgia Department of Transportation, Highways and Streets, and Grady Hospital; all affected city public schools and neighborhood planning unit(s); all utilities and others with facilities located in the street(s) to be abandoned; and any other persons the commissioner of public works deems, in his discretion, should receive notice of the proposed abandonment. (3)  Review existing records and make a site visit. (4)  Post appropriate signage notifying the public of the proposed abandonment. (5)  Evaluate the responses, documents, and findings from abutting property owner, affected person, and petitioner and determine, based on criteria established by the commissioner, whether the street in question is no longer necessary as a public right-of-way and whether the petition for a street abandonment can be accommodated. (6)  Advise the petitioner on the feasibility of abandoning the street and if the petition for abandonment is not feasible, advise the petitioners on what must be done to make it feasible. (7)  Request of the refund of the fee paid pursuant to this section if the commissioner of public works does not recommend the street abandonment. (c)  Upon a determination by the commissioner of public works that the street is no longer necessary for the public's use and convenience as a public right-of-way, and that the conditions outlined in this section have been fulfilled, the commissioner of public works shall submit an abandonment ordinance to the council for consideration. An ordinance cannot be considered until the provisions outlined in this section have been fulfilled. (1)  The fees described in section this section may be waived by ordinance of the council upon recommendation by the purchasing agent; or (2)  In the event that the value of the abandoned right-of-way parcels are determined to be equal to or less than the cost of conducting an appraisal, the council may waive the requirement for an appraisal and may declare that the fair market value shall be an amount equal to the square foot unit value of the abutting property as determined by the most recent appraisal by the appropriate county tax commissioner. (d)  All legislation related to street abandonments shall originate in the city utilities committee as a committee paper. The city utilities committee shall not consider legislation for abandonment of public right-of-way unless the conditions outlined in this section have been met. (e)  In order to vacate or abandon any street or a portion of any street, an ordinance prepared by the department of public works declaring the intent of the city to abandon the street or a portion of the street which, in the judgment of the council, has ceased to be used by the public to the extent that no substantial public purpose is served by it or is no longer needed for public road purposes shall be passed by the council. There shall be attached to the ordinance a plat or sketch showing the street or portion of the street to be vacated or abandoned, and indicating which sections shall be acquired by which affected parties. (f)  Prior to consideration of the ordinance shall authorize and require an advertisement shall be published in at least one of the daily papers published in the city, which advertisement shall notify the public that a hearing on the question of the abandoning of the street or a portion of the street will be held by the city utilities committee on a day certain, which date shall be not less than ten days from the date of the paper in which the advertisement appears. The advertisement shall give notice of the introduction of the ordinance, the street or portion of the street proposed to be vacated or abandoned and the time and place of the hearing thereon. The council staff of the city utilities committee through the municipal clerk's office shall be responsible for the advertisement being done in a timely manner. The municipal clerk shall be authorized to place said advertisement upon receipt from the commissioner of public work or his designee that the petition is complete. Written notice of the hearing shall be given by the department of public works to the owners of property located on the street or portion of the street to be vacated or abandoned. At the hearing, any person opposed to the vacation or abandonment shall be allowed a reasonable time within which to present such person's views and opposition thereto, after which the city utilities committee shall make its recommendation to the council on the ordinance. Thereafter, the council shall have full power and authority to adopt or reject the ordinance. (g)  If the city utilities committee recommends that the street or right-of-way be abandoned, the owner(s) of each abutting property shall post funds with the clerk of council, within a time limit set by the city utilities committee, in an amount equal to the fair market value of the portion of the right-of-way to be acquired. Upon receiving the recommendation from the committee, and funds being posted for all portions of the right-of-way in question, the council shall have full power and authority to adopt or reject the ordinance. Council shall not act upon the abandonment ordinance until all funds have been received. (h)  Upon the adoption of the ordinance by the council after the hearing before the city utilities committee, and upon approval of the ordinance by the mayor, notice of vacation or abandonment shall be given to property owners located on the street or portion of the street vacated or abandoned, and the street or portion of the street shall thereafter cease to be a street for any purpose whatsoever and the rights of the public in and to that section of the street vacated or abandoned shall cease, provided that all easements and rights of the utilities, telecommunications providers and other persons that have facilities located in the street shall continue as governed by state law. (i)  Streets or right-of-way having been abandoned shall be divided along the centerline and transferred by quit claim deed to the abutting property owners along each side of the abandoned right-of-way in sections defined by extension of existing property lines. Said transfer shall be conditioned upon the abutting property owner having posted funds as outlined in paragraph (e) above. If the abutting property owner fails to post funds as outlined in paragraph (e), another abutting property owner may post such funds and shall thereby assume the right to acquire that portion of the abandoned right-of-way. Any such quitclaim deed shall not effect utilities located in such street or right-of-way. (j)  If, having duly signed a certification of intent as described in this section, the property owner shall fail to complete the transaction to acquire the appropriate pro-rata share of the abandoned right-of-way, the city attorney shall unilaterally file a quit-claim deed and shall simultaneously file a lien against the abutting property in an amount equal to the fair market value of the right-of-way portion in question. (1)  No street nor right-of-way shall be abandoned where the abandonment shall result in any parcel of land being left landlocked, nor shall any new unbuildable lot be created. No abandonment shall occur until all portions of the right-of-way are identified and accounted for as to whom shall be the receiving owner, and appropriate funds have been posted. All property boundaries resulting from the abandonment of any street or right-of-way shall be as regular and reasonable as possible. (k)  Physical conditions for abandonment. No street or right-of-way shall be abandoned unless the following conditions are met. (1)  No abandonment shall result in any parcel of land being left landlocked, nor shall any new lot be created which does not comply with the current applicable zoning and building permitting requirements. (2)  No abandonment shall result in the creation of any dead end street without the inclusion of an appropriate turn-around infrastructure to be installed by the petitioner at the petitioner's expense as defined in the department of public works standard details. It shall be a condition of any abandonment that appropriate city standard infrastructure shall be constructed by the petitioner, including the appropriate dedication of any additional land area required by construction of a cul-de-sac. (Code 1977, §§ 9-3014, 9-3015; Ord. No. 1999-60, § 2, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-46, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 2013-35(13-O-1121), § 1, 7-24-13) State Law reference— Abandonment of roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-7-1 et seq. 
Sec. 138-10. - Dangerous or hazardous conditions near the right-of-way. (a)  Fences. (1)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any barbed wire fence, electric fence or any other character of fence or object that would endanger the persons or clothing of passersby along the sidewalks on the portion of any lot adjacent to a public right-of-way in the city, unless the fence is amply protected by a barrier approved by the commissioner of public works or unless the fence is placed not less than three feet from the inside edge of the sidewalks of the street, the location being totally on abutting private property. (2)  Enforcement. The police chief shall, upon request of any citizen or upon the request of the commissioner of public works, give notice to the owner of the property where the fence may be that the fence violates this section, and, unless removed within three days after notice, the owner shall be cited to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this section. Upon finding that this section has been violated, the owner may be required by the court to remove the barbed wire within a time prescribed by the court or the commissioner of public works shall be authorized to remove the barbed wire and the cost of removal shall be a lien against the property. (Code 1977, § 9-3004; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-11. - Digging up, carrying away gravel, earth and other material from street or sidewalk.     Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to dig or scrape up and carry away gravel, earth, dirt, rock, sand or other materials which are a part of any street or sidewalk of the city. (Code 1977, § 9-3005; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-12. - Depositing, dumping or storing material in street or sidewalk.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, or store any refuse, waste, garbage or other material of any nature, in or along the public right-of-way. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-13. - Affixing signs within right-of-way. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: (1)  "Affix" shall mean the act of tacking, nailing, posting, gluing, painting, stapling, marking or writing upon the surface of any structure or directing, authorizing or paying another to do such act. (2)  "Public property" within the public right-of-way shall mean the area lying within the dedicated or prescriptive easement of any street or road located within the city, whether improved or not, including sidewalks, ditches, drains, the tree lawn areas between detached sidewalks and streets, roadway medians, parkways, bridges, utility poles and boxes, street signs and sign poles. (3)  "Sign" shall mean any material containing printed or written matter in words, symbols, pictures, or any combination thereof, including, but not limited to flyers, handbills, pennants, posters, and streamers. (4)  "Special event sign" shall mean any temporary sign which shall advertise or promote any meeting, event, gathering, function, entertainment or other activity scheduled for a particular date or series of consecutive days. (b)  Signage prohibited. Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to post or affix signs on public property within the public right-of-way. (c)  Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall apply to the installation of the following: (1)  Metal plaques or plates commemorating a historical, cultural or artistic event, location or personality; (2)  Signage identifying licensed franchisees of the city or indicating the presence of workers of permitted utilities and their facilities or equipment within or immediately adjacent to the right-of-way; (3)  Signage identifying or directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic to or from property immediately adjacent to the signage when displayed on structures under the ownership or control of the property owner or lessee; (4)  Signage providing public transportation information; (5)  Signage providing direction to governmental facilities, hospitals or houses of worship; (6)  Signage affixed pursuant to permits issued by governmental entities having authority to do so; (7)  Signage used to provide for the safety of individuals using the public right-of-way or immediately adjacent property; (8)  Flags, banners, bunting, signs, displays or other forms of decoration which are displayed in conformance with and permitted by section 138-60; or (9)  Commercial advertisements which are displayed in and on bus shelters in conformance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51. (d)  Removal. Any signs found upon any public property, not in compliance with this section, may be removed by the city. The person(s) responsible for causing the unlawful sign to be placed on any public property may be held responsible for the cost of removal. These persons shall include, but are not limited to, any individuals or businesses whose advertisement, message or information appears on or is contained in any sign or notice unlawfully placed on public property. (e)  Special event signage. Any special event signs found upon any public property may be removed by the city. The person(s) responsible for causing the unlawful special event sign to be on public property may be held responsible for the cost of removal. In addition, the person(s) responsible for causing the unlawful special event sign to be on public property shall be subject to a minimum of three days in jail. These persons shall include, but are not limited to, any individuals or business whose special event appears on or is contained in any special event sign or notice unlawfully placed on public property and any individual responsible for authorizing, directing, or paying persons who unlawfully place special event signs on public property. (f)  Citations. Any person violating this section shall receive a citation. The citation shall state the date, location, and brief description of the violation. The citation penalty may be paid prior to the assigned court date, in the amount of $100.00 per violation to cover the removal of the unlawfully placed sign. Payment may be made as directed by the citation. Upon a third, and subsequent, violation, the person cited must appear in court. (g)  Penalties. Any person violating this section shall be subject to one or more of the following penalties: (1)  A fine not to exceed $1,000.00 upon appearance before the judge of the municipal court, for each unlawfully placed sign or special event sign; (2)  Imprisonment for a term not exceeding five days.     Fines that remain unpaid after 60 days will automatically trigger a separate violation, resulting in the responsible person(s) being subject to the penalties provided in this chapter, in addition to the original fines and/or jail time. (h)  Enforcement. Any person empowered by the City of Atlanta to issue citations may enforce the provisions of this section. (Code 1977, § 9-3012; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2004-36, § 1, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2006-77, § 1, 11-14-06) Cross reference— Signs generally, § 6-26 et seq. Land Development Code Reference— Supplemental zoning provisions pertaining to signs, § 16-28A.001 et seq. 
Sec. 138-14. - Maintenance of sidewalk area. (a)  Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. When there is an accumulation of ice, naturally or by artificial means, or snow sufficient to cover the sidewalks, the occupants or owners of the houses and other establishments fronting the sidewalks shall have the ice or snow cleared from the sidewalks in front of their establishments when an accumulation occurs, within a reasonable time after such accumulation. (b)  Maintenance of unpaved portion of sidewalk space. Whenever a sidewalk is paved and not all of the sidewalk space is covered by the pavement, but a space is left between the sidewalk and the curbs or between the sidewalk and property line or both or where there exist planted materials in the ground or in planters within such unpaved portion, the owner of the abutting property shall be responsible for maintenance of that space and for keeping it free of holes and weeds, level with the sidewalk and sodded with grass and for watering, pruning and maintaining the planted materials, whether such materials are planted in the ground or in planters placed in or alongside the sidewalk area. Upon the failure of that person to do so, the commissioner of public works may give written notice to the person to do so within ten days, and upon the failure of that person to comply, the person shall be cited to appear for a hearing to show cause for noncompliance, after which the commissioner shall have the property put in a condition complying with this section and shall notify the chief financial officer of the costs thereof. Execution shall issue against the owner of the property for the full amount of costs, which execution shall be collected by the chief financial officer as are all other executions issued by the city. (c)  Paving of grass plots upon repaving sidewalks. Whenever a sidewalk is repaved on a street which has a grass or dirt plot between the curb and the pavement, the commissioner of public works shall be authorized to extend the repavement to the curbline. If the extension to the curbline is repaved, the grass or dirt plot so paved shall be paved with the same material as the new pavement. (d)  Damaged sidewalk abutting the right-of-way. When the sidewalk abutting the right-of-way is damaged, it is the obligation of the abutting property owner to repair such sidewalk upon notice from the department of public works. If after receiving such notice, the abutting property owner fails to repair the sidewalk within a reasonable time, the department of public works is authorized to make such repairs and assess the abutting property owner for costs incurred; provided however that where funding is identified, applicable and available for implementation of repairs by the city, such repairs not required due to damage directly attributable to action(s) of the abutting property owner or agents, contractors, or employees of the abutting property owner, shall be undertaken by the city upon a prioritized basis until the funding is exhausted. The absence of city funding shall not excuse the abutting property owner from the requirements of this section. (e)  Reporting requirement. The department of public works shall update city council on a quarterly basis as to all sidewalk repairs conducted by location, responsible party, and dollar amount of each repair. (Code 1977, §§ 9-3016, 9-3087, 9-3086; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2015-40(14-O-1361), §§ 1, 2, 7-29-15 ) 
Sec. 138-15. - Obstructing sidewalks by display or sale of goods     Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk by placing thereon goods, wares, merchandise or other things of value for the purpose of display or advertising or to erect or use thereon any boxes, steps, stands or other structures or contrivances for the purpose of displaying goods, wares, merchandise or other things of value or to sell or offer for sale thereon any goods, wares, merchandise, service or other things of value. However, temporary use of the sidewalks as may be necessary to get merchandise into or away from places of business fronting on any such sidewalk shall not be held to be prohibited by this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit peddling by licensed peddlers. (Code 1977, § 9-3018; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. State Law reference— Obstruction of roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq. 
Sec. 138-16. - Compliance with noise ordinance.     All permittees performing construction or other activities in the public right-of-way must comply at all times with chapter 74 which regulates noise within the city. Notwithstanding this section, however, the commissioner of public works shall have the authority to waive noise restrictions for an applicant when doing so is in the best interest of the city. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-17. - Design objectives for sidewalks.     Sidewalks installed in the public right-of-way shall be a minimum width of 60 inches, shall be located at the edge of the right-of-way and shall conform with all ADA requirements. Sidewalks shall be designed and installed in such a manner as to protect existing mature trees and to allow for the planting of future trees. In the event that topographical or other conditions do not allow for the installation of a 60-inch minimum sidewalk, the commissioner of public works is authorized to exercise his discretion to determine an appropriate resolution. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-18. - Utility markings. (a)  Temporary markings. Prior to any utility construction or repair that may damage other utilities located in the public right-of-way, persons performing construction activities, to the extent permitted by law, shall locate and mark the location of all existing utilities. Upon the completion of all construction activities, all temporary utility location markings shall be removed. (b)  Permanent pavement marker. All permanent utility markers in the public right-of-way shall: identify the owner of such facility, be no larger than three inches in diameter, installed flush with the pavement, and constructed with such material that in the event of failure, will not create a public safety hazard. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENCROACHMENTS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, adopted March 14, 2001, amended article II in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. To the extent permitted by law, the city may determine to apply all or certain provisions of this ordinance [Ord. No. 2001-22] to agreements, franchises, and licenses existing on the effective date of this ordinance [March 5, 2001]. This ordinance shall apply to all telecommunications providers, persons seeking to use the streets in the manner described in section 138-127 herein, and franchisees, permittees, and licensees after its adoption. 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 138-20. - Minimum requirements for changes, excavations or encroachments in right-of-way for any purpose other than its intended use as a public street or highway. (a)  When performing construction activities or the erection of a temporary or permanent encroachment, all such persons shall obtain prior approval, including all necessary permits and/or agreements, from the department of public works, and pay a permit fee and annual inspection fee for the issuance of said permit or agreement as set forth in Appendix B of this Code. The commissioner of public works shall require the person conducting activities pursuant to the permit and within the right-of way to provide each abutting property owner or occupant with reasonable and timely notification of any impending construction work that would unreasonably interfere with either egress or ingress onto said owner's or occupant's property. (b)  For the purposes of this article, encroachments include but are not limited to: (1)  Vehicle, pedestrian or utility bridges. (2)  Vehicle, pedestrian or utility tunnels. (3)  Pipes, wires, conduits or similar facilities. (4)  Basements, vaults, elevator shafts, stairs, stairwells, ventilation shafts, gratings or similar facilities. (5)  Canopies, ledges, bay windows, balconies, decorative lighting, flagpoles, gargoyles, architectural embellishments, area walks or similar facilities. (6)  Any building, parking garage, structure, or part of thereof, including footings, foundations, tie-backs, supports, walls, eves, or projections; which extend into the public right-of-way; whether intended for public or private use; whether new or historic shall be defined as an encroachment. (7)  A vault encroaching under the public right-of-way which is covered by the franchised agreements between the city and the various utility companies is excluded, except when that vault is an integral structural part of the building being served, including the basement walls, footings or foundations of the building, in which case the vault will also be subject to an agreement as outlined in this section between the building owner and the city. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2007-79(07-O-1953), § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2010-29(10-O-0904), § 1, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 138-21. - [Establishment of administrative rules.]     The commissioner of public works is authorized to establish and implement such administrative rules and procedures necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-22. - Nonconforming encroachments. (a)  Structure or properties that encroach into public right-of-way and for which there is not an applicable agreement shall be considered "nonconforming uses." The city may, at the discretion of the commissioner of public works, permit certain nonconforming encroachments. The city may at any time determine that continued encroachment is not in the public interest and may require the removal of said encroachment. (b)  If a nonconforming encroachment ceases to have continuous use, has a change in the type or degree of use, or if the structural or functional soundness of the structure or property deteriorates due to lack of maintenance, damage by fire, flood, wind, or other act of God, it shall no longer be tolerated and shall not be eligible for repair, replacement, or further use until an encroachment agreement has been executed. The city shall have the right and duty to require the removal of any encroachment thus affected. (c)  Past tolerance of an encroachment or failure to enforce the prohibition against encroachment shall not be grounds for continued existence of a nonconforming encroachment. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-23. - Obligation to relocate upon notice. (a)  The city reserves the right to perform any public works or public improvements necessary to maintain the public right-of-way. The city may therefore, upon written request to the permittee, require relocation of the permittee's facilities existing in the public right-of-way at the permittee's own expense when the relocation is necessary to maintain the health, safety, or welfare of the public or to improve or maintain the public right-of-way for transportation uses. (1)  Notification, failure to remove. Upon receiving written notice from the city to remove, or relocate facilities which are using or occupying a public right-of-way which the city has to improve, the permittee shall, within 60 days thereafter, begin arrangements for said removal or relocation in accordance with said written notice from the city. Should the permittee fail to comply with such notice within a reasonable time sufficient to allow for procedures reasonably necessary for the removal and relocation of the facilities, the city may give the permittee a final notice directing that such removal begin not later than ten days from the receipt of such final notice. (2)  Removal or relocation of facilities by the city. If the permittee refuses or neglects to relocate said facilities existing in the public right-of-way within ten days of receipt of such final notice, or if an emergency affecting public safety or health exists requiring immediate relocation of the permittee's facilities, to the extent not inconsistent with state and federal law, the city may relocate such facilities and the permittee shall pay to the city the reasonable costs incurred in connection with such relocation. (3)  Removal or relocation of facilities for aesthetic purposes. If the relocation of facilities in the right-of-way is for aesthetic purposes or purposes not related to improving the public right-of-way for transportation purposes or to maintain the public right-of-way for health or safety reasons, then the cost of such relocation shall be borne by the requesting third party and not by the city or the permittee. (4)  Removal or relocation of facilities by an act of God. If an act of God necessitates the relocation of the permittee's facilities located in the public rights-of-way, the cost of such relocation shall not be borne by the permittee. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-24. - Conditions of permit. (a)  Encroachment agreement. It shall be prohibited and shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any temporary or permanent right-of-way encroachment in the city, unless that encroachment is covered by an encroachment agreement administered by the department of public works. (b)  The city will not enter into an encroachment agreement to any owner of property adjacent to any street or roadway that is part of the street system of the city or right-of-way along the limited-access highways of the federal or state aid road system within the city limits or any agent or contractor employed by the owner to make changes to, to alter or to construct an encroachment over, upon or under the right-of-way unless: (1)  Changes to benefit public. In the opinion of the commissioner of public works the proposed alteration, excavation or encroachment will constitute a benefit to the public and, except for permitted temporary disruptions of service, will not adversely impact the ability of the right-of-way to handle vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise to perform their intended function. (2)  Agreement as a condition of a permit. The owners of the adjacent or connected properties abutting the right-of-way seeking a permit to alter, excavate or encroach on the right-of-way enter an agreement with the city, which agreement shall be binding upon the owners of the property abutting the right-of-way and their successors in title in perpetuity or until the agreement is ended by mutual consent of the city and the agreeing parties and which will provide but is not limited to the following: (3)  Submission of plans and technical specifications. All alterations, excavations or encroachments permitted on, in, over, under or within the public right-of-way of the city shall be pursuant to a plan, calculations and technical specifications prepared by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state, which plans, calculations and technical specifications have been approved by the commissioner of public works pursuant to the standards set forth in this chapter or promulgated pursuant to this chapter and, when applicable, the standards of state department of transportation or the federal highway administration or both. Minimally, the plans should show the location of any supports, the height or depth of the structure and the width and volumetric cubic feet of the structure, where applicable. (4)  Performance bond as a condition of a permit. When in the opinion of the commissioner of public works it is deemed appropriate and prior to beginning any work on, in, over or under the public right-of-way of the city, the owner of the abutting property or the contractor employed by the owner to perform the work shall present to the city a performance and completion bond for the full value of the work contemplated furnished by a corporate surety satisfactory to the city, the amount of the surety being determined by the city's risk manager to be adequate to either complete the proposed work impacting the public right-of-way in its entirety or to restore the public right-of-way to its condition prior to commencement of the work if the owner or the owner's contracting agent fails to complete the work to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works. (5)  Indemnification insurance as a condition of a permit. Evidence of insurance shall be issued to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers and employees from all claims arising out of any injury to persons or damage to property resulting from the changes to or work on, in, over, under or within the right-of-way by the property owner or the contractor employed by the owner or any of the agents or employees of the owner or contractor. (6)  Signatures required of all parties to agreement. All parties required for the execution of such agreement shall be signatories thereto, as evidenced by a title certificate of an attorney licensed to practice law within this state, which title certificate sets forth the names and addresses of the owners of the property or structures to be connected by the bridge or tunnel and the names and addresses of the lessors and lessees of the property or structures, together with sufficient information as to the terms of any leases of the property or structures and the corporate names of any parties. (7)  Obligation to replace the area beneath the street. The granting of permission to construct an encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within any public street or public alley within the city shall be contingent upon the agreement of the owner and the lessor of the tracts of land adjacent to the street or alley affected by the encroachment or excavation to remove the encroachment or excavation and to replace any area beneath the street or alley where the encroachment or excavation is constructed to a condition satisfactory to the city within 90 days after being notified to do so by the commissioner of public works without cost to the city and to provide security, if requested to do so by the city, to ensure that the encroachment or excavation will be removed or backfilled and the area returned to a condition satisfactory to the commissioner of public works without the cost to the city. (8)  Performance bond required to replace the area beneath the street. The granting of permission for an encroachment or construction of an excavation on, in, over, under or within any public street or public alley within the city shall be contingent upon an agreement by the owner or lessee of the building or property to furnish and maintain a bond, at no expense to the city, with a corporate surety satisfactory to the city, to guarantee the performance of the principal in removing the encroachment or backfill the excavation as provided for in subsection (7) of this section. (9)  Annual rental of space. The granting of permission to construct the encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within any public street or public alley within the city shall be contingent upon the agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees of the tracts of land connected by the encroachment or excavation to pay to the city an annual rental for the space occupied by the encroachment or excavation at a rate per cubic foot as determined by the council, computed on the outside dimensions of the encroachment or excavation lying within the bounds of the public right-of-way of the city, which rental shall be collected by the department of finance and shall be subject to change from time to time. For rental of less than 5,000 cubic feet, the commissioner of public works may require one year's rental payments in advance. (10)  Public liability insurance requirement as a condition of a permit. The granting of permission to construct an encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within a public street or public alley of the city shall be contingent upon the agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees of the tracts of land permitted by the city to effectuate the encroachment or excavation to hold the city harmless from any and all claims arising out of the construction, operation, use, maintenance or removal of the encroachment or excavation and upon the additional agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees to maintain a policy of public liability insurance, at no expense to the city, satisfactory to the city and naming the city as a named insured, in an amount approved by the city's risk manager. The agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees of the tracts of land to hold the city harmless shall not be limited to the amount of the insurance. (11)  Non-waiver of city negligence. The granting of permission to construct an encroachment or excavation shall be contingent upon the agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees of the tracts of land permitted by the city to effectuate the encroachment or excavation that the obligation to hold the city harmless against all claims arising out of the construction, operation, use, maintenance or removal of the encroachment or excavation shall not be waived by the city because of the commissioner of public works having approved by the plans and specifications for the encroachment or excavation or by the requiring or not requiring modifications thereto, even though the city may be found to have been negligent as a matter of law because of its acts or failure to act in regard thereto. (12)  Locating all pre-existing public and private utilities. The granting of permission to construct the encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within a public street or public alley of the city shall be contingent upon the parties' seeking permission to construct the encroachment or excavation, determining at their expense the location of all aboveground and below ground public utilities and private utilities of the city in the area where the encroachment or excavation is to be constructed, and making arrangements for the removal or relocation of those utilities, at the expense of the parties seeking permission to construct the encroachment or excavation and at no expense to the city. (13)  Compliance with this chapter. The granting of permission to construct the encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within a public street or public alley of the city shall be contingent upon the agreement of the parties seeking permission to construct the encroachment or excavation to comply with all the terms of this chapter and to comply with all other ordinances and regulations of the city. (14)  Reimbursement of damages to city. The granting of permission to construct the encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within a public street or public alley of the city shall be contingent upon the agreement of the parties seeking permission therefore to repair any damage to the street or alley resulting from the construction, maintenance or use of the encroachment or excavation and to reimburse the city for any damage to the street or alley beneath, on or above where the encroachment or excavation is constructed, because of that construction and during the construction, use and maintenance of the encroachment or excavation. (c)  Enforcement. The police chief shall, upon request of any citizen or upon the request of the commissioner of public works, give notice to the owner of the property which may be encroachment that the owner may be in violation of this section. Alternatively, the commissioner of public works may give notice of violation to the owner. The owner shall then be allowed 30 days to resolve the conflict by removing the encroachment, entering into an "encroachment agreement" with the city, or by demonstrating to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works that the structure or property in question is not in violation. Failing compliance, the owner shall be cited to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this section. Upon finding that this section has been violated, the owner may be required by the court to remove the encroachment within a time prescribed by the court or the commissioner of public works shall be authorized to remove the encroachment and the cost of removal shall be a lien against the property. (d)  Penalties. Any violator of this section shall be held accountable as provided in the penalty section of this chapter. Each day of continuation of violation after notice shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-25. - Erection of bridges, tunnels or similar structures across streets or alleys. (a)  It shall be unlawful to erect a bridge, tunnel or similar structure which crosses any public street or public alley, whether above or below the surface of the right-of-way, for the purpose of providing a passageway between property or structures adjacent to the right-of-way except upon the approval and authorization of the council by ordinance and upon compliance with all applicable sections of this Code and other ordinances of the city, including this sections, as follows: (1)  It shall be unlawful to place supports for any bridge or tunnel or any other obstructions within the public right-of-way of any street or public alley or of any portion thereof set aside for or used for sidewalk purposes. (2)  The minimum height above or depth below street level in each instance of the construction of the bridge or tunnel shall be fixed and determined in advance by the commissioner of public works in order to provide for the safe and efficient use of the right-of-way for public transportation purposes. (3)  The maximum outside width and height dimensions of each bridge or tunnel shall be as fixed and determined in advance by the commissioner of public works in order to provide for the safe and efficient use of the right-of-way for public transportation purposes. (4)  The bridge or tunnel shall be designed by an architect or an engineer licensed to practice in the state, and the plans and specifications for the bridge or tunnel presented to the city for approval shall bear the architect's or engineer's official registration seal thereon. The plans and specifications shall be submitted to the commissioner of public works, the director, bureau of buildings and the urban design commission for their written recommendations before the council shall consider approval thereof. (5)  The outside appearance of any bridge permitted by this section shall not detract from the adjoining buildings or the neighborhood, and no articles of any nature, other than lighting fixtures, shall be permitted to be suspended from the outside of the bridge. (6)  It shall be unlawful to display or place any advertisements or mercantile displays upon or attached to any outer surface of the bridge or placed upon or attached to any window or glass-like surface of the bridge so as to be visible from outside. (b)  The granting of permission to construct any bridge or tunnel across any street or public alley shall be contingent upon the owner or, where applicable, lessor and lessee of the property or structures between which the bridge or tunnel is to be constructed entering into an agreement with the city, which shall be executed by all the parties prior to the issuance of any building permit therefore and the covenants of which shall include, at a minimum, the following: (1)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall remove the bridge or tunnel within 90 days after the commissioner of public works directs the bridge or tunnel to be removed without cost to the city, following the commissioner's determination that such removal is required for the safe and efficient use by the public of the right-of-way for transportation purposes. (2)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall furnish and maintain a bond, at no expense to the city, with a corporate surety satisfactory to the city, to guarantee the performance of the principal in removing the bridge or tunnel as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section. (3)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall pay to the city a monthly rental for the air space or subsurface space occupied by the bridge or tunnel, as follows: a.  The monthly rental rate for all bridges or tunnels used for pedestrian transportation or utility purposes only shall be the fair market value of each such bridge or tunnel as determined by a certified general real estate appraiser selected by the chief procurement officer. A fee to cover the cost of such appraisal shall be paid by the owner, lessor or lessee. The appraisal shall be submitted to and shall be reviewed and approved by the city utilities committee before submission to the council. The monthly rate as determined by the appraiser shall be for an initial period of ten years from the execution date of the agreement and shall be subject to re-appraisal every ten years b.  To the extent currently authorized by other applicable sections of this Code, the monthly rental rate for each bridge or tunnel used for the sale of merchandise and mercantile displays, shall be the fair market value of the space occupied by such bridge or tunnel, which rate shall be determined by a certified general real estate appraiser selected by the chief procurement officer. A fee to cover the cost of such appraisal shall be paid by the owner, lessor, or lessee. The appraisal shall be submitted to and shall be reviewed and approved by the city utilities committee before submission to the council. The monthly rate as determined by the appraiser shall be for an initial period of ten years from the execution date of the agreement and shall be subject to re-appraisal every ten years. c.  Reserved. (4)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall hold the city harmless from any and all claims arising out of the construction, operation, use, maintenance or removal of the bridge or tunnel and shall furnish and maintain a policy of public liability insurance satisfactory to the city, naming the city as a named insured, in an amount approved by the city's risk manager, and the agreement to hold the city harmless shall not be limited to the amount of such insurance. (5)  The obligation to hold the city harmless against all claims arising out of the construction, maintenance, use or removal of the bridge or tunnel shall not be waived by the city's having approved the plans and specifications for the bridge or tunnel or by the city's requiring or not requiring modifications to the bridge or tunnel or by the city's requiring or not requiring maintenance of the bridge or tunnel, even though the city may be found to have been negligent as a matter of law because of its action or failure to act in regard thereto. (6)  All parties required for the execution of such agreement shall be signatories thereto, as evidenced by a title certificate of an attorney licensed to practice law within this state, which title certificate sets forth the name and address of the owner of the property or structures to be connected by the bridge or tunnel and the names and addresses of the lessors and lessees of the property or structures, together with sufficient information as to the terms of any leases of the property or structures, and the corporate names of any parties. (7)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall determine the location of all public utilities and all utilities of the city in the area where the tunnel or bridge is to be constructed and shall make arrangements for the removal or relocation of those utilities, if necessary, all at such person's own expense and at no expense to the city. (c)  This section shall apply to all rentals of air space or subsurface space above or below the public right-of-way for bridges and tunnels and supersede the procurement and real estate code in chapter 2, article X to the extent of any conflict. (Code 1977, § 9-3008; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2008-18(06-O-1947), §§ 1—3, 3-25-08) 
Sec. 138-26. - Erection of balconies over sidewalks. (a)  It shall be unlawful to attach a balcony or erect other structures to a building so as to extend over any portion of a public sidewalk, except upon the authorization of the commissioner of public works and upon compliance with all applicable sections of this Code or other ordinances of the city, including this section. (b)  Balconies shall be designed by an architect or an engineer licensed to practice in the state and the plans and specifications for balconies presented to the city for approval shall bear the official registration seal of the architect or engineer. The plans and specifications shall be submitted to and approved by the urban design commission and the director, bureau of buildings before the commissioner of public works authorizes the balconies. (c)  The granting of permission to construct these balconies so as to extend over the public sidewalks shall be contingent upon the owner, lessor or lessee of the building onto which the balconies are constructed, the owner of the land upon which the building is erected and all creditors secured by all or a part of the land or building entering into an agreement with the city which shall include but not be limited to agreements by the owner or lessee of the building to which the balconies are attached to: (1)  Construct and maintain the balconies so as to prevent any portion thereof from becoming detached and falling to the street or sidewalk below; (2)  Remove any or all of the balconies without cost to the city within a 90-day period after the council directs such removal by mailing a notice to remove the balconies to the owner, or lessee at an address set forth in the agreement; (3)  Furnish and maintain a bond, at no expense to the city, with a corporate surety satisfactory to the city, to guarantee the performance of the principal in removing the balconies as provided for in subsection (c)(2) of this section; (4)  Indemnify and hold the city, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all claims arising out of the construction, maintenance, use of or removal of any and all of the balconies, including claims arising out of persons falling or jumping from the balconies or arising out of objects being dropped or thrown from the balconies; (5)  Furnish a policy of public liability insurance and property damage insurance satisfactory to the city and naming the city as a named insured or an additional named insured, in an amount approved by the, city's risk manager, which protects the city and its officers, agents and employees from claims arising out of the construction, maintenance, use of or removal of the balconies, including claims arising out of any person falling or jumping from any such balcony or throwing or dropping any object from a balcony; (6)  Provide insurance covering the agreement to indemnify and hold the city and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all claims arising out of construction, maintenance, use of or removal of any or all of the balconies, including claims arising out of persons falling or jumping from the balconies or similar structures or arising out of objects being thrown or dropped from the balconies, with a further agreement that the obligation to indemnify and hold the city and its officers, agents and employees harmless shall not be limited to the amount of the public liability and property damage insurance naming the city as a named insured or an additional named insured; and (7)  Pay to the city a monthly rental for the air space occupied by the balconies extending over a sidewalk of the city or a portion thereof at a rate per square foot, as determined by the commissioner of public works. (d)  Each request for permission to erect those balconies shall be accompanied by a title certificate of an attorney authorized to practice law in the state setting forth the names and the addresses of the owner and lessee of the building and the land on which it is erected, the names and addresses of any creditors who are secured by all or any part of the land or building involved, together with sufficient information as to the terms of any leases on the land or building, the corporate names of any of the parties sufficient to accurately disclose the names of any of the parties required in the agreement between the city and the parties desiring to construct the balconies, which agreement shall be executed by all the parties desiring to construct the balconies, which agreement shall be executed by all the parties prior to the issuance of any building permit for the construction of the balconies or similar structures. The agreement shall be binding on all the parties, their heirs, administrators, assigns and successors in title, and upon the execution of the agreement it shall be filed in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County. (Code 1977, § 9-3009; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2008-18(06-O-1947), § 4, 3-25-08) 
DIVISION 2. - UTILITIES 
Sec. 138-27. - Franchise utilities.     Nothing contained in this article or any other section of this Code or other ordinances, resolutions or acts of the council in relation to the construction, operation, or maintenance of any public or private utility and transmission and distribution facilities shall be construed to mean that the city holds itself in any manner responsible or liable for damages to persons or property caused by such, and the city disclaims any liability whatsoever in the premises. (Code 1977, § 9-3125; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Secs. 138-28—138-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POLES, CONDUITS, WIRES AND OTHER FACILITIES 
Sec. 138-40. - Poles. (a)  Granting of permits to erect poles and facilities conditioned on right to grant use to others. (1)  In granting permits to erect poles and transmission and distribution facilities for purposes of electric light or power or for the use of telephone, telegraph or other wires, the council reserves the right, if the interest of the city so requires, to encourage other persons to use the same poles and transmission and distribution facilities for similar purposes, upon the payment to the owner thereof of a proper compensation to be determined by agreement. All permits shall be subject to this condition and in accepting a permit the applicant binds the applicant according thereto. (2)  To the extent permitted by law, permits for newly issued franchises may be conditioned upon the placement of transmission and distribution facilities underground. (3)  To the extent practicable, persons shall locate all above ground facilities in such a manner as to minimize disruption to the access of private property and pedestrian traffic. (b)  Duty to reset or remove poles to facilitate street improvements. (1)  It shall be the duty of any street railway or electric light or power, CATV, telephone or telegraph company authorized to set poles for the stringing of wires thereon, within 30 days upon notice from the commissioner of public works, to remove or reset any poles belonging to that company, when the removal or resetting of poles is necessary in the judgment of the commissioner to facilitate the improvement of any public right-of-way or in order to protect public health, safety and welfare. In such instances, the expense of the removal shall be borne by the owners of the poles. The commissioner of public works may also request that the owner of poles reset poles for the convenience of a lot, but the owner of such poles shall have no obligation to reset such poles unless the lot owner agrees to reimburse the owner of such poles for the costs of resetting the poles. Relocation requirements are located in section 138-23. (2)  Mandate to place facilities underground. The city may designate geographical areas in which facilities are preferred to be placed underground; provided however, that franchisees are not required to place transmission and distribution facilities underground when aerial facilities exist and that where existing aerial facilities are being retired and removed from service, replacement will be made using underground construction if technically practical and economically feasible and subject to applicable state and federal law. (c)  Restoration of streets and sidewalks after setting or removing poles. All surplus dirt remaining after setting telegraph, telephone, electric light and other poles on a street or sidewalk shall be removed by the company placing the poles. When any poles are removed, the street or sidewalk shall be repaired and left in a condition satisfactory to the commissioner of public works. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-82, § 2, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 2003-72, § 2, 6-8-03) 
Sec. 138-41. - Conduits. (a)  Application of section. This section shall apply to all persons installing conduits under any ordinance or resolution of the council. However, this section shall not apply to any person having a specific contract or agreement with the city with reference to the manner in which conduits or subways maintained by that person within the city may be used by any other person, if the provisions of the contract or agreement are different from or contradictory to this section. (b)  Restrictions upon installation. All grants or permissions given by the council by ordinance or resolution to any person to install multi-duct conduits of any kind in or upon the streets and public places of the city, for the purpose of having wires or other appliances, such as cables and the like, placed or strung therein to convey electric current, gas or steam to supply electric light, electric power or heat or for the use of telephones, telegraphs or television shall be subject to the right of the council to grant similar privileges and permits to other persons to use the same conduits for similar purposes, provided such additional use is practicable and capacity is available as determined in the discretion of the owner which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Persons using such conduits shall pay a reasonable value, as determined by agreement, to the owner. Such value shall be determined by agreement or condemnation subsequent to the grants or permits made by the council to the second applicant. All grants, permits and privileges made by the council for any of the purposes named in this section shall be subject to all the conditions of this section, and the applicant therefore binds the applicant thereto by accepting any of the grants or privileges. (Code 1977, § 9-3123; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-42. - Location of certain electrical wires. (a)  Overhead electrical wires installed within the public right-of-way which carry 2,000 volts or more and are located less than ten feet, measured horizontally, from any wire or structure owned by another person shall be at least five feet above such wire or structure. (b)  New installations of electrical wires that carry 2,000 volts or less shall be located underground. (Code 1977, § 9-3126; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
DIVISION 4. - BUS SHELTERS 
Sec. 138-43. - Bus shelters. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: (1)  "Bus shelter" means a shelter or bench located at a bus stop for the convenience of passengers of public transportation systems owned and operated by governmental units or public authorities. (2)  "Commercial advertisement" means a printed or painted sign encouraging or promoting the purchase or use of goods, services or events and includes public service announcements and art displays, but does not include campaign posters, signs or advertisements prohibited by O.C.G.A. §§ 32-6-51 and 21-1-1. (b)  Restrictions; permit required. It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain a bus shelter located within the city except by issuance of a permit by the commissioner of public works. No bus shelter shall be erected, located or maintained except in accordance with this chapter. No bus shelter shall be permitted within the sight distance triangle of another street as defined in this section. Any violator of this section shall be held accountable as provided for in the penalty section of this chapter. Any violator of this section shall also be subject to an order by the commissioner of public works to remove any bus shelter found to be in violation of this section. Failure of the owner of the bus shelter to remove the bus shelter within 30 days of being issued a written order of removal by the commissioner of public works shall authorize the commissioner of public works to remove the bus shelter, at the expense of the owner of the bus shelter. Applications for permits shall be in the form and shall contain such information as shall be required by the commissioner of public works. All bus shelters shall be erected and maintained by the permit holder in conformity with the city's zoning ordinance, and this section shall be in addition to and shall in no way modify or replace the city's zoning ordinance and all permits required therein. Only governmental units or public authorities which own and operate public transportation systems within the city or their approved designees shall be permitted to erect or maintain bus shelters. All applicants for bus shelters permits shall comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51 imposed by the state, shall obtain any other permit required by any other political jurisdiction and shall abide by all applicable state and federal regulations. (c)  Agreement for use of public right-of-way. Permits for bus shelters erected or maintained on the right-of-way of a public road or street shall only be issued upon a written agreement being entered into by the city and the respective public authority or governmental unit owning and operating the public transportation system. No permit for any bus shelter in the public right-of-way shall be authorized or issued unless the property immediately adjacent to such shelter is zoned to the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, I-1, I-2, SPI-1, SPI-2, SPI-3, or SPI-4 zoning district pursuant to part 16 of this Code. (d)  Authorization for use of other property. All permits issued for bus shelters erected or maintained on property other than on the right-of-way of public roads or streets shall be issued only upon the governmental unit or public authority owning and operating the public transportation system first obtaining authorization of the owner of property on which the bus shelter is to be erected and providing proof thereof at the time of filing an application for the permit. No permit for any bus shelter or property other than such right-of-way shall be authorized or issued unless the property upon which such shelter is to be located is zoned to the I-1 or I-2 zoning district pursuant to part 16 of this Code. (e)  Limitation on number. There shall be a limit of 300 total bus shelters on the right-of-way of public roads or streets or on other property within the city. There shall be no more than 300 bus shelter permits issued by the commissioner of public works. Permit numbers shall be affixed to the permit in the upper right hand corner of the shelter. Permits are not transferable. (f)  Design plans; location. Before a bus shelter is permitted to be erected, the applicant must submit design plans, which should be accompanied by photographs and any other supporting documents, to the commissioner of public works for approval. If an applicant proposes that a bus shelter contain illumination, the applicant must submit illumination plans at the time the application is made. It shall be unlawful for a bus shelter to contain illumination except pursuant to a permit issued by the commissioner of public works authorizing illumination. All permits authorizing the erection or the illumination of a bus shelter are subject to the final inspection and approval of the commissioner of public works before the bus shelter may be used to serve bus passengers. All permit requests shall be reviewed by the urban design commission as is required by chapter 90, article II, division 2 of this Code. The commissioner of public works shall not issue a permit until the permit application has been reviewed by the urban design commission pursuant to chapter 90, article II, division 2 of this Code. Each application must be approved by the commissioner of public works as to location and design and a permit issued before a bus shelter is erected. The criteria for evaluating the bus shelter design shall be the design compatibility with the site proposed, and the factors to be considered in making the determination shall be the aesthetics, size, scale, massing, detailing and materials of the proposed bus shelter. Additionally, the applicant must receive the approval of the commissioner of public works regarding the location of each and every proposed bus shelter before it is erected. The criteria for evaluating bus shelter locations shall be whether the bus shelter is compatible with the site selected, whether the proposed setback for the bus shelter would allow for the proper flow of pedestrian traffic and whether public transit usage levels justify the erection of a bus shelter at a particular location. All bus shelters shall be erected in accordance with the location and design approved and permitted by the commissioner of public works. All shelters serving bus passengers shall be handicap accessible and provide handicap access to and from the bus to the shelter. (g)  Setbacks. Where a curb and gutter are present, there shall be a minimum of five feet of clearance from the face of the curb to any portion of the bus shelter. Where no curb or gutter is present, the front of the bus shelter shall be at least ten feet from the edge of the main-traveled roadway. In special public interest (SPI) districts 1, 2, 3 and 4, the minimum amount of unobstructed pedestrian space shall be as set forth in the pedestrian space plan in chapters 18A-18D of part 16 of this Code. (h)  Maintenance. All governmental units and public authorities permitted to erect and maintain bus shelters or their designated agents shall be responsible for maintaining the bus shelters in a safe, clean and complete condition and in good order and repair at all times. A notice shall be placed on all bus shelters listing the name, address and telephone number of the person designated by the bus shelter permit holder who is responsible for the maintenance of the bus shelters and for fielding complaints by the public. The permit holder or designee shall maintain a log of each and every complaint made regarding the bus shelters and corrective action taken, which shall be available during normal business hours for inspection by the department of public works. The bus shelters shall be subject to inspection by the department of public works at all times, which may issue citations for maintenance violations. All maintenance violations shall be corrected within 48 hours upon the permit holder's being provided notice by the commissioner of public works of a violation. (i)  Commercial advertisements. Commercial advertisements are permitted on shelters serving bus passengers only in those zoning districts specified in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. It shall be unlawful to place commercial advertisements on any shelter serving bus passengers within 100 feet of any designated landmark district, historic district, conservation district, landmark building or site; historic building or site; and 50 feet of any park. In addition, such commercial advertisements are prohibited within any landmark district, historic district, conservation district or park. However, bus shelters containing advertising shall be permitted on the public right-of-way in otherwise prohibited areas when at least one adult from 70 percent of residences within 500 feet in either direction on the street of the proposed bus shelter location signs a petition requesting a bus shelter be permitted. It shall be unlawful to place commercial advertisements on a bus passenger bench, whether inside or outside a shelter. One double-faced commercial advertisement, not to exceed 24-square feet in sign area, may be attached to a shelter for bus passengers; provided however, such commercial advertisements must be placed at the end of the shelter furthest from the approaching traffic flow on the side of the street on which the shelter is located and may not be placed on the back or any other portion of the shelter. Such commercial advertisement shall not extend beyond the limits of the shelter. Placement of such commercial advertisement on the top of any shelter serving bus passengers is specifically prohibited and a violation of the City Code. Double-faced commercial advertisements are defined and measured as set out in chapter 28A of part 16 of this Code. (j)  Nonconformities. Any legal bus shelter in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives which does not comply with this section shall be removed by the permit holder or owner after a period of ten years commencing with the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives. Any such nonconforming bus shelter which shall cease being used for a continuous period of one year shall be removed after such period of nonuse. However, no commercial advertisement which was not permitted prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be permitted on any shelter serving bus passengers unless the shelter is in conformity with this section. (k)  Indemnification. All permit holders for bus shelters located within the city shall at all times assume all risks for the bus shelters and shall indemnify and hold harmless the city against all losses or damages resulting from or alleged to have resulted from the existence, maintenance or any other aspect of the bus shelters. (Code 1977, §§ 9-3020, 9-3021; Ord. No. 1995-76, § 1, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
DIVISION 5. - VENDING DEVICES AND TELEPHONES[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Identification of coin-operated vending machines or amusement devices, § 30-1; vending on public property, § 30-1401 et seq. 
Sec. 138-44. - Definitions. (a)  The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: (1)  "Downtown improvement district" means that certain area of downtown Atlanta designated as a community improvement district pursuant to Resolution 95-R-1374 passed by the city council. (2)  "Equivalent publication vending device" means any publication vending device which is of the same size, material, dimensions, and style of the specified publication vending device and which is approved by the commissioner of the department of public works. (3)  "Olympic corridors" means Peachtree Street from Memorial Drive to Third Street; Auburn Avenue; Capitol Avenue from Decatur Street to Little Street; International Boulevard; North Avenue from Techwood Drive to Peachtree Street; Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard from Lee Street to Capitol Avenue; Georgia Avenue from Capitol Avenue to Grant Terrace; Tenth Street from Fowler Street to Peachtree Street; Marietta Street from International Boulevard to Peachtree Street; Pine Street from West Peachtree Street to Peachtree Street; Currier Street from Courtland Street to Piedmont Avenue; the Atlanta University Center/Westside Pedestrian Corridor System; and extending 30 feet in either direction on all cross streets intersecting the foregoing streets. A map indicating the boundaries of the Olympic Corridors shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the municipal clerk. (4)  "Publication" means newspapers; news-related, non-news-related, and commercial periodicals; or published materials of any nature. (5)  "Publication vending device" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display, distribution, or sale of publications. (6)  "Public sidewalk" means that portion of the public right-of-way designed or ordinarily used for pedestrian travel. (7)  "Public street" means that portion of the public right-of-way designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. (Ord. No. 1996-07, § 1, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 138-45. - Enforcement, violations and penalties.     It shall be the duty of the commissioner of public works to enforce this article. Any person violating any section of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 138-4. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. (Code 1977, § 14-11011; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-46. - Permit. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, locate, operate or maintain any publication vending device in or on any part of the public sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the commissioner of public works. (b)  No fee shall be required for the issuance of a publication vending device permit. (c)  Applications for all permits for the placement and maintenance of publication vending devices must contain the following: (1)  The applicant's name and address at which any notices required by this article shall be deemed received when placed on an envelope and deposited in the United States mail with adequate postage affixed. (2)  The telephone number of the applicant at which notice of any repairs deemed necessary to permitted publication vending devices are appropriately received. (3)  The total number of and exact location of each publication vending device to be permitted. (4)  An agreement of indemnification, as required by this article. (5)  A certification that the applicant has reviewed, understands, and will comply with all requirements of this article. (6)  An agreement by the applicant promptly to inform the director in writing of any changes in the applicant's name, address or telephone number, and that failure to do so shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. (d)  Applications for all permits for the placement and maintenance of publication vending devices shall be reviewed, and if in compliance with all requirements of this article, shall be approved by the commissioner of public works within 30 days of receipt of such applications. Only one permit shall be required for the placement of any number of publication vending devices, provided that the application clearly states the location of each. (e)  If at any time the commissioner of public works determines to deny an application for a permit, or determines that a publication vending device for which a permit has been issued does not comply with any requirement of this article, the commissioner shall issue a written notice of intent to deny, or intent to revoke, the applicable permit to the applicant or permittee. The notice shall state specifically the reason for the denial or revocation of the permit, and shall offer the applicant or permittee an opportunity for a hearing before the commissioner of public works or his or her designee, on such denial or revocation not less than ten days following the issuance of such notice. The applicant or permittee may file a written response to the notice prior to such hearing setting forth the reason the permit should issue or should not be revoked. In the alternative, the applicant or permittee shall submit sufficient evidence that any application deficiency or violation has been corrected. If the commissioner of public works or his or her designee determines, following a hearing, that the denial was proper, or that the violation as charged is true and accurate, and that the applicant or permittee has not caused the application or violation to be corrected, or if the applicant or permittee fails to appear at the hearing and can present no justifiable excuse for the nonappearance, a final notice of denial or revocation shall issue. If sufficient evidence is submitted that the applicant or permittee is in compliance with the requirements of this article, the commissioner shall issue the requested permit, or withdraw the notice of violation. (f)  Nothing in this section will prohibit the owner or lessee of property abutting a city sidewalk upon which is placed publication vending devices that have not been permitted by the city from, after due diligence and inquiry to the city to determine that a permit has not been issued, removing any such illegal publication vending devices. The decision to remove any publication vending device by such an abutting property owner or lessee is at its own risk and the city will incur no liability to the abutting property owner or lessee or the owner or lessee of the publication vending device removed. (Code 1977, § 14-11010; Ord. No. 1996-07, § 3, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 1996-47, § 1, 7-8-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2002-73, § 1, 10-15-02) Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2002-73 states that the city further imposes a moratorium on any further permitting or placement of publication vending devices on any city sidewalk for a period of 180 days, to commence on the date this section is approved by the city's mayor. [October 15, 2002] 
Sec. 138-47. - Hold-harmless agreement.     Every person who installs, places or maintains a publication vending device on a public sidewalk in the city shall file a written statement with the municipal clerk satisfactory to the city attorney whereby the person agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, directors and employees from any loss of liability or damage, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, placement or maintenance of a publication vending device within the city. (Code 1977, § 14-11009; Ord. No. 1996-07, § 3, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-48. - Projection onto public streets.     It shall be unlawful for any person to install, place or maintain any publication vending device which projects onto, into or over any part of a public street or which rests wholly or in part upon, along or over any portion of any public street. (Code 1977, § 14-11002; Ord. No. 1996-07, § 3, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-49. - Dangerous condition or obstruction.     It shall be unlawful for any person to install, place or maintain any publication vending device which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public street or any public sidewalk when such installation, placement or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property or when the site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use or when such publication vending device unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress or egress of any residence or place of business, the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near the location. (Code 1977, § 14-11003; Ord. No. 1996-07, § 3, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-50. - Identification.     Every person who installs, places or maintains a publication vending device on a public sidewalk of the city shall have affixed thereto, in a place easily seen, the name, address and telephone number of such person. (Code 1977, § 14-11004; Ord. No. 1996-07, § 3, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-51. - Standards for installation and maintenance of publication vending devices in designated areas. (a)  Publication vending devices shall be installed and maintained as mandated for the district in which they are located, as set forth below: (1)  Olympic corridors, downtown improvement district, and the government district of Downtown Atlanta. In the Olympic corridors, downtown improvement district, the government district of Downtown Atlanta, and all publication vending devices shall be uniform and standardized as outlined below. a.  The color of publication vending devices shall be CODA Green (Pantone color 5467C). The publication's name shall be permitted to be displayed on the front of the publication vending device directly below the publication display window in letters a maximum of two inches high. The publication's name shall also be permitted to be displayed one time on the back of the publication vending device, centered, exactly four inches from the top edge of the publication vending device, with letters a maximum of two inches high. A service telephone number for the reporting of publication vending device malfunctions may be displayed directly below the publication's name on the front (the side which contains the display window) of the publication vending device in letters a maximum of one and one-half inches high. This service telephone number may also be displayed, instead of the publication's name, one time on the back of the publication vending device, centered, exactly four inches from the top edge of the publication vending device, with numbers a maximum of two inches high. No other logo, advertising, or lettering shall be permitted on publication vending devices. Face plates for coin boxes may be customized to contain a publication's name or logo. Free publications or other publications whose vending device does not require a coin box may also customize the face plate where a coin box would otherwise be located. Card holders may be permitted to be displayed on publication vending devices provided that card holders contain logos, lettering or advertising for that publication only. Card holders shall not exceed 11 inches by 17 inches and shall be placed in the space provided directly below the front display window. b.  Publication vending devices shall be standard Sho-Rack galvanized material model 100, or equivalent publication vending device, as defined in section 138-156. c.  Publication vending devices shall weigh a minimum of 75 pounds and may be fastened to one another in such a manner that they cannot be easily moved or toppled or otherwise pushed or thrown into a right-of-way or street. d.  Publication vending devices shall not be fastened to the sidewalk without prior approval from the commissioner of the department of public works. e.  Publication vending devices shall abut one another and shall be located so as to abut one another beginning at a location not less than 30 feet from the intersection point of the projected curblines of any intersection. No group of publication vending devices may extend for more than 13 feet. There shall be a space of 50 feet between groups of publication vending devices. f.  Publication vending devices shall not be located: 1.  Within five feet from the nearest outer edge of any crosswalk; 2.  Within 20 feet from any fire hydrant, fire call box, or police call box; 3.  Within five feet from the nearest outer edge of any driveway; 4.  Within two feet of signs, parking meters, streetlights, or utility poles; or 5.  Within 15 feet of any designated bus stop sign or post. 6.  In such a manner that hinders egress to parked vehicles in marked parking stalls; 7.  In such a manner that impairs bus, taxicab, truck or passenger loading zones; or 8.  In a manner that blocks historic markers, benches, or other public improvements. g.  Publication vending devices shall be placed within the street furniture zone as described by the pedestrian space plan (sheets 137 and 138 of the city official zoning map) no closer than 18 inches from the back of the nearest curb of the road and shall be positioned to provide for a minimum of nine feet of unobstructed sidewalk so as not to impede reasonable pedestrian traffic on sidewalks. Publication vending devices shall not be permitted on sidewalks with a width, which is less than 12 feet. (2)  All other locations. Publication vending devices within the city that are not within the Olympic corridors, downtown improvement district, or the government district of Downtown Atlanta shall not be subject to the regulations imposed on publication vending devices as set forth in subparagraph (1), but shall comply with the following: a.  Publication vending devices shall not be located: 1.  Within five feet from the nearest outer edge of any crosswalk; 2.  Within 20 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box or police call box. 3.  Within five feet from the nearest outer edge of any driveway. 4.  In such a manner that impairs bus, taxicab, truck or passenger loading zones; 5.  Within 15 feet of any designated bus stop sign or post; 6.  Within 50 feet of any other publication vending device on the same side of the street containing the same edition of the same publication; and 7.  At any location whereby the area of unobstructed public sidewalk for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet. (b)  No single publication vending device shall exceed five feet in height, 30 inches in width or two feet in thickness. (c)  No vending device shall be chained to any property not owned by the owner of the publication vending device or to any permanently fixed object; however, publication vending devices, when placed side by side, may be chained or otherwise attached to one another. (d)  Publication vending devices may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of publication vending devices shall extend more than six feet along a curb or wall. (Ord. No. 1996-07, § 2, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 1996-21, §§ 1, 2, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2017-15(17-O-1153) , § 1, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 138-52. - Maintenance; advertising prohibited. (a)  Each publication vending device shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a publication vending device for advertising or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the publications sold therein. (Ord. No. 1996-07, § 2, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-53. - Abandonment.     Any publication vending device placed upon the public right-of-way which appears to have been in disuse by the permittee for that location for at least 45 days shall be considered abandoned, and to constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement procedures as provided for in this Code of Ordinances. (Ord. No. 1996-07, § 2, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 1996-47, § 2, 7-8-96) 
Secs. 138-54—138-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FLAGS, BANNERS, SIGNS, DISPLAYS 
Sec. 138-60. - Flags, banners, signs, displays. (a)  Permit required. No person shall attach any flag, banner, bunting, sign, display or other form of decoration to any light pole or other standard erected in any right-of-way along any street, whether the pole or standard is the property of the city or of a person, unless a permit to attach the flags, banners, bunting, signs, displays or other forms of decorations to the pole or other standard shall have been issued by the commissioner of public works under the following conditions: (1)  No flag, banner, bunting, sign, display or other form of decoration shall be permitted which contains any advertising or any reference to any organization organized or operated for profit or which contains advertisement of any event or occurrence to take place under the sponsorship or for the benefit of any person operating for profit. However, for permitted festivals and centennial celebrations of local companies or corporations, the commissioner of public works may issue a permit allowing a limited form of advertising, if the following conditions or others determined by the commissioner of public works are met: a.  The actual surface area of the flag, banner, bunting, hanging sign, display or other form of decoration does not extend more than three feet horizontally and four feet vertically, such dimensions resulting in an area no greater than 12 square feet, with the exception of those poles designated specifically for the purpose of accommodating flags, banners, buntings, hanging signs, displays, the dimensions of which shall not exceed eight feet horizontally and eight feet vertically, such dimensions resulting in an area no greater than 24 square feet total; b.  The form of advertising shall be the corporate logo or trademark of the for-profit sponsoring organization; c.  The corporate logo or trademark shall not exceed one-tenth of the total surface area on either side; d.  Only one corporate logo or trademark shall be allowed per street decoration; and e.  All provisions of this section are strictly adhered to. The approved size of the flag, banner, bunting, hanging sign or other display shall be in the discretion of the commissioner of public works, considering the areas to be decorated, structures upon which such decorations are to be installed, length of street right-of-way involved and the impact on adjacent structures, properties and activities. The determination of the commissioner of public works with respect to approving applications and permitting the hanging of flags, banners, buntings, signs, displays or other forms of street decorations shall be final. (2)  No flag, banner, bunting, sign or display or other form of decoration shall be permitted which, in the opinion of the fire chief, would create a fire hazard. No permit shall be issued under this section by the commissioner of public works until the materials to be used in such decorations have been approved in writing by the fire chief. (3)  No permit shall be issued by the commissioner of public works for any flag, banner, bunting, sign, display or other form of decoration to be attached to any poles or standards in any right-of-way area, which poles or standards belong to any person, other than the city, unless permission in writing from the owners of the poles or standards to attach the decorations is submitted to the commissioner of public works with the application for the permit. (4)  The permit under this section which will allow flags, banners, buntings, signs, displays or other forms of decoration to be placed within the rights-of-way should be for a duration of no more than 30 days except by authorization from the commissioner of public works. (5)  The permit for banners, buntings, signs, displays or other forms of decoration should be limited to 100 except by authorization from the commissioner of public. The distribution of such decorations along the public right-of-way are subject to the approval of the commissioner of public works and the criteria for approval of the number of such shall include those standards and requirements pertaining to size and format as set forth in this section. (6)  No permit shall be issued by the commissioner of public works until the person requesting the permit agrees in writing to remove all flags, banners, bunting, signs, displays or other forms of decorations, without cost to the city, within five days after the end of the permit period. (7)  With the exception of permit applications filed by or on behalf of the office of cultural affairs for city sponsored annual events, no permit shall be issued by the commissioner of public works until a deposit of $1,000.00 is made by the applicant for the permit to the commissioner of public works. The deposit shall be returned to the applicant if all flags, banners, buntings, signs, displays or other forms of decorations attached to any poles or standards under the permit granted are removed within five days after the end of the permit period. If the flags, banners, buntings, signs, displays or other forms of decorations are not removed within five days, the deposit shall be forfeited as liquidated damages and the commissioner of public works shall remove the flags, banners, buntings, signs, displays or other forms of decorations. If the expense of removal shall exceed the amount of the deposit, the excess over the amount of the deposit shall be collected from the person to which the permit was issued, as provided by law. (8)  With the exception of permit applications filed by or on behalf of the office of cultural affairs for city sponsored annual events the base fee for a permit shall be $100.00 (plus the $1,000.00 refundable deposit per subsection (a)(7) of this section). Additional fees shall be assessed as follows: a.  For-profit organizations: $1.80 per banner for each permitted day. b.  Not-for-profit and charitable organizations: 1.  $0.75 per banner per day for each permitted day in excess of 30 days. 2.  $0.75 per banner per day for each banner in excess of 100. (9)  The commissioner of public works shall approve all brackets, supports or any type of supporting structures for hanging the banners. (10)  The printing process for the banners shall be approved by the special events coordinator of the department of parks and recreation. (11)  The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the city indemnifying and holding the city, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all claims arising out of the placement of, maintenance of, use of or removal of banners, including claims of banners or the structures upon which they are hung falling on people or property. (b)  Hanging across streets. No banners, bunting, signs, displays or other forms of decoration may be constructed to cross any street in the city, and no permit shall be issued therefore. (c)  Use of city personnel or equipment for installation. No city agency may use any city personnel or any city equipment to install or to aid in the installation of any flags, displays or other forms of decoration along the city right-of-way for any private organization. (d)  Certain waivers for sporting events. The commissioner of public works is authorized to waive the requirements of subsections (a)(1), (a)(7) and (b) of this section for applicants sponsoring one-day sporting events when, in the commissioner's judgment, public safety will not be compromised. (Code 1977, § 9-3010; Ord. No. 2000-62, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 2, 5-16-01; Ord. No. 2003-92, § 1, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 8, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2018-67(18-O-1714), §§ 1, 2, 12-12-18 ) Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. Cross reference— Sign regulations generally, § 6-26 et seq. Land Development Code Reference— Supplemental zoning regulations pertaining to signs, § 16-28A.001 et seq. 
DIVISION 7. - DUMPSTERS 
Sec. 138-61. - Dumpsters in the right-of-way. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: (1)  "Dumpster" shall mean any container or storage box used for the storage, collection, or removal of construction debris, demolition debris, or other discarded material but shall not include a refuse compactor or grease container, and shall also not include the refuse containers. (2)  "Applicant" shall mean the person who leases or otherwise causes placement (if a dumpster or container for temporary use at the location requested). (3)  "Provider" shall mean the person who owns a dumpster. (b)  Permit required. It shall be prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain a dumpster in the public right-of-way unless such person shall first obtain a dumpster permit from the department of public works. (c)  Application. An application for a dumpster permit shall be made to the commissioner of public works by the applicant. The application form shall require the applicant to provide the following information: (1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; (2)  The number of dumpster(s) requested to occupy the permitted location; (3)  The street address adjacent to the permitted location; (4)  The intended use of the dumpster(s); and (5)  The intended period of occupancy of the dumpster(s). (d)  Duration and conditions of permit. (1)  Duration of permit. Duration of a dumpster permit shall not be more than six months. An applicant holding a permit and requesting an extension of time shall apply for a new permit according to the provisions of this code section. (2)  Demonstrated need as condition of permit. No dumpster permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall first demonstrate to the commissioner of public works that the dumpster(s) cannot be accommodated on private property. (3)  Indemnification insurance as condition of permit. No dumpster permit shall be issued until the applicant for such permit shall first have presented to the commissioner of public works or his designee evidence of insurance issued to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers and employees from all claims arising out of any injury to persons or damage to property resulting from the placement, presence, use, maintenance or removal of the permitted dumpster on, irk, over or within the public right-of-way. Such insurance shall be furnished by an insurer satisfactory to the city, the amount of the policy being determined by the city's risk manager to be adequate to protect the interests of the public and shall name the City of Atlanta, its officers, employees and agents as additional insured. The insurance shall be maintained in effect at all times that the dumpster remains on the public right-of-way. (4)  Reimbursement of damages to city. The granting of permission to place or maintain a dumpster on, or in, the public right-of-way shall be contingent upon the agreement of the applicant to repair any damage to the public way resulting from the placement, maintenance, use or removal of the dumpster during the times the dumpster remains on the public right-of-way. (5)  Compliance with this chapter. The granting of permission to place or maintain a dumpster on, or in, the public right-of-way shall be contingent upon the agreement of the applicant to comply with all the terms of this chapter and to comply with all other ordinances and regulations of the city. (e)  Permit fee. The applicant for a permit issued by the department of public works for dumpster placement shall, upon receipt of such permit, pay to the city a permit fee as provided in this section. (1)  There shall be a $20.00 fixed fee for all permits issued as provided in this section, unless otherwise provided herein. (2)  A permit cost for use of up to 100 linear feet of any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $10.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. (3)  A permit cost for use of 101 to 200 linear feet of any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $15.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. (4)  A permit cost for use of 201 to 300 linear feet of any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $20.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. (5)  A permit cost for use of over 300 linear feet of any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $25.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. (6)  An additional fee to recover the cost of the blocked parking meters, or to recover the cost of the issuance of emergency no parking signs or other materials related to traffic control measures may be added to the cost of the permit, where applicable. (f)  Dumpster identification. The commissioner of public works is authorized to establish and publish a list of conditions and requirements for the placement, maintenance, use or removal of any dumpster in the public way in a manner not inconsistent with this chapter. Said conditions shall contain, but not be limited to, the requirement that the provider clearly identify all dumpsters in the public right-of-way in the following manner: (1)  Clear identification of the name and telephone number of the provider, visibly displayed in a conspicuous manner, according to standards established and published by the commissioner of the department of public works. (2)  The requirement to affix and maintain, on each of the four corners of the dumpster high-intensity retro-reflective sheeting, or other retro-reflective or prismatic material or substance according to standards established and published by the commissioner of the department of public works. (g)  Location. No dumpster shall be permitted for a location that is: (1)  Within 40 feet of any bus stop. (2)  Within 20 feet of any parking space designated for persons with disabilities. (3)  Within 20 feet of any pedestrian crosswalk. (4)  Within 30 feet of any intersection. (5)  Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. (6)  On any sidewalk, unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works or his designee that an alternative location is not feasible and that placement of the dumpster(s) on such sidewalk would not create a safety hazard, disrupt pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or damage public or private property. (h)  Placement, appearance and maintenance of dumpster. (1)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to place the dumpster immediately adjacent to the property identified by the street address stated on the permit application. (2)  It shall be the responsibility of the provider to make certain that the dumpster remains free of graffiti (as defined at section 106-801 of this Code) at all times. (3)  It shall be the responsibility of the provider when transporting or otherwise moving a dumpster, to ensure that no portion of the load is falling, shifting, blowing, dropping or in any way escaping from the dumpster. The provider shall use a tarpaulin or other appropriate cover to secure the top of a dumpster while in transit. (i)  Violations. (1)  Violations of the conditions stated in the permit required by this section, or failure to obtain or maintain a valid permit shall constitute an offense and shall be punishable as provided under in the penalty section of this chapter. (2)  Any dumpster in the public right-of-way not bearing its identification information or reflective material as required by subsection (f) of this section, shall be in violation of the requirements of this section; and (3)  Any dumpster not located immediately adjacent to the street address specified in the permit shall be in violation of this section; and (4)  Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. (j)  Enforcement and penalties. Upon a determination that a person is in violation of this chapter, the commissioner of public works or his designee shall give notice or issue a citation that indicates the person is in violation of a section of this chapter. Should the violation continue for a period of 14 days after the person receives notice, the commissioner or his designee may cite the violator to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this chapter.     Upon a finding that a section of this chapter has been violated, the violator shall be subject to one or more of the following penalties: (1)  The revocation or suspension of a permit issued in accordance with this section. (2)  A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 a day for a violation of this section. (3)  Imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months. (k)  Effective date. This ordinance shall be effective starting on September 1, 2005. (Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 7-26-05; Ord. No. 2008-23(08-O-0555), § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 138-62. - Bike sharing infrastructure. (a)  Purpose and intent. (1)  The public health, safety and welfare will be enhanced by the implementation of a self service bicycle rental program also known as citywide bike share program ("program" or "system") of the type generally set forth in "The Atlanta-Decatur Bike Share Feasibility Study" ("Atlanta-Decatur Study") published in January 2013 by the Atlanta Bicycle Coalition. The program, which will establish bike sharing infrastructure, both in the public right-of-way and on private property in the City of Atlanta ("city"), and which will be fully paid for by one or more vendors ("providers") selected by the city, will accomplish the city's goals of establishing a positive and useful program for the general public while eliminating city costs and expenses if the city were to directly implement the program. (2)  The location of bike share infrastructure on public property is intended to increase utilization of other transit modes by providing a first mile and last mile travel alternative that will increase the range of destinations served. (3)  The bike sharing experience of the general public as set forth in the Atlanta-Decatur Study will be enhanced by the ability of the city to contract with providers to install and manage bike share infrastructure on public property including the public right-of-way for the installation around the city of multiple rental stations ("stations" or "kiosks") that house rental bicycles ("bicycles"). (4)  The system will allow the general public to rent bicycles from stations located around the city, use a bicycle for trips of varying times and durations and return the bicycle to a different station. Such programs provide a convenience for residents, workers and visitors because Bicycles are available on an as-needed basis and are available for one-way trips. The program, made available by the city, can operate on a cooperative basis and link with other programs sponsored by other entities to grow the system quickly and expand the reach of the program beyond the city. (b)  Definitions. The words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The use of capitalized abbreviated reference terms for the definitions contained herein are intended to refer to the terms and phrases from which they were derived. (1)  " Bike Sharing Rental Program " means a system funded, managed and operated by one or more providers under contracts entered into with the city, which provide the public with opportunities to rent bicycles from stations at locations on both private and public property including the public right-of-way. (2)  "Citywide Bike Share System" is an initiative by the city to implement certain of the recommendations of the type generally set forth in the Atlanta-Decatur Study in order to provide a non-traditional transit option to cover the "first and last mile" of a transit trip by encouraging and installing infrastructure that will allow access to rental bicycles and for other purposes. (3)  "Commissioner of planning" means the commissioner of the department of planning and urban development, and/or his or her successor performing the same general duties, or a designee. (4)  "Commissioner of public works" means the commissioner of the department of public works, and/or his or her successor performing the same general duties, or a designee. (5)  "Kiosk" means self service bicycle rental station kiosk which is a structure containing the self service payment device located at a station at which bicycles are rented. (6)  "Provider" means a bicycle rental service provider which is a person or entity with a contract with the city to provide public self service bicycle rental services. When used with respect to interconnectivity, the private self service bicycle rental service as defined in the Zoning Code is included as a "provider" only in the capacity as one whose rental bicycles may be returned to, stored in or rented from stations operated by that person or entity. (7)  "Rental bicycle" or "bicycle" means a self service rental bicycle that is rented from a station that is operated by a private self service bicycle rental service as defined in the Zoning Code. (8)  "Station" means a public self service bicycle rental station which is an automated facility constructed as a part of a bike sharing rental program where bicycles are made available for rental without the requirement that employees or attendants be present to accept rental payments from customers, rent bicycles to customers, or receive bicycles from customers when the bicycles are returned from rental. (9)  "Storage" means self service rental bicycle storage which is a part of a station that is utilized for the storage of rental bicycles available for rental or v being returned after rental at any station, including stations maintained by a private self service bicycle rental service as defined in the Zoning Code; for the servicing of rental bicycles, or for the storage of any other goods or materials, provided that no part of any station may be used for the storage of rental bicycles that are inoperable or which cannot be rented within 24 hours after their return. (c)  Authorization to allow the use of public property and right-of-way for the program. The commissioner of public works is authorized to allow the installation of stations and kiosks on public property including the public right-of-way. Such stations shall only be installed by a provider that has a contract with the city to manage and provide services to the public under the program. In order for the provider to install required infrastructure for operation of the program in the public right-of-way, the provider must enter into an encroachment agreement with the city for the installation of each kiosk and station pursuant to the requirements of Division 1 of Chapter 138 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances in general, and Code section 138-24 in particular. In no instance shall the contract or the authorization granted by this section require the commissioner of public works to allow the installation of kiosks and stations in locations which the commissioner of public works deems unsuitable for the installation of such infrastructure. (d)  Criteria for the location of stations in the public right-of-way. (1)  No station shall interfere with the reasonable visibility needs of drivers on the street where the station is located or any connecting street. (2)  No station shall interfere with the flow of pedestrian traffic taking into consideration the queuing areas for adjacent businesses, the size of the station and the width of the sidewalk. (3)  No station shall be located so as to unreasonably interfere with businesses located on the same block (block faces) as the proposed station location. A notice shall be posted by the provider at the site on the street frontage where the station is to be located which states that the provider has sought permission from the city to install a station at the location. The required encroachment agreement shall not be executed by the city until the provider submits an affidavit that the notice has been posted for ten days. The commissioner of public works shall receive any comments from the public and consider those comments in making a decision as to whether to authorize the station installation. (e)  Installation of infrastructure on private property. (1)  It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain a station on private property except as permitted by the commissioner of planning through an endorsement of a special administrative permit ("SAP") obtained from the office of planning by a provider and issued pursuant to the City of Atlanta's Code of Ordinances Land Development Code at Part 16 of Chapter 25. The endorsement by the commissioner of planning of such SAP shall be the final approval required before a building permit may be sought to construct the station. (2)  All stations to be located on private property shall be erected, operated and maintained by the provider in conformity with the city's zoning ordinance, including without limitation, the requirements as to signage, station size and design, as evidenced by the approval of an SAP by the commissioner of planning. The permit and the review of the criteria required in this section to obtain the endorsement of the SAP by the commissioner of planning shall be in addition to and shall in no way modify or replace the requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and all permits required therein. (3)  Before a permit for a station to be located on private property can be approved, the applicant must submit design plans, to be accompanied by photographs and any other required supporting documents, to the commissioner of planning for approval. The submitted design plans for stations located on private property must also comply with the same restrictions related to the location and placement of the stations installed in the public right-of-way as described immediately above in subsection 138-62 (d). (4)  All SAPs shall be reviewed by the urban design commission as required by Chapter 90, Article II, Division 2 of Part 16. Such review may be undertaken at any time prior to the commissioner of planning's endorsement of the SAP. (f)  Provider assumes risk for installation and operation/management of the stations. All stations located on public property are to be installed and managed by the provider who shall at all times assume all risks for the condition and management of the stations, the use of rental bicycles and any events occurring at the stations. The provider will obtain liability insurance in an amount approved by the city's office of enterprise risk management and under which the city shall be named an additional named insured.     Such insurance requirements shall be set out in the encroachment agreement that must be agreed to and executed by the provider. (g)  Provider responsible for condition of public property. All stations located on public property are installed at the risk of the provider who shall at all times have the obligation to return the public property on which the station is located back to the city in the same condition as when the encroachment agreement was entered into. In this regard, bond requirements as set out in the encroachment agreement must be complied with by the provider. (h)  City held harmless. The provider shall hold the city harmless against all losses or damages resulting from or alleged to have resulted from the installation, and/or existence, and/or maintenance operation or any other aspect of the operation and use of the stations and the bicycles. Such hold harmless agreement as provided for in the encroachment agreement must be agreed to by the provider. (i)  Maintenance. The provider shall be responsible for maintaining the stations in a safe and clean condition. The stations shall be kept in good order and repair at all times. (i)  Failure of compliance. The provider shall be notified by the commissioner of public works when a station is no longer in compliance with city code requirements and/or the provisions of the encroachment agreement and the actions that must be taken to bring the station into compliance. In addition to any contractual remedies, the commissioner of public works may order removal of a station that cannot be brought into compliance by issuing a written order of removal to be sent by certified mail. Failure of the provider to remove the station within 30 days of being issued a written order of removal by the commissioner of public works shall allow for the removal of the station at the cost of the provider. ( Ord. No. 2014-35(14-O-1325), § 1, 7-30-14 ) 
Secs. 138-63, 138-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION OR EXCAVATION IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, adopted March 14, 2001, amended article III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to improvements as they relate to streets, sidewalks and other public places. See the Code Comparative Table. To the extent permitted by law, the city may determine to apply all or certain provisions of this ordinance [Ord. No. 2001-22] to agreements, franchises, and licenses existing on the effective date of this ordinance [March 5, 2001]. This ordinance shall apply to all telecommunications providers, persons seeking to use the streets in the manner described in section 138-127 herein, and franchisees, permittees, and licensees after its adoption. 
Sec. 138-65. - Permits for construction or excavation. (a)  Permit required. Any person desiring to conduct construction activities within the public right-of-way or to have an excavation or opening made within a public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way shall make application for a permit to the commissioner of public works. The commissioner of public works shall have the authority to impose such permit terms and conditions necessary to protect the public health and safety, and the permittee shall comply with all terms and conditions imposed by the commissioner of public works including the right to maintain a register of authorized contractors. Only authorized contractors shall engage in permitted activities in the rights-of-way. Applications for all permits for construction and excavation pursuant to this section shall be reviewed, and if the application is complete and the permittee is in compliance with all requirements of this article, to the extent practicable, the city shall issue a permit within 60 days of receipt of the last application and notice to all parties; provided that all joint application permits for excavation by two or more persons shall be expedited and if in compliance with all requirements of this article shall, if practicable, be approved by the commissioner of public works within 30 days of receipt of such applications. (1)  Scheduled maintenance permits— There shall be a standing permit for the routine maintenance and repair by the franchisees to existing facilities in the public rights-of-way. (2)  Construction permits: a.  Persons desiring to conduct excavation work in the streets or public rights-of-way for the purpose of sewer installation, water line installation, and water meter installation shall apply for a construction permit. Such permits shall be issued for a fee of $85.00 per permit. b.  Persons desiring to conduct excavation work in the streets or public rights-of-way including, but not limited to, any street cuts boring activity and the placement or removal of conduits, manholes, cable, shall apply for a construction permit. Such permits shall be issued for a fee of $200.00 per permit. The permit fees set out above shall include one hour of inspection by a department of public work's inspector upon the completion construction activity. In addition, the city may charge an inspection fee of $50.00 per hour. However, where the Georgia Department of Transportation has primary permitting authority over a particular construction activity, the permittee may show a copy of the GDOT permit upon application for a city permit and the city permit fee and inspection fees shall be waived for that permit. With respect to subsection (2)b. immediately above, to the extent that a person pays or remits payment to the city pursuant to section 138-127(h)(1). Such payment shall be in lieu of permit fees and inspection fees. (3)  Emergency repair permit —Persons conducting excavation work in the public rights-of-way pursuant to an emergency shall comply with the provisions set forth in section 138-74. (b)  Permit maintained on site. The permit granted by the commissioner of public works to conduct construction activities within the public right-of-way, maintenance activities, or to open any street or sidewalk shall be maintained on site and displayed to any official of the department of public works, police, or other city official upon request. A scheduled maintenance permit shall be exhibited for scheduled maintenance. A construction permit shall be exhibited for excavation activities. Emergency repair permits shall be exhibited for emergency repairs. Failure to exhibit the appropriate permit shall not only be a violation of this article but shall also be cause for revocation of the permit by the commissioner of public works. (c)  Working without a permit. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of the City Code to perform any regulated activity within the public right-of-way without complying with the permit requirements of the department of public works in this chapter. Any person deemed guilty of such violation, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished with a fine of $1,000.00. An additional fine of $100.00 per day will be assessed for each day of the violation. (d)  Denial of a permit. The commissioner of public works shall grant no permit where the applicant has failed to comply with the terms of a prior permit. It shall be within the reasonable discretion of the commissioner of public works to decline a permit to any person who shall have failed to carry out any prior order or instruction of the commissioner of public works in connection with the opening of a street or sidewalk at any time. The commissioner of public works may in the commissioner's discretion decline to grant a permit if the commissioner determines that the permit will not be in the public interest. A person may appeal the denial of a permit to the commissioner of public works. The responsibility shall be upon the commissioner of public works to see that no permit is granted to any person to open any street or sidewalk where the results to be accomplished under the permit will unreasonably interfere with the use of the street or sidewalk. Time length for allowing excavations to remain shall be determined by the commissioner of public works. (e)  Signed petition required. The commissioner of public works shall not grant any permit to conduct construction activities within the public right-of-way or for an excavation underneath sidewalks or streets for any purpose, unless the petition for that use in each instance is signed by the owner of the proposed facility, who shall enter into an agreement with the city binding the owner and the owner's successor in title. The owner shall agree to indemnify the city against any and all damages to either persons or property caused by the construction or maintenance of the excavation or opening and agree that the commissioner of public works shall have the right to have said excavations closed and filled at any time the commissioner of public works determines and the owner shall vacate the area beneath the sidewalk when requested to do so by the city without cost to the city. The work in each instance shall be done under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works. Any person violating this section shall be required to close the excavation and remove any obstructions upon the direction of the commissioner of public works. If such notice is not complied with, such encroachment shall be removed by the commissioner of public works at the owner's expense. (f)  Supervision of work. All such openings, except as provided in this subsection, shall be made and refilled and permanent improvements removed shall be replaced by or under the supervision of the commissioner of public works. (g)  Cost of work. The cost of conducting construction activities within the public right-of-way or making and refilling any opening and of replacing any permanent improvement removed shall be paid by the person at whose request such opening is made. If work is performed by the city on behalf of or at the request of an applicant, charges therefore shall be in such amounts as may be fixed by the commissioner of public works, subject to the approval of the council. The commissioner of public works shall likewise in each case estimate the cost of replacing permanent improvements and shall have authority to replace or require the replacement of all of a sidewalk or street when it is necessary to put the sidewalk in as good condition using materials of equal or better quality as before the opening. All such cost, whether computed from a schedule fixed by the commissioner of public works or embodied in an estimate made under this subsection by the commissioner of public works, shall be paid before the work is done by the city or the permit is granted. (h)  Conditions of maintaining a permit. (1)  The commissioner of public works is authorized to establish and publish a list of conditions and requirements for all construction, repair, maintenance, and other activities within the public right-of-way including, among other things, the power to establish reasonable fees and fines not inconsistent with this chapter. Said conditions shall contain, but shall not be limited to, requirements pertaining to: a.  Notice of proposed construction activities and projected impediment to the abutting commercial and residential land five business days prior to construction activity. Notice shall be visibly displayed in a conspicuous manner on the door of the residence or commercial establishment; b.  Traffic protection; c.  Emergencies; d.  Clear identification of all construction and maintenance sites, vehicles, metal plates and other obstacles with the name and phone number of the utility owner and the person performing the work; e.  Construction plans to show length of cut, construction activity to install the equipment, size, type and location of utilities in the rights-of-way and technical specifications for street rehabilitation; f.  Placement of warning signs identifying construction and excavation-site; g.  Replacement of decorative sidewalk style and material; h.  Coordination of excavation and paving activities between and among any persons; i.  Placement and removal of paint markings for utility locations; j.  Bonds, insurance and other financial protection for the city; k.  As-built plans. As-built plans and drawings in a form specified by the department of public works. Plans submitted to the department of public works for permit approval, which have been updated and certified to reflect actual construction and field changes, shall satisfy this section. Permittee shall not be required to supply privileged information. Any such plans submitted to the city, to the extent permitted by applicable law, shall remain proprietary. No person shall artificially under-estimate the size of their proposed system to evade the purpose of this article. l.  Permittee shall provide to the department of public works a list identifying all subcontractors used by a permittee on a construction or excavation project. List shall include the name and telephone number of the subcontractor, location and the anticipated duration of the project; and m.  Any other requirements, limitations, or conditions that may be necessary and proper. (2)  Restoration of the right-of-way. Upon the determination by the department of public work that all construction and excavation activity in the right-of-way, has ceased, within 14 business days of such determination, all persons shall begin to restore the right-of-way to its pre-construction condition. The restoration of the right-of-way shall include; the repaving of all streets and sidewalks, removal of temporary utility markings, the removal of all barricades, obstructions, surplus excavation material and the restoration of the appropriate vegetation. However, trees and shrubs should be planted during the appropriate season. All restoration shall be completed within 21 days after the end of construction activity. Failure to comply with this section will subject all persons to the maximum penalties as set forth in section 138-4 of this chapter. (i)  Safety barriers. It shall be the duty of all persons doing any kind of non-emergency work in the streets of the city, such as paving, laying sewers, sidewalks and curbing, moving buildings or any other work that in any way obstructs free passage thereon to notify the commissioner of public works at least 96 hours before the work is commenced and on its completion. It shall be the duty of the commissioner of public works to see that this subsection is enforced, both as to the erection of barriers or enclosures and as to travel on the street by vehicles or otherwise during the time prohibited. It shall also be the duty of the commissioner of public works to notify the fire chief and police chief, Grady Memorial Hospital, the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority and persons named by the mayor or the mayor's designee of the date and time the street will be closed. (j)  Performance bond. Persons performing construction or excavation work in the right-of-way shall maintain a performance and completion bond in the amount of $500,000.00 or in an amount determined by the city's risk manager to be adequate to either complete the proposed work impacting the public right-of-way in its entirety or to restore the public right-of-way to its condition prior to the commencement of the work if the person fails to complete the work to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works. (k)  Insurance. The city's risk manager shall require the person conducting construction activities within the public right-of-way to obtain a policy of public liability and property damage insurance naming the city as an additional insured and affording coverage for personal injury, including death in an amount not less than $3,000,000.00, or such amounts established by the city's risk manager, to protect the city from liability claims arising out of the permitted construction activities. These insurance requirements may be met by evidence of self-insurance acceptable to the city. (l)  Cash deposit and irrevocable letter of credit. The permittee conducting construction activities within the public right-of-way shall maintain either an irrevocable letter of credit from a qualified financial institution or a cash deposit securing the compliance of the terms of this chapter and the faithful performance of the obligations of the party conducting construction activities within the public right-of-way. The permittee is not required to obtain an irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit for each individual construction activity for the year beginning January 1. The irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit shall cover all construction activities conducted by the permittee from January to January of the next year. (1)  Amount. The irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit shall be in the sum of $10,000.00 for work up to 500 feet in the public right-of-way. A $25,000.00 irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit shall be required for work performed in the public right-of-way in excess of 500 feet. The deposit shall be placed in an interest bearing account. (2)  Demand on the irrevocable letter of credit or from cash deposit. The commissioner of public works may demand payment from the institution that issued the letter of credit for a violating party or make deductions from the cash deposit, as applicable to offset the costs of, among other things, the repair, excavations or work performed by the department of public works, or to pay any assessed penalties or costs associated with violations of this chapter. Where practicable, the city shall provide the permittee with ten days advance written notice of a deduction from the deposit. (3)  Release of the letter of credit or cash deposit. The letter of credit or cash deposit shall be maintained for a period of one year after the satisfactory completion of work performed in the public right-of-way to secure the obligations in the permit and this ordinance. Upon expiration of one year of the satisfactory completion of the latest activity conducted in the public right-of-way, the department of public works shall either release the letter of credit or cash deposit securing satisfactory completion of the work performed in the public right-of-way. If the department determines that the work is unsatisfactory, the department of public works shall provide written notice of the reasons why the work is unsatisfactory to the person conducting the construction activities. If no notice of unsatisfactory work is provided by the department of public works within 30 days after a request for release pursuant to this section, any letter of credit or cash deposit plus accrued interest will be refunded. (4)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the requirement for an irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit may be waived, or the amount may be decreased at the discretion of the city's risk manager. (m)  Notification to abutting property owners or occupants. The commissioner of public works shall require the person conducting activities pursuant to the permit and construction activities within the public right-of-way to provide each abutting property owner or occupant with reasonable and timely notification of any impending construction work that would unreasonably interfere with either egress or ingress onto said owner's property. (n)  Indemnity of the city. The commissioner of public works shall require the person conducting activities pursuant to the permit and construction activities within the public right-of-way to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees, from any and all claims or litigation arising from any construction activities which interfere with the ability of the abutting property owner to conduct his business and/or personal activities in a manner to which he is accustomed. (o)  Consequential damages. The commissioner of public works shall require the person conducting activities pursuant to the permit and construction activities within the public right-of-way to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees, from any and all claims or litigation arising from any consequential damages arising from any construction activities within the public right-of-way, including but not limited to vehicular damage caused by such disruption to the right-of-way. (p)  Guarding of temporary excavations. All persons making an excavation in any street, sidewalk or public place for any purpose shall erect around the excavation a fence or barrier adequate to protect the public from the excavation. When the excavation is made across the sidewalk or at a place used by pedestrians, a bridge shall be erected over the excavation sufficient for the safe passage of the public. All excavations shall be properly lighted at night as determined by the commissioner of public works. The guarding and protection of excavations shall be in accordance with state law and with specifications promulgated by the commissioner of public works and on file in the office of the commissioner of public works. Appropriate signage shall be erected by all persons making an excavation in the street to provide notice of the excavation to the public. (q)  Reservation of rights. The city reserves the right, upon the review of its franchise application, to waive, modify or amend the various bonding, letter of credit, cash deposits and insurance requirements as set forth in section 138-65, taking into account, among other factors, the financial stability of the franchisee or revocable licensee and the past performance of the franchisee or revocable licensee in the city's right-of-way. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-82, §§ 3, 4, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 2002-91, § 1, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 2003-72, §§ 1, 6, 6-8-03; Ord. No. 2008-42(08-O-0880), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2015-32(15-O-1131), § 1, 6-24-15 ) 
Sec. 138-66. - Neighborhood identification signs.     Neighborhood identification signs as defined in section 16-28A.012(a)(10) shall be subject to the requirements of this section, except for section 138-24(a), and, section 138-24(b)(4), (5), and (9) which shall not apply to such signs. In lieu of said provisions which shall not apply to such signs, the commissioner of public works shall review and approve the plans and technical specifications and the location of the proposed neighborhood identification signs. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-67. - Pedestrian access. (a)  Where it is necessary to close a portion of the pedestrian public right-of-way, only the minimum necessary width of the right-of-way shall be obstructed so as to leave a safe, passable thoroughfare not less than four feet in width, and providing appropriate access at and between intersections in accordance with the Americans With Disabilities Act (the "ADA") standards, and separated from the construction area by adequate safety barriers as approved by the commissioner of public works. (b)  Where a four-foot wide pedestrian route on the existing thoroughfare cannot be dedicated, a temporary covered, lighted walkway shall be constructed over the existing pedestrian thoroughfare in accordance with regulations set out by the department of public works. (c)  Where it is not possible to provide access via methods (a) or (b) above, a temporary pedestrian route shall be erected utilizing a combination of the existing sidewalk, the adjacent parking lane, and/or the adjacent vehicular traffic lane at the discretion of the commissioner of public works. Where a traffic or parking lane is used, appropriate barricades and signage shall be utilized to separate the pedestrian lane from the vehicular lane and the route shall be accessible as per the guidelines of the ADA. (d)  Where the party seeking the permit has shown due diligence to perform either (a), (b), or (c) of this section and are unable to do so due to the structural necessities of the work to be completed, proper signage must be provided at each pedestrian-accessible intersection, between which lies the permitted closure or obstruction, directing pedestrian traffic to cross to the other side of the street. Signage must be visible to pedestrian traffic both on the side of the street with the obstruction and to pedestrian traffic at intersections with access to the segment of the sidewalk containing the permitted obstruction. (e)  The commissioner of public works is prohibited from accepting, as reason for an inability to comply with items (a), (b), or (c) of this section, that the pedestrian right-of-way must be closed due to a need for vehicular parking on the site of the work being performed necessitating the closure. (f)  All such walkways mandated by this section, shall be maintained by the party responsible on the permit for closure and any damage, or obstructions to this temporary right-of-way shall be repaired and cleared immediately by that party. Permittee is required to display the permit in a conspicuous place so that the public and inspectors can visibly see it. (Code 1977, §§ 9-3031, 9-3034, 9-3037; Ord. No. 1995-60, § 1, 9-24-95; Ord. No. 1998-82, §§ 1—3, 11-20-98; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-68. - Scheduling and coordination of excavation. (a)  Twenty-four month plans. In order to facilitate an interactive planning process, persons desiring to cut or make an opening, in the street shall submit a quarterly plan in a format acceptable to the commissioner of public works that shows all major excavation work anticipated to be done in the public right-of-way for the next 24 months. The plan shall include a method of excavation designed to protect to the maximum extent possible, the existing infrastructure and minimize the interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic plans may be revised and updated from time to time by such person. The person submitting the plans shall mark such plans as proprietary, or trade secrets and the plans will be protected from disclosure by the city, to the extent permitted by law. This requirement shall not impose any requirement on any person desiring to cut a street to disclose confidential business information. This 24-month plan shall not require persons to disclose information on lateral construction marked protected. In addition, this information is only an estimate and will only be used for general location of construction activities of the person and no liability shall be incurred due to or on account of the submission of such projection. (b)  Persons participating in joint excavation. The permit holder shall be deemed the lead person on the joint excavation. In addition, the permit shall list the names of all persons participating in the joint excavation. (c)  Application fee. When two or more persons for a joint excavation submit an application for an excavation permit, the joint applicants shall pay one fee for the excavation permit. (d)  Coordination of 24-month plans. The commissioner shall review all 24-month plans on file in order to identify conflicts and opportunities for coordination of activities. The commissioner shall notify persons with a 24-month plan on file of such conflicts to the extent possible to maximize coordination of major excavation work and to avoid unnecessary and repeated excavations in street. All persons shall coordinate, to the extent possible, major excavation with other potentially affected persons to minimize disruption of the city's public right-of-way. The department of public works may schedule monthly meetings with persons who desire to work in the right-of-way for the purpose of reviewing submitted as-built plans as required in section 138-65. Persons who seek to perform excavation activities in the right-of-way shall be required to attend such meetings. Failure to attend such meetings shall subject all persons to: revocation or suspension of licenses or permit, the issuance of a stop work order or the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. (e)  Department repaving schedule. In October of every year, the commissioner of public works shall prepare for public inspection, a preliminary 12 month repaving plan showing anticipated and proposed resurfacing and repaving of the public right-of-way. Upon completion, such 12 month repaving plan shall be provided to every person with a 24-month plan on file with the department of public works. The commissioner of public works will update such plan as appropriate and provide a copy to the persons referenced in the preceding sentence. (f)  The persons subject to this chapter will use their best efforts to conduct industry meetings on a regular basis to try and better coordinate excavation activities. The department of public works may participate in these industry meetings and endeavor to coordinate major excavation work of the city and the industry. (g)  Good faith efforts. Persons subject to this chapter will use good faith efforts to conduct joint excavation activities subject to technical, economic and competitive considerations. Joint applications shall be approved in an expedited manner. Any joint application shall identify the lead person responsible for the requested permitted activity. The lead person will coordinate the activities of the other persons participating in the joint project. As an incentive, to encourage joint excavation activities, the city shall implement expedited permit procedures and other fee schedules. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-69. - Rehabilitation and restoration of the pavement.     Whenever any person desires to cut or make an opening in any street, such person shall repair and restore the street, including milling and resurfacing, to the specifications of the department of public works. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-70. - Work done by public utilities.     The commissioner of public works may require public utilities to make their own cuts, backfills and permanent improvements, but all that work shall be done under the supervision and subject to the approval of the commissioner of public works. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-71. - Availability of material and equipment before starting work.     It shall be unlawful for a contractor to tear up or interfere with the pavement upon a street or sidewalk unless, immediately prior to the time the contractor commences work on the contract, the contractor has sufficient material and equipment immediately available with which to carry out the paving proposed and the commissioner of public works is satisfied that this section has been complied with. If the commissioner of public works determines that the contractor has not complied with this section, the commissioner shall refuse to allow the street and sidewalk to be torn up or interfered with, nor shall this be done until the contractor shall comply with this section. (Code 1977, § 9-3051; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-72. - Building adjoining viaduct, bridge or tunnel. (a)  Bearing upon or against viaduct, bridge or tunnel. No portion of a building adjoining a viaduct, bridge or tunnel shall bear upon or against the viaduct, bridge or tunnel structure, but a space of not less than one inch shall be left open between the sidewalk and the structure and then filled with an approved expansion joint material. (b)  Responsibility for damages. Any and all damages to streets, on either level, or damage to bridge, viaduct or tunnel structures caused by the contractor or by the contractor's employees must be repaired immediately at no cost to the city and to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works. (Code 1977, § 9-3039; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-73. - Protection for gas lines. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commence, perform or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating equipment in any street right-of-way or any tract or parcel of land inside the city limits of the city until such person has complied with O.C.G.A. § 25-9-5 and O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 and all other applicable state laws. (b)  The provisions of this section are in addition to the requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 9 (O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq.). (Code 1977, § 17-11006; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-74. - Emergency excavations.     Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent any person from taking any action reasonably necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the restoration of interrupted service provided by a utility when such necessity arises during days or times when the department of public works is closed. In the event that any person takes any action to excavate or cause to excavate the public right-of-way pursuant to this section such person shall apply for an emergency permit within four hours after the department of public works' offices are first opened. Permits submitted pursuant to this section shall receive an expedited review. The applicant for an emergency permit shall submit a written statement of the basis of the emergency action and described excavation performed and any work remaining to be performed. Persons conducting emergency excavations pursuant to this section shall prominently display a notice of such emergency activity. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-75. - Fees charged for permits which allow blocking or closing sidewalks or streets; etc. (a)  The applicant for any permit issued by the department of public works for closing, occupying, blocking or otherwise using sidewalks or streets for building construction, building repairs, material or equipment storage, movement of oversize vehicles or loads and other special purposes shall pay to the city an application fee of $35.00 and, upon receipt of such permit, pay to the city a permit fee as provided in this section. (b)  There shall be a $35.00 fixed fee for all permits issued as provided in this section, unless otherwise provided herein. (c)  A variable permit cost for use of up to 100 linear feet of sidewalk and any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $15.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. (d)  A variable permit cost for use of 101 to 200 linear feet of a sidewalk and any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $30.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. (e)  A variable permit cost for use of 201 to 300 linear feet of a sidewalk and any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $45.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. (f)  A variable permit cost for use of over 300 linear feet of a sidewalk and any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $60.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. (g)  The variable permit cost for use of sidewalk space only shall be 40 percent of the variable permit cost as determined for paragraphs (c), (d), (e) and (f) of this section, based on the linear feet of sidewalk used. (h)  The variable permit cost for use of multiple lanes or full street closure shall be the cost of a single lane permit as established in paragraphs (c), (d), (e) and (f), multiplied by the number of marked traffic lanes encroached upon by the permitted use. Where no lane markings are used, a lane width of ten feet shall be assumed for determining the permit cost. (i)  The variable permit cost for trenching or excavating within rights-of-way shall be $25.00 per calendar day per lane for the duration of the permit. (j)  Each truck, trailer, crane, tractor, structure or similar device parked or placed within public rights-of-way contrary to established parking regulation and not within an area permitted, as provided by other portions of this section, shall be required to have from the department of public works a permit for such storage or parking. The cost of such permit shall be $20.00 per day; however, the fixed fee of $20.00 shall not be applied. (k)  A single trip permit for moving vehicles over city streets which exceed the legal length, width, height, or weight shall be $20.00 for exceeding one of the limitations and $30.00 for exceeding more than one of the limitation. If the department of public works determines that such vehicles or load, because of its size, must be moved at night or will require a special police escort, the variable permit cost shall be $200.00. Permit charges required in this subsection may be waived if such oversized vehicle or load thereon is being used as part of or in preparation for a parade, festival or other such event. (l)  An annual multiple trip permit cost for moving vehicles which exceed the legal length, width, height or weight shall be $200.00. (m)  Minor routine maintenance of buildings, walls, signs, fences, trees or similar facilities which requires use of a sidewalk, shall require a permit and permit fee. (n)  The commissioner of the department of public works shall make a determination on any question concerning conditions which require a permit and shall approve waivers of permit fees as provided for herein. (o)  The fee for a haul route permit shall be $80.00. (Ord. No. 2008-43(08-O-0881), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2015-32(15-O-1131), § 2, 6-24-15 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, adopted March 14, 2001, amended article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to poles, wires and conduits as they relate to streets, sidewalks and other public places. See the Code Comparative Table. To the extent permitted by law, the city may determine to apply all or certain provisions of this ordinance [Ord. No. 2001-22] to agreements, franchises, and licenses existing on the effective date of this ordinance [March 5, 2001]. This ordinance shall apply to all telecommunications providers, persons seeking to use the streets in the manner described in section 138-127 herein, and franchisees, permittees, and licensees after its adoption. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 138-76. - Cost and fees of street paving and the improvement of unimproved right-of-way by city assessed against abutting property owners.     Whenever any street or sidewalk or part thereof in the city is originally paved, or the improvement of unimproved right-of-way is accomplished by the city, the cost and fees of street paving and the improvement of unimproved right-of-way shall be assessed against abutting property owners unless other method of payment is authorized by city council. Whenever such work is by direction of the council, there shall be added to the total assessable cost of the work a fee for inspection and engineering services furnished by the city, and the total of cost and fee shall be assessed against the abutting property owner. The fee shall be retained by the chief financial officer to cover the cost of inspection and engineering services. The fee shall be established by ordinance and may be found in the city's rules and regulations. (Code 1977, § 9-3052; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-77. - Engineering and inspection fees for improvements by owner or developer.     When any owner of property or developer thereof shall install any public improvement, such as the grading and paving of streets, sidewalks, the installation of curbs and combination curbs and gutters, either by such owner or developer or by any duly authorized contractor, the contractor or the owner or developer of those properties causing the work to be done shall pay to the city, in advance of construction, a fee for inspection and engineering services as provided by ordinance. (Code 1977, § 9-3053; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Secs. 138-78—138-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREETS 
Sec. 138-81. - Notice to contractor and public utilities of paving. (a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "public utility" includes power, gas, light, telephone, CATV and telegraph corporations and such others as may operate like public services and also includes the department of water. (b)  Notice to contractor that street is ready for paving. The commissioner of public works shall notify the contractor to whom a street paving contract has been awarded that the street is ready for paving under the contract. After the notice has been given the contractor, it shall be unlawful for any person to make any opening of any kind in the street, without the written joint consent of the contractor and the commissioner of public works. (c)  Notice to public utilities. At least 60 days prior to commencing of paving, the commissioner of public works shall notify public utilities and all other persons that have a 24-month plan on file as of the date that the street will be paved, and if any public utility so notified is unable to complete any of its work in the street within 30 days from this notice, the commissioner of public works shall be notified in writing by the public utility, whereupon the commissioner may, at the commissioner's discretion, delay the sending of the notice to commence paving. (Code 1977, § 9-3057; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-82. - Closing of streets during paving operations. (a)  Authority, duties of commissioner. For paving or repaving a street, construction of a bridge or any other work, the commissioner of public works shall be authorized to close the street or part of the street from the time the work is started until, in the commissioner's judgment, the street is suitable for ordinary traffic thereon. If there is any dispute as to the time when the pavement is sufficiently set or hardened or otherwise has become fit for travel, the decision of the commissioner of public works shall be final. The commissioner of public works shall see that this section is enforced, both as to the erection of barriers or enclosures and as to travel on the street by vehicles or otherwise during the time prohibited. The commissioner of public works shall notify the police chief, fire chief, Grady Memorial Hospital, the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority and persons named by the mayor or the mayor's designee of the date and time street will be closed. (b)  Violation. Any person interfering with the street closing or undertaking to operate a vehicle or otherwise travel upon a street closed by authority of the commissioner of public works before the enclosures have been removed therefrom and the street opened for travel shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided in the penalty section of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-83. - Closing of streets during construction of bridges, viaducts and similar structures.     Whenever the city, a public utility or a railroad undertakes work such as the construction of bridges, viaducts or the like, which necessitates the use of a roadway for the erection of such public work, all streets and sidewalks affected by these works shall be closed. The commissioner of public works shall have power to keep any portions of those streets and sidewalks open temporarily where necessary to ensure public safety, but any permits to allow any portions of those streets or sidewalks to be kept open temporarily shall be subject to be revoked at any time in the discretion of the commissioner of public works. (Code 1977, § 9-3059; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-84. - Traffic calming devices—Installation. (a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section and in section 138-85, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection except when the context requires otherwise: (1)  Traffic calming guidelines mean the document titled "Traffic Calming Device Implementation Guidebook," prepared by City of Atlanta, May 1999 and any future revisions. (2)  ITE Guidelines mean the document titled "Guidelines for the Design and Application of Speed Humps" issued by the Institute of Transportation Engineers' I.T.E. Technical Council Speed Humps Task Force in March, 1993 and subsequent revisions. (3)  Speed table means that geometric roadway design features described and defined in the ITE guidelines, which shall be no less than 22 feet in width. (4)  Traffic calming device means a roadway feature such as speed tables, speed cushions, traffic circles and measures implemented to reduce vehicular speed as described in the "Traffic Calming Implementation Guidebook" and "Guidelines for the Design and Application of Speed Humps". (5)  Street segment means a portion of a local residential street within the city located between any two intersecting streets. (6)  Study area means one or more street segments located within the proposed traffic calming area. (7)  Vertical traffic calming measures means measures which create variations in pavement height along a vehicle travel path. (b)  The department of public works shall be responsible for the administration of the traffic calming program to include conducting a traffic engineering study to determine whether all of the conditions set forth below are met. (c)  As a part of such study, the affected neighborhood planning unit and the police and fire departments shall be notified and given the opportunity to comment on the propriety of installing traffic calming devices in the study area. In addition, all utility companies and other companies that have franchise agreements with the city shall be contacted to determine whether any work in the public right-of-way is planned in the study area. (d)  Petitions may be submitted to the department of public works by property owners seeking the installation of traffic calming devices. The submission of such petitions must be within two years from the date of the traffic engineering study in a form satisfactory to the city. The petitions must be signed by 75 percent of the property owners in any study area (based on parcel count), evidencing their desire to have traffic calming devices installed. The petitioners must accept the signage and markings appurtenant thereto, and acknowledge that installing the traffic calming devices could slow the response time of fire and police department vehicles and ambulances by several seconds per traffic calming device. If all conditions are met, the city may construct and install traffic calming devices in such study area. The conditions, which must be met, are as follows: (1)  The study area must be a residential street functionally classified as local or collector street except that streets classified as collector and arterial streets shall not qualify for vertical traffic calming measures; (2)  The 85th percentile speed of traffic on such street must be at least ten miles per hour over the posted speed limit; (3)  The property owners in such study area may apply to the city for funding for all costs of construction and installation. In the alternative, the property owners may elect to engage a private contractor to construct the traffic calming devices in accordance with all requirements of the department of public works and to pay all costs of construction and installation; and (4)  The study area must meet the criteria contained in part 2.0 of the ITE guidelines for speed humps or the criteria contained in the Traffic Calming Device Implementation Guidebook, except to the extent this article expressly provides for different criteria. If the Institute of Transportation Engineers' or the City of Atlanta revokes or suspends their guidelines, then this requirement shall not need to have been met for any traffic calming device installation not completed by the date of such revocation or suspension. (e)  The commissioner of public works reserves the right to install or remove traffic calming measures outside of this traffic calming petitioning process consistent with City Code section 138-3 which assigns authority to regulate activities in the public right-of-way to the commissioner of public works. (f)  In addition to the requirements outlined in this code section, traffic calming installation policy shall be consistent with standard operating procedures adopted by the department of public works and contained in the Public Works Right-of-Way Manual. (Ord. No. 1995-03, § 9-3061, 2-14-95; Ord. No. 1997-46, §§ 1, 2, 8-25-97; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2003-15, § 1, 3-11-03; Ord. No. 2012-21(12-O-0695), § 1, 5-30-12) 
Sec. 138-85. - Traffic calming devices—Removal.     Speed tables on a street segment may be removed if all of the following conditions are met: (1)  Seventy-five percent of property owners within the street segment where the traffic calming devices are installed must, via formal petition, request their removal. (2)  The speed traffic calming devices have been in place no less than one year. (3)  The property owners are made aware that speeds will increase upon removal of the traffic calming devices. (4)  The property owners agree to pay all costs associated with such removal. (5)  The department of public works agrees that removal of the traffic calming devices will not negatively affect public safety. (Ord. No. 1995-3, § 9-3062, 2-14-95; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2012-21(12-O-0695), § 2, 5-30-12) 
Secs. 138-86—138-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SIDEWALKS, CURBS, CURBS AND GUTTERS AND DRIVEWAYS 
Sec. 138-96. - Schedule of charges for construction or repair.     The commissioner of public works shall maintain a schedule of charges for sidewalks, curbing or driveway aprons constructed or repaired by the city which may be revised from time to time by the commissioner of public works, subject to council approval, and which shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. (Code 1977, § 9-3091; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-97. - Construction of sidewalks, driveways and curbs in multifamily residential, commercial and industrial zoning districts. (a)  Before any building permit shall be issued for the construction of any structure on property within any planned development-housing (PD-H) district or any zoning district which permits multifamily residential, commercial or industrial uses, the owner shall agree to construct or have constructed sidewalks, driveways and curbs on all public streets within and abutting the property. This subsection does not apply to property already having such improvements in a condition satisfactory to the commissioner of public works. Failure to construct these improvements shall be grounds for denial of occupancy or use of the improvements constructed on the property. The director, bureau of buildings shall not issue an occupancy permit until the improvements are made. The plans and specifications for the sidewalks, driveways and curbs shall be submitted to and approved by the commissioner of public works prior to the issuance of the building permit. (b)  The requirements of subsection (a) of this section may be waived by the commissioner of public works upon a showing by the applicant of sufficient evidence that the proposed work includes only site improvements and no new construction of new occupiable space. (c)  The commissioner of public works may, in the commissioner's discretion, require the installation of curbs on property exempted pursuant to subsection (b) of this section in conformance with city standards if such is required for proper storm drainage on the abutting or adjacent properties. (Code 1977, § 9-3092; Ord. No. 1996-28, § 1, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-98. - Constructing sidewalks, driveways and curbs by private contractors. (a)  Private contractors may be permitted to lower curbs and construct sidewalks and curbs and driveways across sidewalks in the city subject to the following conditions: (1)  License required. The contractor shall hold a business license from the city. (2)  Permit required. The contractor shall obtain a permit from the commissioner of public works to construct the sidewalks, driveways and curbs. (3)  Standards. All work performed under the permit shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the commissioner of public works, and such sidewalks, driveways and curbs shall be constructed only in accordance with the established lines and grades of the city. (4)  Inspection required. Whenever any contractor holding a permit authorized by this section shall desire to pour any sidewalks, driveways and curbs, the contractor shall notify the commissioner of public works of the contractor's readiness and desire to do so, whereupon it shall be the duty of the commissioner of public works, as soon thereafter as is practical, to send an inspector of the department of public works to inspect the work, and no work shall be poured except on approval of the commissioner. (5)  Insurance. All contractors constructing driveways, sidewalks and curbs shall carry insurance which will protect the city and its officers, agents and employees from all claims for personal injury and property damage arising out of the construction of the sidewalks, driveways and curbs. The insurance shall be in an amount and shall provide such coverage as determined by the city's risk manager after consultation with the commissioner of public works. The insurance shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents and employees against all claims resulting from injuries to persons or property damage for a period beginning on the date of the commencement of any work being performed by the contractor and continuing for 30 days after the completion of the work by the contractor. Presentation and delivery of the policy of insurance or appropriate certificate thereof to the commissioner of public works shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit for the work. (6)  Charge for permit. The charge for the permit required by this section shall be fixed by the council, and the sum shall be paid to the department of public works at the time of the issuance of any permit under this section. (Code 1977, § 9-3093; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-99. - Permit required for construction of driveways or sidewalks on streets.     It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any driveway or sidewalk on any street without first having obtained a permit from the commissioner of public works. If any person without first obtaining the permit should construct a driveway or sidewalk on any street, then the person shall be in violation of this Code, and the commissioner of public works shall be authorized to condemn the driveway or sidewalk and have it removed and replaced at the expense of the owner of the property, the owner being notified of this action prior to construction. (Code 1977, § 9-3094; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-100. - Notice to abutting property owners prior to construction of sidewalks.     Except for a single-property request for the construction of a sidewalk, it shall be the duty of the commissioner of public works to give all abutting property owners written notice prior to construction of any sidewalk abutting their property. (Code 1977, § 9-3095; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-101. - Additional standards for replacement or reconstruction of sidewalks in certain districts and areas. (a)  Applicable districts and areas. This section shall apply in the following districts and areas: (1)  Any landmark district, except for the M. L. King, Jr. Landmark District. This exemption does not apply to the Auburn Avenue Streetscape improvements which were installed for the 1996 Olympics. (2)  Any historic district. (3)  Any urban conservation district which existed prior to 1991, as so defined by the Urban Design Commission, except for the Candler Park Urban Conservation District. (4)  Reserved. (b)  Existing standard sidewalks. In any of the districts or areas listed in subsection (a) of this section where replacement or reconstruction of the standard sidewalk is deemed necessary, the standard sidewalk shall be replaced or reconstructed with hexagonal pavers or a standard sidewalk inlaid with an 18-inch diameter hexagonal imprint. This shall be considered a standard sidewalk replacement in such circumstances in such districts and areas. All such sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the commissioner of public works and in accordance with established lines and grades of the city. (c)  Existing sidewalks constructed of hexagonal pavers or inlaid with hexagonal imprint. In any of the districts or areas listed in subsection (a) of this section, a sidewalk constructed of hexagonal pavers or a standard sidewalk inlaid with a hexagonal imprint shall only be replaced or reconstructed with material of equal or better quality and similar in design to the original. Hexagonal pavers may be replaced with hexagonal pavers or a standard sidewalk inlaid with an 18-inch diameter hexagonal imprint. This shall be considered a standard sidewalk replacement in such circumstances in such districts. All such sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the commissioner of public works and in accordance with established lines and grades of the city. (Code 1977, § 9-3096; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-61, §§ 1—3, 8-15-01) 
Sec. 138-102. - Additional standards for limited local residential streets in new subdivisions. (a)  Standards of construction for limited local residential streets in new subdivisions are as follows: (1)  The width of the street as measured from face of curb to face of curb shall be 28 feet. (2)  The pavement section shall meet the following minimum requirements: a.  All natural ground under fill or base shall be scarified to a depth of not less than six inches and recompacted to 90 percent of maximum density at optimum moisture content as determined by the modified Proctor method in accordance with ASTM D-1557. b.  The crushed aggregate base course shall conform to the requirements of the department of public works streets and sidewalk construction specification, January 1975, and the crushed aggregate base course shall be a minimum thickness of six inches. c.  The asphalt concrete base and top shall conform to the requirements of the department of public works street and sidewalk construction specifications, January 1975, and the asphalt concrete base course and top course shall be a minimum total thickness of four inches. (3)  The standards of the department of public works are amended to include a curb and gutter cross section having the dimensions of six inches thick by 24 inches wide with a curb six inches high, materials and workmanship conforming to the standards of the department of public works, subject to the following: a.  Pending the adoption of a revised standard by the city, by the department of public works and, where applicable, the owner shall agree to install a modified grate and frame compatible with the reduced gutter width provided for in this section. The type, style, thickness, weight and other mechanical properties of such grate and frame, as well as modifications that may be required of existing standard basins permitted, shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner of public works or the commissioner's authorized agent. (4)  On limited local residential streets in proposed new subdivisions, the owner shall agree to dedicate to the use of the public forever a nine-foot wide utility easement on either side and abutting the right-of-way of the limited local residential street, including around the bulb of any cul-de-sac which is a part thereof, the purpose of such dedication being to install traffic signs, fire hydrants, gas, water, sewer mains, related appurtenances and public sidewalks as provided for in this section. On all limited local residential streets, the sidewalk may be installed by petition of the abutting property owner or, when in the opinion of the commissioner of public works it is necessary, by any other means provided in this section. (5)  On limited local residential streets and higher classification streets in proposed new subdivisions permitted under this section, the owner shall agree to install the full roadway prism in accordance with the standards of the department of public works and the governing sections of this Code or other ordinances of the city. The roadway cross section to be developed will extend from the right-of-way line or utility easement line to the right-of-way line or utility easement line, whichever distance is greater. Cuts and fills employed to construct the roadway prism to the limits specified shall be two feet horizontal to one foot vertical rise, which, in the case of cut slopes and at the discretion of the commissioner of public works for unusual difficulty or hardship, may be reduced to 11 feet horizontal to one foot vertical rise. (6)  On limited local residential streets and higher classification streets in proposed new subdivisions permitted under this section, where such new or existing street has a proposed intersecting street or is a through street serving other subdivisions or areas and on looped limited local residential streets, the owner shall agree to install a minimum five-foot wide by four-inch thick concrete sidewalk, with the back of the sidewalk being located at the right-of-way line or at the most far removed utility easement line, whichever distance from the centerline of the street is greater, with the exception that the owner will not be required to install sidewalks around the bulb of the cul-de-sac of a proposed street classified as limited local residential. (Code 1977, § 9-3097; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) Land Development Code References— Subdivision design standards, § 15-08.001 et seq.; required improvements in subdivisions, § 15-09.001 et seq. 
Sec. 138-102.1 - Negotiated traditional neighborhood development (NTND). (a)  Intent. The following street design standards, called the NTND Street Standards, are to be utilized by the City of Atlanta as optional street standards for new developments meeting the definition of a negotiated traditional neighborhood development (NTND). The primary purpose of these NTND streets is to create places that will be safe, pleasant, and useful for pedestrians and bicyclists. Providing mobility for cars and occasionally trucks is a secondary purpose. In general, NTND streets are narrow streets with low traffic speeds and low traffic volumes, designed naturally to slow traffic without the need for bumps, humps, or bulb-outs. NTND streets often are designed to require some degree of "slow flow" whereby cars must slow or even stop intermittently to allow oncoming traffic to pass. Users of these standards are reminded that the street design regulations apply to communities and locations that conform to design features cited above. These NTND streets are not intended to carry large volumes of through traffic, and an adequate, separate system of arterial roadways is necessary to serve higher volumes and long distance travel. (b)  Definition, negotiated traditional neighborhood development . A development using the NTND Street Standards shall be required to receive approval from the commissioner of the department of planning, development and neighborhood conservation to ensure that the development is consistent with all of the following guidelines. (1)  The NTND shall be compact and pedestrian-friendly. (2)  The NTND shall contain at least eight acres of property. (3)  The NTND shall contain at least two land uses, including residential and commercial and/or office. (4)  The NTND shall contain at least one internal public street. (5)  Streets shall interconnect to form a grid or web-like pattern, rather than a dendritic (tree-like) pattern. (6)  The street network of the NTND shall connect to the existing public street network [at] at least two points. (7)  Within the gross area of the residential component of the NTND, residential unit density shall exceed six units per acre. (8)  The NTND shall contain at least 5,000 square feet of non-residential floor area, of which no less than 2,000 square feet shall be used for retail uses including eating and drinking establishments. (9)  A park that is accessible to the general public and is at least one-eighth acre in size shall be provided within 2,000 feet, as measured in a straight line from property line to property line, of all residences. (10)  Garages shall not be located closer to the adjacent public or private street than the principal building. (11)  Sidewalks or pedestrian access shall be provided along all streets within the NTND. (c)  Applicability requirements. (1)  A development using the NTND Street Standards must receive approval from the commissioner of the department of planning, development, and neighborhood conservation and the commissioner of public works that it meets the definition of a negotiated traditional neighborhood development. (2)  Streets for which these standards are applied must have posted speeds no greater than 25 m.p.h. (3)  Maximum street grades shall not exceed 11 percent. (d)  General Conditions. (1)  On-street parking is allowed on one or both sides of a street. Such parking permission depends on the type and size of the street, as outlined in the following sections. Certain streets as herein designated require specific approval of the City of Atlanta Fire Department. (2)  On residential streets where the primary function of the street is to provide access to adjacent development and foster a safe and pleasant environment, at least one unobstructed moving lane of not less than 12 feet must be ensured even where parking occurs on both sides. On-street parallel parking lane widths are assumed to be not less than seven feet in width for purposes of calculating street sections. (3)  Street lanes, including bicycle lanes, should not be striped. (4)  Header curbs are required to be used to maximize pavement area and improve street appearance. (5)  Streets that are within 1500 feet of a neighborhood collector or arterial street are not required to accommodate large-scale, public transit vehicles. (6)  Special provisions are required to accommodate emergency, sanitation, and other special vehicular access. These provisions depend on the type and size of the street, as outlined in the following sections. (7)  Curb ramps shall be designed to meet ADA requirements and shall include a top and bottom landing of at least 48" in length and 36" in width. Maximum slope of 1:12 and maximum cross slope of 1:50 are permitted. (8)  Driveway aprons shall end at the sidewalk clear zone and be limited to the street furniture/tree planting zone. Driveway aprons shall have a slope of between 1:10 and 1:13. A minimum of 36" of landing area at sidewalk shall be required and sidewalk may be partially dropped to prevent apron from exceeding 1:13 slope. (9)  Block lengths shall be no greater than 600 feet. Stop signs may be placed within the NTND to ensure that automobiles travel no greater than 600 feet without interruption. (10)  Alleys must be privately owned and all drawings and plats issued for the NTND must contain an acknowledgement of that private ownership. Any improvements, maintenance and other similar actions to such alleys must be the responsibility of the private property owners. (11)  The physical curb radii for intersections within NTND and between NTND streets and non-NTND streets shall be as follows: a.  The physical curb radii for intersections of 20 feet wide streets without parking shall be 20 feet, b.  The physical curb radii for intersections of 27 feet wide streets with parking on one side shall be 15 feet with mountable curbs. Mountable curbs shall be designed in accordance with criteria established by the department of public works, c.  Physical curb radii for intersections of 34 feet wide streets with parking on two sides shall be 15 feet with mountable curbs. Mountable curbs shall be designed in accordance with criteria established by the department of public works, d.  For conditions a, b, and c above, the full street width of all streets shall extend to the intersection and parking shall not be allowed within 30 feet of each intersection. (e)  Street designations. The following street designations and design standards are applicable to negotiated transitional neighborhoods development: (1)  Type 2-C: Two-way street with no parking may be designed as follows: a.  Curb to curb street sections permitted: 20 feet. b.  Special provision required: 1.  To provide maximum vehicular space, there shall be no solid obstructions (includes trees, poles, etc.) within 18" of the face of curb on both sides of the street. (2)  Type 2-D: Two-way street with parking on one side only may be designed as follows: a.  Curb to curb street sections permitted: 27 feet. 1.  Special provision required: i.  To provide maximum vehicular space, there shall be no solid obstructions (includes trees, poles, etc.) within 18" of the face of curb on both sides of the street. (3)  Type 2-E: Two-way street with parking on both sides may be designed as follows: a.  Curb to curb street sections permitted: 34 feet. b.  Special provision required: 1.  To provide maximum vehicular space, there shall be no solid obstructions (includes trees, poles, etc.) within 18" of the face of curb on both sides of the street. ( Ord. No. 2018-04(18-O-0602), § 1, 7-9-02 ) 
Sec. 138-103. - Inspection and repair of sidewalks.     The commissioner of public works shall inspect the sidewalks along public right-of-way, to maintain the sidewalks thereon in a safe and suitable condition for public use and travel, to condemn promptly pavements on such sidewalks that are unsafe or unsuitable for public travel, and to cause repairs to be made in accordance with city law and to charge the cost of the repair to the abutting property; provided however that where funding is identified, applicable and available for implementation of repairs by the city, such repairs shall be undertaken by the city upon a prioritized basis until the funding is exhausted. The absence of city funding shall not excuse the abutting property owner from the requirements of this section. (Ord. No. 1996-26, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2015-40(14-O-1361), §§ 3, 4, 7-29-15 ) 
Secs. 138-104—138-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES AND REVOCABLE LICENSES[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, adopted March 14, 2001, amended article V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly said article pertained to publication vending devices as related to streets, sidewalks and other public places. See the Code Comparative Table. To the extent permitted by law, the city may determine to apply all or certain provisions of this ordinance [Ord. No. 2001-22] to agreements, franchises, and licenses existing on the effective date of this ordinance [March 5, 2001]. This ordinance shall apply to all telecommunications providers, persons seeking to use the streets in the manner described in section 138-127 herein, and franchisees, permittees, and licensees after its adoption. 
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 138-126. - Definitions.     For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.     Affiliated person means such person who falls into one or more of the following categories: (i) each person having directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant or franchisee; (ii) each person in which the applicant or franchisee has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (iii) each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant or franchisee; and (iv) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the applicant or franchisee; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant or franchisee.     Applicant means any person seeking to obtain a franchise or revocable license pursuant to this article.     Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable.     Control or controlling interest means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the applicant or the equipment in the streets. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than five percent of any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person or group of persons.     Equipment means any and all transmission facilities, poles, wires, electrical conductors, fiber, conduits, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances that are used in connection with the provision of telecommunications services.     Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to construct, install, operate, upgrade, repair, maintain, and remove equipment used to provide telecommunications services upon, along, over and under the streets. A franchise does not guarantee the universal use of the right-of-way. Each site-specific use of the right-of-way shall be assessed during the permit application process for that particular site.     Franchisee means a person which is party to a franchise issued by the city.     Gross revenues means all revenue that is received, directly or indirectly by the franchisee with facilities in the right-of-way, from or in connection with the provision of telecommunication services over the franchisee's telecommunications system in the established corporate limits of the city; provided that gross revenue shall not include any fees or any sales or excise taxes collected for direct pass-through to any entity with facilities in the right-of-way other than an affiliated person, including any local, state or federal government, and further provided that gross revenue shall not include any revenue generated by the rental, lease, sale, or other use of a franchisee's facilities by a person who is also a franchisee.     Peachtree Corridor means those commercial areas in the City of Atlanta known as Midtown, Downtown, and Buckhead and which are more specifically defined in the handbook of the department of public works.     Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the limited occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in sections 138-127 and 138-135 of this article.     Revocable license fee means a payment for the fair and reasonable compensation for the use of the city's right-of-way in providing telecommunication services. This fee shall not include fees associated with any other license agreement with the city.     Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.     Telecommunications franchise fee means a payment of for the fair and reasonable compensation for the use of the city's right-of-way in providing telecommunication services. This fee shall not include fees associated with any other franchise agreement with the city.     Telecommunications provider means any person who: (1)  Owns, constructs, operates or maintains equipment in the streets used to provide telecommunications services regardless of whether such telecommunications services originate or terminate in the city; or (2)  Provides telecommunications services that originate or terminate in the city by means of: a.  Specifically identifiable equipment in the streets, which equipment is owned by such person or made available to such person under a lease or any other arrangement for a period longer than 120 days; or b.  Equipment in the streets if the use of such equipment is continuing and substantial, and the city has determined that it is necessary and appropriate to impose the requirements of this chapter in order to preserve the application of this article on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis consistent with applicable law.     Telecommunications services means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to resellers or other such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. The term "telecommunications services" shall not include cable services.     Telecommunications system means the plant, equipment, real property (including interests in real property), tangible and intangible personal property, buildings, offices, furniture, customer lists, cable, wires, optical fibers, amplifiers, antenna, switches, and all other electronic devices equipment and facilities used to provide telecommunications services.     Utility easement means any easement owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated, or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.     Universal access provider means a local exchange company that is obligated to provide basic local exchange service in Atlanta in response to reasonable requests for such service. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
DIVISION 2. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 
Sec. 138-127. - Granting authority. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy the streets as a telecommunications provider, or construct, operate or maintain equipment in the streets used to provide telecommunications services, without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license is granted only for a specified portion of (a) particular street(s). Franchises and revocable licenses are not required for telecommunications providers that do not construct, operate, or maintain equipment in the streets. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person seeking to use the streets to construct, operate or maintain equipment to provide telecommunications for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person in the city, without first obtaining a revocable license in accordance with the provisions found in sections 138-129 and 138-135 of this article. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets to provide telecommunications and shall be granted only if: (1)  The use or occupation of such streets, together with all revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed 500 linear feet; and (2)  The use or occupation of such streets does not involve: a.  The offering or provision of telecommunications services to or from any person in the city; or b.  The origination or termination of any telecommunications service to or from any person in the city. In determining whether the provisions of clause (2) of this section 138-127 are satisfied, the city may consider whether it is necessary or appropriate to require a license or franchise to preserve the application of this article on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory basis consistent with applicable law. (c)  The city council may grant one or more franchises and revocable licenses in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. (d)  The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as shall be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the franchisee or licensee. (e)  Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises, revocable licenses or other authorizations for use of the streets by any means, as the city deems appropriate. (f)  A franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be construed to grant any rights or authorization to provide cable services in the city, and any person seeking to provide cable services in the city shall first obtain a separate franchise in accordance with the City of Atlanta Cable Communications Ordinance, 94-0-1777. (g)  In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a telecommunications provider to exceed the limits established in section 138-127, or fail to comply with the requirements therein, then such telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this article, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. It shall be unlawful to provide service pursuant to a revocable license where the licensee exceeds the limitations or fails to meet the requirements contained in section 138-27(g). (h)  Compensation. It is the purpose of this section to fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the use of the city's rights-of-way. (1)  Measure of compensation—Telecommunication franchisees and revocable licensees shall pay the city an annual franchise fee equal to three percent of the franchisee's annual gross revenue provided that a telecommunications franchisee or revocable licensee shall not be required to pay more than $11,000,000.00 in telephony franchise fees for the reasonable use and occupancy of the rights-of-way. The $11,000,000.00 cap will be increased annually at the anniversary date of the execution of the agreement by the rate of inflation Which will be measured by the percentage change in the gross domestic product-price index "GDP PI"), which is the gross domestic product fixed weight price index calculated by the United States Department of Commerce. In addition, in any calendar year that telecommunication franchisee's or revocable licensee's gross revenue does not exceed $500,000.00, the telephony franchisee fee shall be $15,000.00 per year. (2)  Where a request is made for a determination that ascertaining the amount of gross revenue of a particular franchisee or licensee is impossible, upon such determination the requesting party shall pay compensation to the city at a rate of $8.00 per linear foot for the use of the right-of-way within the Peachtree Corridor, and $2.00 per linear foot for the use of the right-of-way outside the Peachtree Corridor. Such impossibility shall be determined by an auditor and other professionals selected by the city and paid for by the requestor, and as used above, the term impossible shall not mean inconvenient or difficult for the franchisee or licensee, but instead, shall mean that gross revenue is truly incapable of calculation. (3)  The measure of compensation for equipment installed for private use only, which is not used to provide telecommunications services or facilities to end-users or other third parties, shall be $1,000.00 per year. (4)  Such fees represent the fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the use of the city's public rights-of-way. (5)  Certification and payment of fees. Fees shall be paid on a quarterly basis for the prior quarter, and shall be due on April 1, July 1, October 1, and the first business day of January of each year. Projections from the prior year shall be adjusted in the first quarter in the following year. On or before each quarterly payment date, all franchisees shall provide a certificate, signed and attested to by appropriate corporate officers or authorized corporate representative which verifies the franchisee's gross revenue for the prior quarter. (6)  Quarterly reports. On or before each quarterly payment date, each telecommunications franchisee and revocable licensee shall submit a quarterly report to the mayor's office of telecommunication to indicate reasonable documentation of the accuracy of the franchise fees or license fees paid. (7)  Inspection and audit. Each franchisee shall submit a certificate on a quarterly basis verifying and reporting its gross revenue to the city. The city reserves the right to audit or review the accuracy of the reports submitted for the purpose of insuring compliance with this article. Such audits or reviews shall be conducted by an auditor chosen by the city. In cases where the franchisee has failed to submit a certificate verifying gross revenue for two consecutive quarters the costs of such audit shall be borne by the franchisee. In addition, should cases where the audit or review reveals an understatement of' gross revenue more than five percent by the franchisee, all reasonable costs and expenses of such audit or review shall be borne by the franchisee and the franchisee shall make full payment of the relevant obligation, including interest at the legal rate set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 7-4-2. Provided further that if, as a result of any audit or review conducted by the franchisee, it is determined that the franchisee has overpaid franchise fees to the city, then the city shall make full refund of the overpayment, including interest at the legal rate set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 7-4-2, which may be in the form of a credit on future franchise fees, and the city has received an underpayment of franchise fees, city shall receive the legal rate of' interest on all such underpayments. (8)  In the event the franchise fee is passed through by a telecommunications provider to the citizens of Atlanta as a cost of providing service, such fees shall be labeled as City of Atlanta right-of-way franchise fee. (i)  Franchisee and revocable licensee shall report linear miles, linear feet, cable-run, and fiber-run miles, depth and width of all manholes and handholes for their use and occupancy in the right-of-way. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-82, §§ 1, 5—7, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 2003-72, §§ 4, 5, 6-8-03) 
Sec. 138-128. - Compliance with rules; licenses required. (a)  Subject to the provisions of this article, the city may adopt rules, policies and requirements to carry out the purposes and provisions of this article. Each applicant, franchisee and licensee shall comply with such rules, policies and requirements. (b)  No person shall construct or install any equipment in the streets to provide telecommunications services without first obtaining such permits or other authorizations as may be required by the city. Such permits which may be required are described more particularly in article II of this chapter. Neither the fees paid in conjunction with obtaining such permits, nor any penalties imposed for the failure to obtain necessary permits or for any other purpose shall be construed as franchise fees nor shall they be used to set off franchise fees or additional permit fees owed by the franchisee or licensee. No permits or other authorizations for such construction or installation shall be issued prior to the granting of a franchise or a revocable license pursuant to this article or such other authorization as may be required by applicable law. (c)  No person shall construct or install equipment in the streets without clear identification of all construction maintenance sites, vehicles, metal plates, and other obstacles with the name and phone number of the franchisee or revocable licensee. (d)  The department of public works may schedule monthly meetings with the franchisee and revocable licensee for the purpose of reviewing the as-built plans as required in section 138-65. Franchisees and licensees who seek to perform construction activity in the right-of-way shall be required to attend the meetings. (e)  Each day during which a franchisee or licensee is in violation of the permitting requirements shall constitute a separate violation. (f)  No permit shall be issued by the city pursuant to chapter 138 Code of Ordinances to any entity that is not a party to a current franchise agreement or revocable license agreement with the City of Atlanta, or is not current in the payment of any franchise fees, revocable license fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-98, § 1, 12-12-01) 
Sec. 138-129. - Submission of application for franchise or revocable license. (a)  Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted to the office of the mayor and shall be in such form and request such information as the mayor may determine, subject to applicable law. (b)  The mayor may require that an application contain the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license and such other information, documentation, and items with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license as the mayor shall deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with applicable law: (1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person to be contacted concerning the application; (2)  A description of the telecommunications services proposed to be provided, including, without limitation, a description of facilities and equipment to be located within the streets; (3)  A description of the proposed franchise area or in the case of a revocable license, the specifically identified streets proposed to be used; (4)  A proposed construction schedule and sequence; (5)  An application fee, which shall consist of a one time non-refundable fee of $10,000.00 for franchise applicants and $5,000.00 for revocable license applicants; (6)  Indicia of ownership of the applicant and identification of all affiliated persons; (7)  A statement from the applicant that they will abide by all applicable laws; and (8)  Such other information as the mayor may determine to be necessary or appropriate to manage the public right-of-way and ensure compliance with this article, subject to applicable law. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-130. - Compliance with all legal requirements.     It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-131. - Factors for review of application. (a)  In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise or revocable license, the city may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and necessary to ensure proper management of the public right-of-way and compliance with this article, provided such factors are consistent with applicable law, including without limitation: (1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city; (2)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise or the revocable license; (3)  Any services or uses of the streets that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise or revocable license; and the adverse impact of the proposed franchise or revocable license on the efficient use of the streets at present and in the future; (4)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all lawful conditions, limitations, requirements and policies with respect to the franchise or the revocable license; (5)  The adequacy of the terms and conditions of the proposed franchise or revocable license agreement to protect the public interest, consistent with applicable law; and (6)  Any other factors or considerations that the city has a lawful right to consider and that are deemed pertinent by the city. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-132. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. (a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and revocable licenses and determine whether a franchise or revocable license should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. (b)  Consistent with applicable law, the city may develop and implement policies and requirements to ensure that the streets have sufficient capacity to reasonably accommodate existing and future uses in a rational and efficient manner. In evaluating an applicant for a franchise or revocable license, the city may consider an applicant's proposals for addressing capacity needs and compliance with city policies and requirements. (c)  Consistent with applicable law, upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city, the city may grant or deny the franchise or revocable license, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise or revocable license is granted. If the application is denied, a written determination shall be prepared which shall include the reasons for denial. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-133. - Agreement required.     If an application is complete and the applicant otherwise complies with applicable law, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city, including the provisions of this article, the mayor shall enter into negotiations with the applicant to determine whether such applicant and the city are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license in accordance with section 138-134 and 138-135 of this article. The proposed agreement, the application, and such other information as the mayor determines is appropriate or may request shall be forwarded to the city council for its review and consideration. The city may reject any application which is incomplete or otherwise fails to comply with applicable law, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local authority having jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-134. - Terms and conditions of franchise. (a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise and/or in a separate written agreement. A franchise granted pursuant to this article shall not become effective until said separate ordinance becomes effective and any separate agreement is executed by both parties. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: (1)  The term of the franchise which shall not exceed five years with the option of the city to renew for two additional one year terms: (2)  The franchise area and the telecommunications services to be offered; (3)  The compensation to be paid to the city; (4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled; (5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, which shall be required to ensure the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise; (6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities located in the right-of-way and records of the franchisee in order to ensure compliance with this article and the franchise; (7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee; (8)  The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records of those matters pertinent to its obligations under the franchise, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; (9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; (10)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; (11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight of the franchisee by the city; (12)  Provisions to monitor changes in control of the franchisee and in the event the franchisee assigns, sells or otherwise disposes of the entirety of the rights and privileges in a franchise agreement, the assignee shall he obligated to negotiate an acceptable franchise agreement with the city. (13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; (14)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; (15)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; (16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise, including compliance with any coordinated construction schedules as may be established by the commissioner of the department of public works; and (17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of this article and to effectively manage the public right-of-way, consistent with applicable law. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2003-72, §§ 3, 7, 6-8-03) 
Sec. 138-135. - Terms and conditions of revocable license. (a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any revocable license granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the revocable license and/or in a separate written agreement. A revocable license granted pursuant to this article shall not become effective until the separate ordinance granting the license becomes effective and any separate written agreement is executed by both parties. Such separate ordinance and/or written agreement shall address the same subjects listed in section 138-129 of this article subject to the following limitations: (1)  The revocable license shall be for an initial term not to exceed five years from the date that the ordinance granting the revocable license becomes effective with the option of the city to renew not to exceed two additional one years; (2)  The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause; and (3)  The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses previously granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than 500 linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services to any person in the city. (b)  In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a telecommunications provider to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in sections 138-127(b)(1) and section 138-135(a)(3). then such telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this article, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-136. - Renewal applications. (a)  A franchisee or licensee that desires to renew its franchise or license under this article shall, not less than six months nor more than 12 months before expiration of the current franchise or license, file an application with the city for renewal of its franchise. Any information required pursuant to the specific agreement between the city and the franchisee or licensee. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-137. - Renewal determinations. (a)  Upon receiving an application for renewal, the mayor may solicit comments from the relevant city departments and the public at large by undertaking the following: (1)  Notifying the commissioner of the department of public works and any other relevant city department that the application has been filed. The departments may provide written comments regarding the past performance of the franchisee or licensee. (2)  Presenting the matter for public comment before the city utilities committee. (b)  Within 120 days after receiving a complete application for renewal in accordance with section 138-136, infra, the mayor shall issue a written recommendation to city council recommending the grant or denial of the renewal application in whole or in part. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal. These reasons may involve the same as those considered in granting the original franchise or license, in addition to the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and other chapters referenced herein, and with the terms of its franchise or revocable license. Comments from the public or from other city departments as described in section (a) above may serve as evidence of the franchisee or licensee's compliance or noncompliance. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-138. - Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.     No franchise or revocable license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the franchisee's or licensee's performance of the franchise or license, or of the requirements of this chapter or of other chapters referenced herein, have been cured, or until a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the franchisee has been approved by the mayor. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-139. - Surety, security fund, and bonding requirements.     Each franchise and revocable license agreement shall contain surety, security fund, insurance, and bonding requirements that have been determined by the risk manager to be sufficient to protect the city from occurrences and omissions which may occur during the construction and maintenance activities conducted by the franchisee or licensee in the streets. 
Sec. 138-140. - Franchise fee for state or local issued cable or video franchise.     There shall be imposed a uniform franchise fee of five percent of the gross revenues on any cable or video franchisee from services provided within the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2008-05(08-O-0192), § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 138-140.1. - Authorized designee.     The city hereby authorizes the commissioner of the department of public works, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. (Ord. No. 2008-05(08-O-0192), § 1, 2-12-08) 
Secs. 138-141—138-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 138-161. - Severability.     Nothing contained in this article shall be construed or operate to be more stringent than the conditions or requirements imposed by the Georgia Department of Transportation for utilities and similar service providers with facilities in the state rights-of-way. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this article is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-162. - Coordination and interpretation.     In the coordination and interpretation of this article, the provisions of this article shall prevail over any conflicting provisions in the franchise agreement. In the coordination, interpretation, or enforcement of this article, whenever the singular, plural, masculine, feminine or neuter is employed, such references shall be deemed interchangeable whenever necessary to preserve the form and intent of this article. (Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-163. - Amendments to article.     Any franchises or revocable licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to all amendments to this article effected during the term of the franchise or revocable license. 
Secs. 138-164—138-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY HALL[8] Footnotes: --- (8) --- Editor's note— It should be noted that section 2 of Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), provides, " The City currently charges a rental fee for the City Hall Old Council Chambers in the amount of $1,500 for six hours. It currently charges a rental fee for the City Hall Atrium in the amount of $2,500 for six hours and this ordinance does not increase the current fee structure." 
Sec. 138-186. - Applicability of previous articles.     Article I through Article V of this chapter, including the definitions and the department of purview, shall not apply to this Article VI. (Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 138-187. - City Hall defined.     For purposes of this article, "City Hall" shall mean all interior areas of City Hall, including without limitation the building located at 68 Mitchell Street, the building located at 55 Trinity Avenue, the connecting hallway between the two, the entrance area in the Mitchell Street building immediately inside the exterior doors, the entrance area in the Trinity Street building in which security screening is located, all meeting rooms, office suites, Council Chambers, Old Council Chambers, the cafeteria, the Atrium, the underground parking garage, and any completely enclosed outdoor areas including the roof terrace on the fifth floor of the Trinity Street building. (Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 138-188. - Department of purview.     The commissioner of the department of enterprise assets management may adopt appropriate rules and regulations governing the use and operation of City Hall. In addition, the commissioner of the department of enterprise assets management may issue rental permits for use of the Atrium located on the first floor of the Trinity Street building, and Old Council Chambers located on the third floor of the Mitchell Street building, provided that the rules for obtaining permits are set forth in written policies and procedures made available to the public and applied uniformly. Issuance of permits shall not be based on or influenced by the race, color, creed, religion, gender, age, disability status, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation or gender identity of the applicant and/or the event participants. In addition, issuance of permits shall not be based on the identity, associational relationships or viewpoints of the applicant and/or the event participants, or on the viewpoints that may be expressed during the event. (Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 6, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 138-189. - Rules of conduct for City Hall.     In addition to any rules and regulations established by the commissioner of the department of enterprise assets management, the following conduct shall be prohibited in City Hall: (a)  Shouting, screaming or yelling, where the person's voice is plainly audible to anyone at a distance of 50 feet or more. (b)  Emitting or creating any sound, including sound created by musical instruments, where the sound is plainly audible to anyone at a distance of 50 feet or more. (c)  Using a sound-amplifying or voice-amplifying apparatus. (d)  Blocking any of the City Hall entrance/exit doors. (e)  Obstructing other persons from freely entering or leaving City Hall, or any of the City Hall meeting rooms, suites, offices or common areas. (f)  Carrying or possessing any sign, poster, plaque or notice unless it is constructed solely of a cloth, vinyl, paper or flexible cardboard material no greater than one-quarter inch in thickness. (g)  Carrying or possessing any length of lumber, wood or wood lath unless it is one-fourth inch or less in thickness and two inches or less in width. If not generally rectangular in shape, the object shall not exceed three-quarters inch in its thickest dimension. Both ends of the length of lumber, wood or wood lath shall be blunt and shall not be pointed. (Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 6, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 138-190. - Exceptions to rules of conduct.     Exceptions to the rules of conduct set forth in section 138-189 are as follows: (a)  The rules of conduct shall not apply where the prohibited activity is performed by a city official or employee acting in her/his official capacity, where the activity is executed as part of her/his official city duties. (b)  The rules of conduct shall not apply where the prohibited activity is performed by a city contractor or subcontractor, and is associated and performed in conjunction with the scope of work set forth in the applicable city contract. (Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 138-191. - Rental of City Hall Atrium and Old Council Chambers. (a)  Members of the public may receive a rental permit for use of the City Hall Atrium and/or City Hall Old Council Chambers for the purpose of conducting life cycle event ceremonies such as weddings, and for having receptions and parties, provided that these events begin after 5:30 p.m. on weekdays or on weekends or holidays. Rental permits shall be applied for pursuant to the written rules established by the commissioner of the department of enterprise assets management, as described in section 138-188 above. (b)  Persons who have obtained a rental permit for use of the City Hall Atrium or Old Council Chambers may speak, emit or create sound louder than established in section 138-189, and may use one or more sound-amplifying or voice-amplifying apparatuses, but only if the conduct occurs at the time and location set forth in the permit, and only if the permit explicitly allows the conduct at the time it is occurring. (Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 6, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 138-192. - Additional rules for meeting rooms and press conference locations. (a)  In addition to applying the rules of conduct set forth in section 138-189 above, any city official, employee or city entity holding a meeting (including without limitation a hearing or press conference) in City Hall may establish additional conduct rules for the meeting, provided that: (1)  The meeting is run by a city official or employee in her/his official capacity, or is a meeting of a city-created agency, board, or committee; and (2)  The meeting is open to the public; and (3)  The additional rules are applied uniformly; and (4)  The rules are not based on the identity, associational relationships, or viewpoints of any speaker, and are not based upon any of the protected categories listed in section 138-188 above. (b)  For any meeting that fits the description set forth in subsection (a)(1) and (a)(2) above, the city official or city entity holding the meeting shall have the right to waive section 138-89(c) above for the sole purpose of allowing use of microphones. (Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 138-193. - Rules of conduct for City Hall suites and offices.     In addition to applying the rules of conduct set forth in section 138-189 above, a department head or her/his designee may establish additional rules of conduct for all offices and suites where the department is housed. (Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 138-194. - City Hall access during evenings, weekends and holidays. (a)  Standard operating hours of City Hall are weekdays from 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 pm. (b)  Entrance to City Hall during weekday non-standard operating hours, weekends and holidays observed by city government shall be limited to: (1)  A city employee who presents a valid city-issued photo identification card to the City Hall entrance security guard; (2)  A non-city employee or a city employee without a city identification card accompanied by a city employee who presents a valid city-issued photo identification card; (3)  A contractor hired by the city to perform maintenance, repairs or improvements at City Hall, provided that the department of enterprise assets management issues written notification to the City Hall entrance security guard allowing admission, and provided that the contractor produces valid photo identification to the security personnel; (4)  A person attending a meeting that is being held by the city, or by a city-created agency, board, or committee, where the meeting is open to the public; (5)  A person attending an event being held in the City Hall Atrium or Old Council Chambers, after providing valid photo identification. (c)  With the exception of city employees or people accompanied by them, and contractors providing services at City Hall, any person in City Hall during weekday non-standard operating hours, weekends and. holidays must be at a meeting open to the public or at an event in the City Hall Atrium or Old Council Chambers. The visitors may not be in any other area of City Hall. (Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 6, 8-29-18 ) 
Secs. 138-195—138-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[9] Footnotes: --- (9) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 1, adopted Sept. 26, 2006, effective Jan. 2, 2007, repealed art. VII in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to parades as enacted by Code 1977; as subsequently amended. The user is directed to chapter 142 of this Code for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of repeal. 
Secs. 138-231—138-255. - Reserved. 