Chapter 70 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 78; law enforcement, ch. 98. Land development code reference— Impact fee for emergency services, § 19-1001 et seq. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; 911 emergency telephone service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq.; emergency medical services, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 70-1. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions.     In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. (Ord. No. 2011-49(11-O-1323), § 1, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 70-2. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions.     Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the city's chief financial officer at the times and in the manner provided by Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. (Ord. No. 2011-49(11-O-1323), § 2, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 70-3. - Administrative provisions.     The clerk of the city is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this ordinance and amendments thereto in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), by December 31, 2011. (Ord. No. 2011-49(11-O-1323), § 3, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 70-4. - Depositing of funds; use of funds.     In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by the city from charges imposed by this ordinance shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(d)(2) and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction. All such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). (Ord. No. 2011-49(11-O-1323), § 4, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 70-5. - Effective date.     As required by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), this ordinance shall become effective January 1, 2012. (Ord. No. 2011-49(11-O-1323), § 5, 11-16-11) 
Secs. 70-6—70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, approved May 29, 2013, effective September 15, 2013, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 70-26—70-35, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to burglar or robbery alarm systems. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 70-26. - Purpose/applicability. (a)  The purpose of this article is to encourage alarm users and alarm companies to properly use and maintain alarm systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarms, which unduly divert emergency services from responding to actual criminal activity and other emergencies. This article governs systems intended to summon emergency response, requires registration, and provides for civil penalties for violations. (b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any governmental agency, board, authority or entity. (c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to alarm systems installed, operated or maintained pursuant to chapter 78 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. (Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-27. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the City of Atlanta to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this article.     Alarm company means any business, whether operated by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity, which is in the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring alarm systems at an alarm site.     Alarm permit means a permit issued by the City of Atlanta allowing the operating of an alarm system within the City of Atlanta.     Alarm system means any mechanized and/or electronic device or set of devices intended to detect and signal the occurrence of activity requiring the immediate need for emergency services at the premises in which such device or set of devices is installed. For purposes of this article, alarm system does not mean any such device or set of devices installed operated or maintained pursuant to chapter 78 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances.     Alarm user means, with respect to any premises, any person, corporation, partnership, or proprietorship or other entity, who owns, leases, an alarm system or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises.     Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.     Automatic dialer or auto-dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message when activated over a telephone line, radio or other communication system requesting emergency dispatch.     Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the emergency communications center that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to the Atlanta Police Department or the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no such penalty will be assessed.     Duress alarm means a silent alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life-threatening situation or crime in progress requiring law enforcement response.     Emergency communication center means the City of Atlanta 911 Center.     Emergency dispatch means Atlanta Police Department and/or Atlanta Fire Rescue Department dispatch.     Emergency response means Atlanta Police Department and/or Atlanta Fire Rescue Department response.     False alarm means the activation of an alarm system to summon emergency personnel which occurs as a result of mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, unless the request for response was cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before the Atlanta Police Department or the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department arrives at the alarm site. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the Atlanta Police Department or the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, other such crime was committed, attempted, or occurred in or on the premises, which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system, or no fire occurred which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm, which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by violent conditions of nature, nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user or alarm system. In addition, an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the user's alarm company, or designee, to test the system and the alarm company upon receiving such permission does not request emergency dispatch.     Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user.     Permit year means a 12-month period beginning on the day and month on which an alarm permit is issued.     Runaway alarm means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. Either the Atlanta Police Department or the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department may in its respective discretion discontinue responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm.     SIA Control Panel Standard CP-OI means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-OI Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA P-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction".     Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting the Atlanta Police Department or the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department for dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this section, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting emergency dispatch. (Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-28. - Alarm permits. (a)  Permit required. Effective August 15, 2013, no alarm system shall be used unless the alarm user first obtains a permit for such alarm system from the City of Atlanta. There will be no charge for the permit. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to facilitate emergency dispatch. (b)  Registration/Renewal. (1)  Each alarm user has the duty to obtain and complete a permit application on a form provided by the City of Atlanta. (2)  After the initial issuance of a permit under this article, application for renewal shall be made annually by the anniversary of the date of initial issuance. (3)  Alarm permits issued pursuant to this article shall automatically expire on the day following the anniversary date of initial issuance. (4)  The operation of a previously permitted alarm system following the expiration of an alarm permit and the failure of the alarm user to renew their alarm permit by the date required, shall be a violation of this article and shall be enforced through the assessment of a civil penalty in the amount of $50.00. (5)  Failure to renew warning: there shall be no civil penalty assessed in accordance with section 70-28(b)(4) upon the issuance of the first notice of the failure to renew. Instead, the first notice of a failure to renew shall constitute a warning. Should an alarm user continue to operate their alarm system and fail to renew their alarm permit following the issuance of the failure to renew warning, the alarm user shall be assessed a civil penalty in accordance with section 70-28(b)(4), which shall be payable consistent with the remaining provisions of this article. (c)  Non-transferability; new registration required. Alarm permits are not transferable. Upon transfer of the possession of premises at which an alarm system is maintained, the new alarm user shall register for an alarm permit within 30 days of obtaining possession of the property. (d)  Reporting updated information. When information required on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the City of Atlanta within 30 days of the change. (e)  Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure and/or tenant. (Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13; Ord. No. 2015-14(15-O-1106), § 1, 3-25-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-35(16-O-1520) , § 1, 10-12-16; Ord. No. 2017-58(17-O-1581), § 1, 10-2-17 ) 
Sec. 70-29. - Government immunity.     Registration of an alarm system is not intended, to, nor does it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response by the City of Atlanta, the Atlanta Police Department, the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department or other governmental department or agency. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to an alarm dispatch request is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By registering an alarm system, the alarm user acknowledges that emergency response may be based on factors such as availability of emergency units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions and/or staffing levels. (Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-30. - Duties of an alarm user.     An alarm user shall be required to: (a)  Register and obtain an alarm permit; (b)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms; (c)  Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within 30 minutes upon notification of the need to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system; to provide right of entry to the premises, or to provide alternative security for the premises; (d)  Ensure that an alarm is not manually activated by the alarm user or any other person for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report; (e)  Upon obtaining a permit number, provide that number to the alarm company; and (f)  Obtain a new permit if there is a change of address or ownership of a business or residence or if there is updated information. (Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-31. - Responsibilities of an alarm company. (a)  An alarm company should: (1)  Obtain and maintain required state and local license(s) and/or permits. (2)  Maintain current contact information, including user permit numbers, which shall be provided to the emergency communications center at the time of a request for law enforcement response. (3)  Ninety days after the effective date of this section alarm companies should use control panels meeting Security Industry Association (SIA) Control Panel Standard CP-OI on all new installations. (4)  Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company should provide verbal and written instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user and provide written information on how to obtain service from the alarm company. (b)  An alarm company performing monitoring services should: (1)  Attempt to verify, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting emergency dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, except in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime or fire-in-progress has been verified by video and/or audible means. (2)  Communicate a cancellation to the emergency communications center as soon as possible following a determination that response is unnecessary. (3)  Communicate any available information about the location of the alarm. (Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-32. - Prohibited acts. (a)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person to: (1)  Operate an alarm system without a permit issued by the City of Atlanta in accordance with this article; (2)  Activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning emergency response when no unauthorized entry, robbery, other such crime was committed, attempted, or occurred in or on the premises, when no fire has occurred, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. (3)  Install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than ten minutes. (4)  Install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the emergency communications center. (5)  The occurrence of excessive false alarms as described in section 70-33(d) of this article. (b)  Violations of this article are punishable by the assessment of civil penalty (ies) as provided in this article. (Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-33. - Enforcement of provisions. (a)  Civil penalty. Any violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be civil in nature and shall not constitute a criminal infraction. (b)  Payment. Civil penalties shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice. All civil penalties collected shall be deposited into the City of Atlanta General Fund. (c)  Late fee. The failure of an alarm user to make payment of any civil penalties assessed under this article within 30 days from the date of the notice shall result in the imposition of a 50 percent late fee except that the penalty and late fee combined shall not exceed $1,000.00. (d)  Excessive false alarms. It is hereby found and determined that two or more false alarms annually is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be a violation of this article. Civil penalties for false alarms within any 365-day period (rolling year) shall be assessed against an alarm user as follows: (1)  For the first false alarm, a warning shall be given, but no civil penalty shall be imposed. (2)  For the second false alarm, a warning shall be given, but no civil penalty shall be imposed. (3)  For the third false alarm, the person or entity shall be charged a $50.00 civil penalty; however, no civil penalty imposed if the alarm user attends the alarm user awareness class in accordance with Code Section 70-34. (4)  For the fourth false alarm, the person or entity shall be charged a $100.00 civil penalty. (5)  For the fifth and sixth false alarms, the person or entity shall be charged a $200.00 civil penalty. (6)  For all successive false alarms, the person or entity shall be charged a $500.00 civil penalty. (e)  Other civil penalties. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, a violation of any other provision thereof, including, but not limited to the provision of this article prohibiting the operation of an alarm system without a permit issued by the City of Atlanta, shall be enforced through the assessment of civil penalty(ies) in the amount of $75.00. However, no civil penalty shall be assessed for a violation of the provision of this article prohibiting the operation of an alarm system without a permit before February 1, 2014. (f)  Failure to pay civil penalties/late fees. Following the imposition of any late fees pursuant to this section, the City of Atlanta reserves the right to forward any alarm user's outstanding penalties and late fees to a collection agency should an alarm user fail to make payment within 90 days from the date of the notice of the late fee. Collection fees may be added by the collection agency to the balance owed to the extent allowed by law. (Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13; Ord. No. 2015-14(15-O-1106), § 2, 3-25-15 ; Ord. No. 2017-58(17-O-1581), § 1, 10-2-17 ) 
Sec. 70-34. - Alarm user awareness class. (a)  Alarm user awareness class. The City of Atlanta may create and implement an alarm user awareness class and may request the assistance of the area alarm companies to assist in developing and implementing the class. If created, the class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false alarms. (b)  Alarm user awareness class in lieu of payment. An alarm user may have the option of attending an alarm user awareness class in lieu of paying the prescribed civil penalty for a third false alarm. This option may only be exercised once annually. (Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13; Ord. No. 2017-58(17-O-1581), § 1, 10-2-17 ) 
Sec. 70-35. - Administrative appeal/procedures. (a)  Assessment of civil penalties imposed as a result of a violation of this article may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal within 14 days of the date of notification of the assessment of such civil penalties. (b)  The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalties or other enforcement decisions. (c)  In any appeal filed in accordance with this section, the appellant shall be afforded an opportunity for an evidentiary hearing under judicial forms of procedure, after notice of the assessment of such penalties is served in person or by mail. (d)  The notice of assessment of civil penalty shall include: (1)  A statement regarding the time, place, and nature of the hearing; (2)  A statement of the legal authority under which, and venue wherein the hearing is to be held. (3)  A reference to the particular provision of this article allegedly violated. (4)  A short and plain statement of the matters asserted including civil penalties assessed. (e)  An appellant shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence on all issues involved. (f)  In any appeal filed in accordance with this section, a record shall be kept, which shall include: (1)  The notice of assessment of civil penalty. (2)  A record of the oral testimony plus all other evidence received or considered except that oral proceedings or any part thereof shall be transcribed only upon request. (3)  Any decision, opinion, or report by the court or presiding hearing officer. (g)  Assessment of civil penalties imposed as a result of a violation of the provision of this article prohibiting the operation of an alarm system without a permit, or other civil penalties imposed against persons not holding alarm permits, may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the municipal court in accordance with this section. (h)  Assessment of civil penalties against alarm permit holders may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal in accordance with this section. (1)  In lieu of the municipal court, any appeal filed in accordance with this subsection may be held before any Atlanta Police Department representative who has been selected and appointed by the chief of police for such purpose. (2)  Before appointing a hearing officer, the chief of police shall determine that the person under consideration is qualified by reason of training, experience, and competence. (3)  Notice of whether appeals filed under this subsection shall be before the municipal court or by a hearing representative shall be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk of the City of Atlanta no less than 30 days prior to the effective date of the change of hearing location. (i)  The court or the officer presiding over an appeal pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall review an appeal from the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decision, the court or hearing officer shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalties or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. (j)  The court or the officer presiding over an appeal shall render a decision within ten business days of the hearing, and shall give written notification of the decision. (k)  The decision of the court or presiding hearing officer is subject to review via certiorari to superior court. (Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-36. - Confidentiality.     To the extent allowed by law, information contained and gathered through the alarm registration process will be held in confidence by the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. 2013-23(12-O-0375) states: "During the period of time between the approval of the amendments in this ordinance and September 15, 2013, the City of Atlanta shall conduct a campaign to educate the citizens of the City of Atlanta of the effects of thereof. A component of this campaign shall include outreach to the City's Neighborhood Planning Units (NPUs), but shall. not be limited thereto." 
Chapter 74 - ENVIRONMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Clean city commission, § 2-1876 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 86; indoor air, § 86-31 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 130; sewage disposal, § 154-196 et seq.; tree protection, § 158-26 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 74-1. - Cost recovery for reparation of damage due to hazardous material. (a)  For the purposes of this section the term "hazardous material" means and includes all chemicals, materials or substances that may be so defined by the Secretary of Transportation of the United States under the provisions of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act, 49 USC 1801—1812 (Public Safety Law 93-633). (b)  If any damage to city property or discharge of hazardous materials from the shipping package or container or the threat of such discharge occurs which results from the transport, storage, holding, detention, delivery for transport or acceptance for transport of hazardous materials in this city, the city may recover from any shipper, carrier, bailor, bailee or any other person responsible for such storage, transport, holding, detention, delivery or acceptance all costs, including direct as well as indirect, incurred by the city in the prevention, abatement or removal of any such discharge or threatened discharge, including reasonable attorney's fees or costs incurred with respect to recovery. (c)  The mayor is authorized to direct the bringing of any legal action necessary and desirable to enforce this section. (Code 1977, § 7-4028) State Law reference— Costs of oil spill response, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-500 et seq. 
Secs. 74-2—74-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION, AND POLLUTION CONTROL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-48, § 1, adopted Aug. 20, 2004, repealed art. II, §§ 74-36—74-45, in its entirety. Section 3 of said ordinance provided for the inclusion of a new art. II to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 2001-72, § 1, adopted Oct. 9, 2001. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 1, approved July 27, 2010, amended the title of Art. II to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. Land Development Code reference— Building regulations, § 8-2001 et seq. State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4 et seq. 
Sec. 74-36. - Title, authority and findings. (a)  Title. This article will be known as the "City of Atlanta Soil Erosion, Sedimentation, and Pollution Control Ordinance." (b)  Authority. This article is enacted to implement the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1, et seq., as amended in the 2009 Session of the Georgia General Assembly. (c)  Findings. The Council of the City of Atlanta finds that soil erosion and sediment deposition onto lands and into waters within the watersheds of the city are occurring as a result of a need for improvement in the application of proper soil erosion and sedimentation control practices in land clearing, soil movement, and construction activities and that such erosion and sediment deposition result in pollution of state waters and damage to domestic, agricultural, recreational., fish and wildlife, and other resources uses. It is therefore declared to be the policy of the city and the intent of this article to strengthen and extend the present erosion and sedimentation control activities and programs of the city and to provide for the establishment and implementation of a city-wide comprehensive soil erosion and sedimentation control program to conserve and protect the land, water, air and other resources of the city. The city further declares its intention through this article to meet or exceed, where permitted, the requirements of state and federal law regarding the regulation of land-disturbing activities. (Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 2, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-37. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: (1)  Approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the City of Atlanta or the Fulton or DeKalb Soil and Water Conservation District. (2)  Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of sound conservation and engineering practices, and vegetative measures to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. (3)  Board means the Georgia Board of Natural Resources. (4)  Certified personnel or certified person means a person who holds current certification issued by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC) for completion of appropriate courses as determined by the Commission. (5)  City means the City of Atlanta, which is a local issuing authority as defined herein. (6)  Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). (7)  Commissioner means the Commissioner of the Department of Watershed Management, or a designee. (7.5)  CPESC means a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. (8)  Cut means a portion or area of land surface from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation (i.e. the volume between the original ground surface and the excavated surface), and also known as excavation. (9)  Department means the Department of Watershed Management, or its successor agency. (10)  Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. (11)  Director means the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. (12)  District means the Fulton or DeKalb Soil and Water Conservation District. (13)  Disturbed area means the total area on which land-disturbing activities are to take place. (14)  Division means the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. (15)  Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. (16)  Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. (17)  Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." (18)  Fill means a portion or area of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been or will be added (i.e. the volume above the original ground). (19)  Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in pennanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. (20)  Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. (21)  Late-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including. but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 74-38(e). (22)  Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. (23)  Local issuing authority means the City of Atlanta acting through its Department of Watershed Management, which has been certified by the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. and the rules for erosion and sediment control issued by the division set out in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. 391-3-7-.09. (24)  Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia means the guide published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, and amendments to the manual approved by the Commission., as specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b), adopted by reference in section 74-40(a) of the Atlanta City Code, and commonly referred to as the "Green Book." The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is currently available from the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (http://www.gaswcc.org). (25)  Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., referenced in Article VII Chapter 74 section 314(b) of the Atlanta City Code, which addresses environmental and development-related matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. (26)  Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. (27)  Notice or official notice means a written communication by the city to the owner, operator, or person conducting land-disturbing activity, including a notice to comply pursuant to section 74-42(d), a stop work order pursuant to sections 74-42(b), 74-42(c), 74-42(e), or 74-42(f), or a fine pursuant to section 74-42(g). Notice shall be deemed official when it meets one of the following requirements: (1)  Communicated in writing to the owner or operator via U.S. mail; (2)  Hand-delivered to the owner, operator, or person conducting land-disturbing activity; or (3)  Posted in a conspicuous location on the site. (28)  Notice of intent (N0I) means a notification filed with the state to obtain coverage under the NPDES State General Permit for stormwater discharges from a construction site. (29)  Notice of termination (NOT) means a notification filed with the state to terminate coverage under the NPDES State General Permit for stormwater discharges from a construction site. (30)  Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of' those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. (31)  Original ground surface means the existing ground surface before any grading, excavation, or filling. (32)  Owner or property owner means any person having individual or joint or common title to property in any form defined by the laws of the State of Georgia as an estate or interest, whether legal or equitable and however acquired, in real property. (33)  Permanent vegetation means planted trees, shrubs. grasses, perennial vines, a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the Atlanta region and planted at the appropriate time of year, or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of perennial vegetation appropriate for the Atlanta region. (34)  Permit or land-disturbing activity permit (or LDA permit) means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. Such authorization shall be deemed included in the building permit issued pursuant to Appendix A, section 103.1 of the City of Atlanta Land Development Code. If a building permit is not required, such authorization may be provided by a department-approved plan and subject to any required fees, bonds, or NOIs. (35)  Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. (36)  Project means the entire proposed development regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. (37)  Properly designed means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications or BMP design requirements contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (Green Book). (38)  Riparian buffer means the area of land lying adjacent to a wetland or stream in which development is prohibited or limited as more particularly set out in Article VII Chapter 74 section 303 of the Atlanta City Code, or applicable state or federal law. (39)  Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. (40)  Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. (41)  Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. (42)  Site means the real property on which land-disturbing activities occur regardless of the size of the disturbed area. (43)  Stabilization or stabilize means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. (44)  State General Permit or National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means the authorization for the discharge of stormwater runoff from construction activities. This term shall mean the NPDES permit currently in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). (45)  State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. (46)  State water buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to a state waters or trout stream as more particularly set out in section 74-43(c)(15) and 74-43(c)(16). (47)  Structure means that which is built, placed, or constructed, as more particularly set out in Part 8, Chapter 2, Article B section 8-2083 of the City of Atlanta Land Development Code. The term "structure" includes impervious surfaces as defined by Article VII Chapter 74 section 74-302(15) of the Atlanta City Code, temporary buildings or appurtenances, and pipes or utility lines. (48)  Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means methods for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. (49)  Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. (50)  Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil using one or more of the following measures found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia: a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. (51)  Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed, and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. (52)  Wetlands means those areas, delineated in accordance with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual, 1987 as amended, that under normal conditions contain hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrologic conditions reflecting temporary or permanent inundation or saturation by surface or ground water. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas and typically support a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. (Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 3, 7-27-10; Ord. No. 2016-48(16-O-1642) , §§ 1—4, 12-14-16) 
Sec. 74-38. - Applicability of article; exemptions.     This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: (1)  Surface mining as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act;" (2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; (3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; (4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan or development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, (a)  Construction of any such residence (single-family) shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 74-43 of this article. (b)  For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a. trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. (c)  The minimum requirements of section 74-43 of this article and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the city; (5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs. goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry., including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds. (6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing; or other activities otherwise prohibited in a state waters buffer, as established in section 74-43(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices. (7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. (8)  Any project involving less than 5,000 square feet of disturbed area; provided, however, (a)  Construction of any such project shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 74-43 of this article; (b)  This exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters (perennial stream), and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events (ephemeral stream) and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than 5,000 square feet, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that (c)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9), or (10) of this section; (9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1 except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the city, and the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a LDA permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same fines or penalties as violations by permit holders. (10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if an LDA permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same fines or penalties as violations by permit holders; and (11)  Any public water system reservoir. (Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 4, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-39. - Application and permit process. (a)  General. A permit is required for any land-disturbing activity in the City of Atlanta unless exempt in accordance with section 74-38, above. The property owner, developer and designated planters and engineers shall review die general development plans and detailed plans of the city that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city and shall design the proposed development in compliance with these regulations. Land disturbing activity permits shall be applied for as part of a building, permit in compliance with this article and Part 8 of this Code of Ordinances. (b)  Application requirements. (1)  No person required to apply for an LDA permit shall conduct any land-disturbing activity requiring an approved erosion and sediment control plan within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a LDA permit from the city to perform such activity; (2)  The application for a land-disturbing activity permit shall be submitted to the bureau of buildings and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 74-40 of this article. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of subsection 74-43 of this article. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. The application shall include the owner's name, street address, mailing address if different from street address (a post office box alone shall not satisfy this requirement), and other contact information such as phone numbers and e-mail addresses. (3)  Immediately upon approval of an application and plan for an LDA permit, the city shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of' the erosion and sedimentation control plan, if such review and approval or disapproval is required. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the city. No LDA permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsection 74-43(c)(13), (15) and (16), and bonding, if required, as per subsection 74-39(b)(5) have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the city and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. (4)  If an LDA permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous city-issued permits, this article, section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the city may deny the LDA permit application. (5)  Performance bonds required. For land-disturbing activities on sites with a disturbed area of one acre or greater, or on which there is cut, fill, or a combination of both in an amount greater than 500 cubic yards, the applicant shall post a performance bond in accordance with the following requirements: (i)  The bond amount shall be $3,000.00 minimum, and prorated at $3,000.00 per disturbed acre for any amount or fraction greater than one acre; (ii)  The performance bond shall be issued by a bonding company licensed and registered in Georgia; (iii)  The performance bond shall ensure that all affected areas will be stabilized through structural measures, vegetative measures, or both to provide effective soil erosion and sediment control; (iv)  The terms of the bond shall extend from the beginning of the project until one year following its completion. The performance bond shall be written to the benefit of the City of Atlanta and shall obligate the bonding company to correct any violations of this article for a period of one year following cessation of land-disturbing activities or final sign-off pursuant to section 74-43(f); (v)  Failure to maintain or renew the performance bond, should it expire prior to final sign-off, shall be a violation of this article, and shall be a separate violation for each day of such failure, and shall be grounds for suspending or revoking the LDA permit. (6)  If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the LDA permit after issuance, the city may call the bond in accordance with section 74-42(h). (c)  LDA permits. (1)  LDA permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the city of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. (2)  No LDA permit shall be issued by the city unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the city has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsection 74-43(c)(13), (15), (16), or other ordinances are obtained, bonding requirements. if necessary as per subsection 74-39(b)(5) are met, and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met; provided, however, such approval by the district will not be required if the city and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the city to approve the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. If the LDA permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. (3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate LDA permit shall be required for each phase. (4)  The LDA permit may be suspended, revoked. or modified by the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the permittee, owner, or a successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan, or that the permittee, owner, or a successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of an LDA permit or owner shall notify any successor in title as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the LDA permit. (5)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the tax collector or tax commissioner of the county in which the property for which the permit is requested lies and by the official responsible for the collection for municipal taxes for the city, if applicable, certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. (6)  No permit shall be issued or permit modification or revision be approved for construction within a larger common plan of development or sale if there is a pending enforcement action pursuant section 74-42 or the state general permit, except to allow corrective or remedial measures. (7)  Notice of intent and notice of termination. NOIs and NOTs required to be submitted to the EPD District Office under the State General Permit shall be submitted concurrently to the City of Atlanta. (8)  A copy of the permit shall be posted on the site at all times as set out in Appendix A, Chapter 1 section 102.2(c) of the City of Atlanta Land Development Code. (Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 5, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-40. - Plan requirements. (a)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 74-43 of this article. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, city ordinances, and state laws. (b)  Data required for site plan. (1)  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or a narrative shall be written on the site plan, in the general notes section, or in the erosion and sediment control notes section of the plan. (2)  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. (3)  Name, street address, and phone number of the property owner. (4)  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. (5)  Total size of site, project, or phase under construction, and total size of disturbed area in both square feet and acres. (6)  Construction activity schedule showing the sequence of major activities involving land-disturbing activity to be completed in chronological order, including, but not limited to, anticipated starting and completion dates for the project, initial installation of BMPs, clearing arid grubbing activities, grading, utility installation, and temporary and final stabilization in accordance with section 74-43(f). Include the following statement in bold letters: "The installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with laud-disturbing activities." (7)  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems' storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. (8)  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting, dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan shall show applicable options for year-round seeding in accordance with Chapter 6 Section II, Vegetative Measures, of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. (9)  Detailed drawings for all structural erosion control practices. Detailed drawings shall either follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, or shall adhere to more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. (10)  In accordance with section 74-41(a), the following maintenance statement in bold letters: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." (c)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a certified design professional. The certified plans shall contain: (1)  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. (2)  Vicinity maps showing location of project or site, and existing streets and drainage paths within one mile of the project. (3)  Boundary line survey. (4)  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. (5)  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: Map Scale Contour Interval, ft. Ground Slope 1 inch = 100 ft. or larger scale 0.5 or 1 Flat 0—2% 1 or 2 Rolling 2—8% 2, 5 or 10 Steep 8%  (6)  Adjacent areas and features including, but not limited to, streams, lakes, wetlands, and residential areas, which may be affected by the proposed land-disturbing activity. (7)  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. (8)  State waters buffers required by section 74-43(c)(15) and 74-43(c)(16), and the riparian buffers required by Article VII Chapter 74 sections 303(a), 303(b), 303(c), and 303(d). (9)  Where applicable, the 2,000 foot Chattahoochee River Corridor as required by O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. and set out in Article VII Chapter 74 section 314(b), and the allowable limits of impervious surface and land-disturbing activities as specified in accordance with the certificate issued under O.C.G.A. § 12-5-445. (10)  The specified horizontal state waters buffer along designated trout streams (the Chattahoochee River within the city) required by subsection 74-43(c)(16). (11)  Locations of BMPs using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. (12)  Detailed maintenance requirements for each BMP. (13)  Information required by the applicable Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist, as may be amended, established by the Commission (currently available at http://www.gaswcc.org) for projects which disturb one acre or more. (d)  Revisions. Revisions or amendments to an approved erosion and sedimentation control plan that may affect a BMP with a hydraulic component shall be certified by a design professional, and subsequently approved by the Department of Watershed Management. (e)  A copy of the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be kept at the site during all land-disturbing activities. (Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 6, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-41. - Inspection and enforcement. (a)  The city will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which LDA permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion control, the owner or operator shall install additional erosion and sedimentation control measures to control or treat the sediment source. The city shall regulate primary, secondary, and tertiary permittee's as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittee's shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of' best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittee's shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittee's shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of BMPs where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. (b)  Notice. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, LDA permit conditions, or the provisions of this article, an official notice or stop work order shall be served upon that person. The official notice or stop work order shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified in the notice, he or she shall be deemed in violation of this article. (c)  Right of entry. The city shall conduct such investigations it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose, to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private. for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. This includes the right to enter a property when the city has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. (d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. (e)  The districts or the commission or both may periodically review the actions of the city. The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to the city for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the city's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission may notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. (f)  The division may periodically review the actions of the city, Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of the city's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the city If such review indicates that the city has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the city in writing. The city shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the city does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the city as an issuing authority. (Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 7, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-42. - Stop work, penalties, and fines. (a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. No person shall conduct land-disturbing activity that requires an LDA permit in accordance with section 74-39 of this article, and no person shall conduct land-disturbing activity that requires a building permit in accordance with Appendix A, section 103.1 of the City of Atlanta Land Development Code without first obtaining said permit, respectively. Conducting land-disturbing activity without a required permit shall be a violation of this Code. A person that conducts land-disturbing activity in violation of this subsection shall be subject to revocation of its business license, work permit, or other authorization for the conducting of business and associated activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city, and shall be subject to an assessment of double the applicable fees in accordance with Atlanta City Code Appendix A, Building Code Amendments, section 104.2(d). (b)  Land-disturbing activity stop-work orders; effect. When a land-disturbing activity stop-work order is issued by the city, such stop-work order shall be a final order of the city, shall be effective immediately, and shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site, except for necessary corrective action or mitigation, and shall be in effect until such corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Performing land-disturbing activities on a site while subject to a land-disturbing activity stop-work order shall be a violation of this article. (c)  Project-wide stop-work orders; effect. When a project wide stop-work order is issued by the city, such stop-work order shall be a final order of the city, shall be effective immediately and shall apply to all activity on the site, including but not limited to land-disturbing activity, construction, architecture, landscape, electric, plumbing, and any other work at the site, except for necessary corrective action or mitigation, and shall be in effect until such corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Performing activities on a site while subject to a project wide stop-work order shall be a violation of this article. (d)  Notice to comply for first violation of article. Except as otherwise provided in this section, for the first violation of the provisions of this article, the city shall issue an official, written notice to the owner, operator, or violator. The owner, operator, or violator shall have three days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within three days, the city shall issue a land-disturbing activity stop-work order. If the violation is not corrected within three days from the issuance of the land-disturbing activity stop-work order, the city shall issue a project wide stop-work order. (e)  Additional violations of article; when stop-work. For a second and for each subsequent violation of the provisions of this article, the city may issue an immediate land-disturbing activity stop-work order. If the violation is not corrected within three days from the issuance of the land-disturbing activity stop-work order, the city may issue a project wide stop-work order. (f)  Stop-work orders not requiring warning. A stop-work order shall be issued immediately by the city for any of the following, which are violations of this Code: (1)  Commencing any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing activity permit without first obtaining a permit pursuant to section 74-42(a); or (2)  Commencing any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing activity permit without first conducting a pre-construction meeting with the city pursuant to section 74-43(e); or (3)  If the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state pursuant to section 74-43(c)(18); or (4)  If significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the city, have been or are being discharged into state waters pursuant to section 74-43(b)(2); or (5)  Commencing any land-disturbing activity in either the state waters buffer or the riparian buffer that requires either a state buffer variance or an authorized encroachment in accordance with Article VII Chapter 74 section 306 without first obtaining the required variance or authorized encroachment, pursuant to sections 74-43(c)(15), 74-43(c)(16), or 74-43(d); or (6)  Best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained pursuant to section 74-43(b)(1). (g)  Fines and illegal buffer encroachments. (1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any LDA permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the city or director issued as provided in this ordinance shall be liable for a fine not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, the city's municipal courts have been authorized by the General Assembly to impose a fine not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. (2)  Any person who violates section 74-43(c)(15) or section 74-43(c)(16) by performing land-disturbing activities or placing fill or structures within a state waters buffer or a riparian buffer without a state buffer variance or an authorized encroachment in accordance with Article VII Chapter 74 section 306 shall, in addition to any fine or stop-work order, remove such encroachment and temporarily stabilize any disturbed area in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, the unauthorized placement of fill or structures within a state waters buffer or a riparian buffer shall constitute a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful. The Solicitor or City attorney is authorized to file such actions as may be necessary to remedy the unauthorized placement of fill or structures within a state waters buffer or riparian buffer, including a petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or any other appropriate legal action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate an unlawful use or activity. (3)  Buffer Restoration and Revegetation Plan Required. Any person in violation of section 74-42(h)(2), above, shall submit a Buffer Restoration and Revegetation Plan to the city in accordance with the City of Atlanta Buffer Revegetation Guidelines, referenced in Article VII Chapter 74 section 306(d)(3), and in accordance with the approved Buffer Restoration and Revegetation Plan, the violator shall restore the buffer with native riparian vegetation. Final sign-off of the land-disturbing activity in accordance with section 74-43(f) shall be contingent upon implementing the Buffer Restoration and Revegetation Plan. (4)  Any fine imposed pursuant to subsections (1) or (2) of this section shall be in addition to any stop-work order issued by the city or the director under his or her authority. (h)  Bond forfeiture. If after official notice, the owner or operator fails to bring the site into compliance with this Article, he or she shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other fines or penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited the performance bond set out in section 74-39(b)(5). Upon notice by the city that the bond is forfeited, the bonding company shall bring the site into compliance in accordance with section 74-39(b)(5)(iv). Alternatively, the city may remediate and stabilize the site to bring it into compliance, arid the bonding company shall be responsible for the associated costs up to the amount of the bond. (i)  Liens. Any costs incurred by the city in accordance with section 74-42(h) that are not covered by the performance bond shall be assessed against the property on which the land-disturbing activity occurred and shall constitute a lien on the property if such costs are not paid within 60 days of receipt of notice of such costs. Notice shall be deemed effective within five days of the city mailing or delivering by courier or express mail written notice addressed to the property owner(s) as ownership appears on the tax records of Fulton or DeKalb County. (j)  Compliance meetings. In addition to any enforcement mechanism or fine imposed pursuant to section 74-42, the commissioner may invite the owner or operator to a compliance meeting to review the determination that a violation of this article has occurred, and the consequent remedial action(s) to be taken. If the owner or operator and the commissioner can agree to appropriate remedial and preventive measures. such measures and a reasonable compliance schedule shall be incorporated as a supplemental condition of the permit. If an agreement is not reached through this process, the commissioner may institute other enforcement actions in accordance with this ordinance to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article or other laws or regulations. (k)  Show cause hearing. The commissioner may order an owner or operator that causes or contributes to violations of this article to appear before the commissioner and show cause why enforcement actions should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the owner or operator and shall specify the date, time, and location of the hearing., the reasons for this hearing, and proposed enforcement actions. (l)  Consent agreements. The commissioner may enter into a consent order or establish an agreement with the owner or operator responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include the specific action(s) to be taken by the owner or operator to correct the noncompliance within a time frame specified in the order. Failure of an owner or operator to abide by a consent agreement shall be grounds for further and additional enforcement. (m)  Assessment of damages. When erosion or sedimentation from a land-disturbing activity causes damage or any other impairment to city facilities or property, the commissioner shall assess the expenses incurred by the city to repair damage to the city facilities or property, and any other expenses or damages incurred by the city. The commissioner shall file a claim with the owner, operator, or any other person causing said damages seeking reimbursement for any and all expenses or damages suffered by the city. If the claim is ignored or denied, the commissioner shall notify the city attorney to take such measures as shall be appropriate to recover for any expense or other damages -suffered by the city. (Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 8, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-43. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. (a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsection 74-43 of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. (b)  Minimum requirements/BMP's. (1)  Best management practices (BMPs) consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia shall be utilized in accordance with all land-disturbing activities to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, BMPs shall be utilized for the duration of all land-disturbing activities, and shall be properly designed, installed, and maintained in accordance with the :Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. Maintenance of all BMPs, whether temporary or permanent, shall be, at all times, the responsibility of the property owner or operator. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of BMPs shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the commissioner or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a state general permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". (2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing activity permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving, waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction. is equal to or greater than five acres. (3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of this Article for each day on which such failure occurs. (4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. Compliance with any state requirements are additional requirements of any LDA permit issued by the city pursuant to this article. (c)  The city adopts by reference the rules and regulations, ordinances, and resolutions adopted by the board pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1. et seq., as amended, for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities, which require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, as well as the following: (1)  BMPs and tree protection fences shall be installed along site boundaries prior to stripping of vegetation, grading, and other land-disturbing activities to minimize erosion and prevent sedimentation; (2)  Cut or fill shall be minimized; (3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; (4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; (5)  The disturbed area and the duration of soil exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; (6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; provided, however, the following shall apply: (a)  Disturbed areas shall be stabilized using temporary vegetation and. mulch within 14 days of land-disturbing activity, and permanent vegetation shall be used within 30 days of land-disturbing activity; (b)  Disturbed areas related to utility construction shall be stabilized by the close of each business day; and (c)  Slopes greater than 2.5:1 (two and one-half feet horizontal to one foot vertical) shall be permanently stabilized as soon as practicable using erosion control matting and blankets pursuant to the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, in combination with permanent vegetation; (7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; (8)  Structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; (9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until final stabilization in accordance with section 74-43(f) has occurred. BMPs for sediment storage in accordance with this section shall be installed prior to and for the duration of all land-disturbing activities; (10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; (11)  Cut or fill shall not endanger adjoining property; any change in grade shall conform to the following requirements: (a)  No fill shall exceed a 2:1 (two feet horizontal and one foot vertical) slope; and (b)  No cut shall exceed a 2:1 (two feet horizontal and one foot vertical) slope; (12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; (13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of temporary bridges or culverts unless this requirement is waived by the city; (14)  Erosion and sedimentation control plans shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 74-43(b)(2) of this article; (15)  State waters buffer required by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6: Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: a.  No person shall conduct land-disturbing activities within a state waters buffer, and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction-site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved in accordance with section 74-43(f), a state waters buffer may be thinned or trimmed by hand of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim by hand vegetation in a state waters buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.  The state waters buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (1)  Stream crossings for water lines; or (2)  Stream crossings for sewer lines; (16)  State Waters trout stream buffer required by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6: There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally froze the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a state waters trout stream buffer and said buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction-site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a state waters trout stream buffer may be thinned or trimmed by hand of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim by hand vegetation in a state waters trout stream buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; b.  The state waters trout stream buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angel, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; (17)  The project shall be posted with a sign approved by the commissioner and visible both to the street and site workers to notify the public of the erosion and sedimentation control ordinance and city's soil erosion hotline telephone number; (18)  Land-disturbing activities shall not pose an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state. Imminent threats to public health or waters of the state include, but are not limited to, tracking sediment onto a public or private street, encroaching into a state waters buffer, or sedimentation of the municipal separate storm sewer system; (19)  Topsoil, if present, shall be stockpiled and reused on the site to the maximum extent practicable; and (20)  Sedimentation of a watercourse in connection with a land-disturbing activity shall be remediated in accordance with a remedial plan prepared by a design professional and approved by the department. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, sedimentation of a watercourse in connection with a land-disturbing activity shall constitute a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful. The solicitor or city attorney is authorized to file such actions as may be necessary to remedy the sedimentation of a watercourse in connection with a land-disturbing activity, including a petition for a restraining order. injunction, abatement, or any other appropriate legal action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate an unlawful use or activity. (d)  No person shall conduct land-disturbing activity within a riparian buffer without first obtaining an authorized encroachment in accordance with Article VII Chapter 74 of the Atlanta City Code. (e)  No land-disturbing activity shall commence prior to a pre-construction meeting between the city and the person or persons responsible for the installation and maintenance of the erosion and sedimentation control measures. Such meeting shall be held on the site where the land-disturbing activity is to occur. (f)  Final stabilization and final sign-off. Following the completion or cessation of land-disturbing activities at a site, all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures shall be uniformly covered (100 percent of the soil within the disturbed area) with permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures, including, but not limited to, rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches, or geotextiles. A final sign-off by the department of watershed management shall be required for all projects involving land-disturbing activities, and said sign-off shall occur prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the recording of any final plat. (Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 9, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-44. - Validity and liability. (a)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. (b)  Liability. (1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city or district for damage to any person or property. (2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which an LDA permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the LDA permit. (3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved there under or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. (Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 10, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-45. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. (a)  Administrative remedy. In the event of any suspension, revocation or modification of any LDA permit, the permit holder shall receive written notice of such action and shall be given the opportunity to show cause why such suspension, revocation or modification should be withdrawn by the city. The city acting by and through its commissioner of watershed management shall review the LDA permit application, the reasons submitted by the permit holder for determining such permit holder not be in violation, and shall issue a decision in writing, if' such decision to suspend, revoke or modify the LDA permit is affirmed, setting forth the reasons for doing so. (b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by such decision, after exhausting his or her administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of the county wherein which such land-disturbing activity occurred or is proposed to occur, for review of such written decision. (c)  Review process. The review process for new LDA permits, as well as that for suspension, modification, and revocation of LDA permits described in this section, will be conducted by the city, unless the district has not reached an agreement with the city which would authorize the city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. In the absence of such authorization, review will be conducted by the district. (Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 11, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-46. - Education and certification. (a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection, or in any land-disturbing activities shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. (b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have, as a minimum, one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. (c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. (d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. (Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 12, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-47. - Fees. (a)  Where inspections, plan reviews or other administrative or regulatory services are required to ensure compliance with this ordinance, fees shall be collected in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges established by the council from time to time, copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the municipal clerk and the Commissioner. (b)  Land-disturbing activity fee. In addition to any other fee charged in this Code of Ordinances, there is assessed a fee of $40.00 per disturbed acre payable to the City of Atlanta upon application to perform land-disturbing activities. This fee is adopted pursuant to Ordinance 04-O-1209 as required by the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), and the Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. This fee shall be collected as a separate and distinct charge for the purposes of administering the implementation of the state general permit, which has been delegated to the city as a local issuing authority pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. (Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 13, 7-27-10) 
Secs. 74-48—74-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-56, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 2004, repealed art. III, §§ 74-101—74-112, in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to grading and stormwater management as enacted by Code 1977; as amended. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Secs. 74-101—74-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE CONTROL[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, approved Oct. 16, 2017, repealed the former art. IV., §§ 74-129—74-142, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2004-51, § 1, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-17(10-O-0790), § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2012-17(12-O-0502), § 1, 5-16-12; Ord. No. 2013-03(12-O-0774), §§ 1, 2(Attach. A), 1-31-13. 
Sec. 74-129. - Title; purpose. (a)  This article shall be known and may be referred to as the "Atlanta Noise Ordinance." (b)  This section is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of City of Atlanta through the control of noise. It is the intent of this section to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. ( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ) 
Sec. 74-131. - Prohibited conduct. (a)  Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. (1)  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the building, structure or vehicle, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. (2)  Human-produced sounds. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the place, building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. (3)  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12 midnight on Friday and Saturday. (4)  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the building or structure from which the noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12 midnight on Friday and Saturday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. or b. above. (b)  Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. (1)  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building, structure, or motor vehicle or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. (2)  Human-produced sound. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the place on public streets and sidewalks, or in the case of private real property, beyond the property limits, on which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. (3)  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. (4)  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or event to produce noise in such a manner so as to such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building or structure from which the party noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. or b. above. (c)  Restrictions for areas within apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, or other such residential dwelling units. Except for persons within commercial enterprises that have an adjoining property line or boundary with a residential dwelling unit, it is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any other person a distance of five feet beyond the adjoining property line wall or boundary of any apartment, condominium, townhouse, duplex, or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points of contact. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean human-produced sounds of yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, or mechanically-produced sounds made by radio-receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing, or amplifying of sound, or any combination thereof. For the purposes of this subsection, "property line or boundary" shall mean an imaginary line drawn through the points of contact of (1) adjoining apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points owned, rented, or leased by different persons; or (2) adjoining common areas or adjoining exterior walls. Said property line or boundary includes all points of a plane formed by projecting the property line or boundary including the ceiling, the floor, and the walls. ( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ) 
Sec. 74-132. - Exclusions.     The prohibitions of this article shall not apply to the following: (a)  The generation of noise by public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or authorized public safety personnel performing their public functions. (b)  Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building, or from any automobile alarm, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within 15 minutes of its activation. (c)  The generation of noise in the performance of any work or action necessary to deliver essential services including, but not limited to, water or sewer projects, and other related public works projects; repairing gas, electric, telephone, and/or public transportation facilities; removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way; or abating emergency conditions threating the public health, safety or general welfare. (d)  Noise from snow blowers, snow throwers, and snowplows. (e)  Noise generated from celebrations, outdoor festivals, and/or municipally sponsored or approved events which were approved by contract, permit or otherwise. (f)  Noises resulting from the operation of the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. (g)  Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration, for which a permit for temporary variance has been granted pursuant to this article, and which conforms to the conditions and limits stated in the variance and reasonably related activities. (h)  Noises resulting from any event sponsored by, associated with, or approved by a recognized institution of learning. (i)  Noises that result from or arise out of or stem from the occurrence of a professional sporting event or organized sports league. (j)  Noises and/or sounds caused to be made by manufacturing, governmental, or commercial entities in the normal course of their business. (k)  Any noise arising out of construction, maintenance, repair or renovation activities related to the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) bus or rail system, or the city's streetcar system, or other mass transit systems. (1)  MARTA and/or the city will develop and implement procedures by which NPUs affected by construction or planned maintenance activities will be notified prior to the commencement of work. (2)  MARTA and/or the city will develop and implement procedures by which any complaints of excessive noise created by construction or planned maintenance activities and reported by citizens to MARTA are available for review by interested citizens or members of the city council. (3)  MARTA and/or the city will develop and implement procedures by which contractors conducting planned maintenance or implementing new construction on the MARTA bus or rail system, or the city's streetcar system, or other mass transit systems will be monitored so as to ensure that all work is performed in a manner that will result in the creation of the least amount of noise disturbance. ( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ) 
Sec. 74-133. - Time restrictions on landscape maintenance motorized devices.     It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any noise-generating, motorized landscape maintenance devices, including but not limited to leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chainsaws, any single-family residential, two-family residential, multi-family residential, or mixed-use zoning district or in areas within 300 feet of any single-family residential, two-family residential, multi-family residential, or mixed-use zoning district from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. ( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-34(18-O-1414), § 1, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 74-134. - Construction noise; loading and unloading activity. (a)  Construction noise that does not otherwise qualify under any of the exclusions listed in 74-132 shall comply with the following: between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on a weekday or between 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on a weekend day or legal holiday, construction noise of any type including but not limited to, noise caused by the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any earth-moving equipment, crane, saw, drill, pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, hoist, automatic nailer or stapler, or any similar equipment, shall not be plainly audible within any single-family residential, two-family residential, or multi-family residential zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noise emanates; provided that between the hours of 7:00 a.m. (or 9:00 a.m. on a weekend day or legal holiday) and 7:00 p.m., the prohibitions of this article shall not apply to construction noise. (b)  Noise related to the standing of trucks or other vehicles on a street for the purpose of loading or unloading, and noise related to such loading or unloading that does not otherwise qualify under any of the exclusions listed in 74-132 shall comply with the following: between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, shall not be plainly audible within any single-family residential, two-family residential, multi-family residential, or mixed-use zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the source from which the noise emanates; provided that between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., the prohibitions of this article shall not apply to noise as described in this subsection. The restrictions described in this subsection shall not apply to noise generated by the standing of any interstate bus on a street for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers. ( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-34(18-O-1414), § 2, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 74-135. - Conditions for permits for temporary variance; notice of approval or denial; hearings and appeals. (a)  Any person who owns the real property from which a noise source emanates or operates any noise source may, with the permission of the owner, apply with a designee of the commissioner of the department of city planning for a temporary variance from one or more of the provisions of this article, unless such noise source is specifically exempted according to the provisions of section 74-132. This application, and the procedures for completing this process, shall be posted on the City of Atlanta's website. Failure to supply the information required thereby be cause for rejection of the application. Applications for a permit of temporary variance shall supply information including, but not limited to: (1)  The nature and location of the noise source for which such application is made; (2)  The reason for which the permit of temporary variance is requested, including the hardship that will result to the applicant, his/her client, or the public if the permit of temporary variance is not granted; (3)  The section or sections of this article for which the permit of temporary variance shall apply; (4)  A description of interim noise control measures to be taken for the applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring from the noise for which the variance is sought; and (5)  A specific schedule of the noise control measures that shall be taken to bring the source into compliance with this article within a reasonable time; and (6)  An affidavit stating that notice has been provided to the department of city planning for transmission to the NPU and the councilmembers (district and at-large) for the council district and council post where the variance is to be operational. (b)  The applicant shall pay a fee of $25.00 to cover expenses resulting from the processing of the application for a permit of temporary variance. (c)  Any permit of temporary variance shall be effective no longer than 14 days. Any person holding a permit of temporary variance may request an extension of time through the process for applying for a new permit of temporary variance according to the provisions of this section. (d)  The designee of the commissioner of the department of city planning shall notify the applicant in writing of his or her determination on the application within 14 days after receipt of the application. This notification shall inform the applicant of whether a permit for temporary variance has been approved or denied; and, if approved, shall set forth the location, dates and times of temporary variance. (e)  The permit of temporary variance may be revoked by the designee of the commissioner of the department of city planning if the terms of the permit of temporary variance are violated. (f)  In the event a permit for temporary variance shall be denied, or revoked, the aggrieved applicant shall have the right to a hearing before the commissioner of the department of city planning, or a hearing officer appointed by the commissioner of the department of city planning for that purpose, provided that the request for such hearing is made to the department of city planning within five days after receipt of the notice. Notices that are given only by mail shall be presumed to have been received three days after the mailing. Notices given in person, hand-delivered to the address of the applicant or sent by facsimile transmission or electronic mail shall be presumed to have been delivered on the date given or sent. (1)  Hearings contesting the matters in the notice shall be held before the commissioner of the department of city planning or the hearing officer, shall be informal, and shall be scheduled within five business days after receipt of the request for a hearing by the department of city planning. The hearing may be continued at the request of the applicant or to allow the attendance of any necessary party or witness, but only from day to day. The determination on such hearing shall be made at the conclusion of the hearing, and the commissioner of the department of city planning or the designee shall issue a written determination within one business day thereafter, which determination shall affirm or reverse the original decision. (2)  The hearing under this section shall be de novo and shall be informal. Such hearing shall evaluate the original decision and the application in accordance with the criteria of this article. (3)  The written determination of the commissioner of the department of city planning or the designee upon the conclusion of the hearing as provided in this section shall be the final decision of the city in the matter, and such a determination shall be subject to review by the Superior Court of Fulton County via a writ of certiorari. ( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-34(18-O-1414), § 3, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 74-136. - Commercial entities near single-family residential, two-family residential, and multi-family residential zoning districts; commercial entities near mixed-use zoning districts. (a)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of section 74-131, "Prohibited Conduct," subparagraph (a), concerning "Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday" and its subparts 1. through 3. shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any single-family residential, two-family residential, or multi-family residential zoning district more than 300 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. (b)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of section 74-131, "Prohibited Conduct," subparagraph (b), concerning "Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday," and its subparts 1. through 3. shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any single-family residential, two-family residential, or multi-family residential zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. (c)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of section 74-131, "Prohibited Conduct," subparagraph (a), concerning "Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday" and its subparts 1. through 3. shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any mixed-use zoning district more than 500 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. (d)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of section 74-131, "Prohibited Conduct," subparagraph (b), concerning "Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday," and its subparts 1. through 3. shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any mixed-use zoning district more than 300 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. ( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-34(18-O-1414), § 4, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 74-137. - Penalties. (a)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided by section 1-8. (b)  Each day during which any violation occurs shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense. ( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ) 
Secs. 74-138—74-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NUISANCES[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 106. Land development code reference— Nuisance in or around buildings, § 17-9013. 
Sec. 74-161. - Jurisdiction to abate. (a)  Summary abatement. Any judge of the municipal court or the mayor or designee shall have the power to order the removal and abatement, without hearing, of those things which are declared either by the common or by the statute law to be nuisances, or which are nuisances per se and from their nature indisputably are so. (b)  Service of notice to abate. Any requirement of service of notice to abate a nuisance, which may be summarily abated, may be complied with by the mailing of such notice by registered mail to the last-known address of the person so to be notified. (c)  Service on complaint to abate a nuisance. On the hearing of any complaint before a judge of the municipal court concerning a nuisance and removal and abatement, reasonable notice by personal service shall be given to the parties interested, the owner or occupant of the premises where the alleged nuisance is taking place, or upon the person causing the nuisance, of the time and place of the hearing upon the complaint. (d)  Persons authorized to perform the removal or abatement of nuisances. After a nuisance has been ordered to be abated or removed, as provided in this section, it may be removed or otherwise abated by any employee designated by the mayor. (Code 1977, § 17-9001) 
Sec. 74-162. - Collection by execution of cost of abatement of nuisance.     Where any person ordered to do any work for the purpose of abating a nuisance has failed or refused to do that work, and the work has been done by the employees of the city, the cost thereof may be collected by execution against that person and that person's property. Each execution shall be prepared by the department charged with the duty of abating or removing the nuisance, shall be signed by the clerk of the council and shall be delivered to the revenue collection administrator, ex officio marshal, for collection as other executions are collected. (Code 1977, § 17-9002) 
Sec. 74-163. - Refusal to comply with an order to abate a nuisance.     The failure or refusal of a person ordered to abate a nuisance after a hearing, or upon a summary abatement, shall, in addition to subjecting the person to punishment for contempt if the order is issued by the judge of the municipal court, constitute an offense which, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each day's failure or refusal to comply with the order, after the expiration of the time allowed in which to remove or abate the nuisance, shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1977, § 17-9003) 
Sec. 74-164. - Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, vehicles, similar devices.     It shall be a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful for any person to have in that person's possession or under that person's control upon any premises owned or occupied by that person, which premises are frequented by or accessible to children for playing or other purposes, the following items: (1)  Any icebox, refrigerator or similar device, abandoned or not being put to the use for which it was intended, which is equipped with any lock or locking device by which the door on such icebox, refrigerator or similar device, when closed, cannot be opened from the inside, or which impedes or makes more difficult the opening of the door from the inside thereof; or (2)  Any motor vehicle, abandoned or not being put to the use for which it was intended, which is equipped with any lock or locking device by which the windows or doors on the vehicle, when closed, cannot be opened from the inside, or which impedes or makes more difficult the opening of the door from the inside thereof. (Code 1977, § 17-9004) State Law reference— Abandoned containers, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100. 
Sec. 74-165. - Disposal of fecal matter, dead animals, tainted meat, waste, similar matter.     It shall constitute a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful to place or throw or cause another to place or throw, in or upon any street, or public or private property of another, any dead bird or animal, tainted meat, decayed fruits or vegetables, human or other excrement. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the discharge of human excrement into the sewer system of the city, or the placing of the objects named in this section in suitable containers at curbside for garbage pickup. (Code 1977, § 17-9005) 
Sec. 74-166. - Obstruction of natural flow of water.     Any person who shall, by the erection of a dam or other obstruction, prevent the natural flow of water, causing it to collect in pools upon any lot or in any street or alley, or who shall allow any such dam or obstruction to continue on any property owned or controlled by such person, after knowledge of its existence, or who shall do or cause to be done any work the effect of which will be to cause the damming up or collection of water in pools, shall be guilty of the offense of maintaining a nuisance, and such action shall be unlawful; provided, however, that this section shall not prevent persons owning or controlling property from filling up such lots as they may desire, if sufficient drainage is provided across such lots for such natural flow; provided, further, that this section shall not prevent such change of the grade of any street as may be for the public interest. (Code 1977, § 17-9008) 
Sec. 74-167. - Pollution of water.     It shall constitute a nuisance and shall be unlawful for any person to commit the following acts: (1)  To keep a slaughterhouse, pen or stockyard on any real estate within the city which drains into the public water supply. (2)  To knowingly dispose of waste or rubbish directly into an open or flowing body of water. (Code 1977, § 17-9009) Cross reference— Water, § 154-51 et seq. 
Sec. 74-168. - Storage of odorous commodities.     It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance to keep uncured hides or other odorous commodities to the annoyance of any citizen or to keep such within 300 yards of the dwelling or place of business of any citizen of the city. (Code 1977, § 17-9010) 
Sec. 74-169. - Obnoxious gases or odors.     It shall constitute a nuisance and shall be unlawful for any person to burn in any furnace, grate, boiler, fireplace or upon any open land within the limits of the city any substance containing rubber, zinc, lead, sulfuric acid or any other substance which emits poisonous or obnoxious gases, fumes or smoke. This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit the burning of those substances within an enclosed structure and provided those gases, fumes or smoke are not allowed to escape from the enclosure in which those substances are burned in a state which would pollute the air or is harmful or injurious to the health and welfare of the citizens of the city. (Code 1977, § 17-9011) 
Sec. 74-170. - Wells, cisterns, pits, holes. (a)  The maintaining upon the premises by the owner or any person occupying such premises of wells, cisterns, pits and other holes in the earth where such are not securely covered or enclosed shall constitute a nuisance, and it shall be the duty of all persons owning or occupying those premises within the city to keep those wells, cisterns, pits and other holes in the earth on such premises securely covered or enclosed, so as to prevent injury therefrom to the person or property of others. Any person suffering or allowing those openings to be or remain open, unenclosed or otherwise so exposed as to be dangerous to the person or property of others, after being notified by an officer of the city to remedy that condition, shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. (b)  Old and unused wells shall be filled by the owners or agents in charge of the property upon which the wells are located. It shall be the duty of the director, bureau of sanitary services to see that this is done as follows: Written notice shall be served personally upon the owner or agent to fill any such well, and upon the failure of any person notified to do so, the person shall be summoned before the judge of the municipal court and upon conviction for such failure shall be punished as provided for in section 1-8. (Code 1977, § 17-9012) 
Sec. 74-171. - Buildings used to sell or dispose of illegal controlled substances. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Conviction means legal adjudication of guilt in a court having jurisdiction and the exhaustion of all direct appeals.     Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.) known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act.     Dwelling unit means any portion of a building used, intended or designed as a separate abode and used, intended or designed for living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein.     Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design.     Occupied means any person living in, using or having legal possession of a dwelling, except that a temporary guest or a trespasser shall not be considered an occupant.     Owner means any person or persons having any individual, joint or common title or interest in real property defined by the laws of the state as a legal or equitable estate or interest.     Tenant means one who occupies lands or the premises of another in subordination to that other's title, and with such other person's assent, express or implied. (b)  Nuisance declared. The city finds that the sale and purchase of illegal controlled substances is being conducted in certain buildings, structures and dwellings in the city, creating a source of illegal criminal activity which endangers the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. Therefore, buildings, structures and dwelling units where illegal drugs are being sold, stored or used are declared a public nuisance. (c)  Abatement. Where a house, dwelling unit, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and more than 50 percent deteriorated and where a report is made by the police department or any law enforcement agency, or by five or more residents of the city, that illegal drugs are being sold, stored or used in such house, dwelling unit, building or structure, the chief of police shall notify the commissioner of housing and/or the commissioner of planning and development of such reports, and such commissioner shall proceed to exercise those procedures set out in sections 30 through 33 of the city housing code and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17 to have the building demolished or to otherwise abate the public nuisance. (d)  Notice. (1)  Where a house, dwelling unit, building or structure is vacant but less than 50 percent deteriorated or occupied and being used for illegal drug activity, the chief of police, upon the chief's own initiative, or after receiving five complaints from residents, shall serve a cease and desist notice upon the owners and tenants of the house, dwelling unit, building or structure informing such owner or tenant that such property may be subject to seizure if the illegal drug activity does not cease. Such notice shall be in substantially the form as exhibit A, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived. (2)  Upon the first conviction of illegal drug activity from a house, dwelling unit, building or structure, the chief of police will serve a second cease and desist notice and inform the owner and tenant that upon three convictions, the property will be referred to municipal court for abatement of the nuisance, which may result in seizure of the property. Such notice shall be in substantially the form as exhibit B, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived. (3)  Upon two convictions, the chief of police will refer the case to the solicitor, who shall serve a letter of notice of intent to declare the property a public nuisance in municipal court and seek to abate the public nuisance. Such notice shall be in substantially the form as exhibit C, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived. (4)  Upon three convictions, the solicitor will file a complaint in municipal court to abate the nuisance and cause to be served upon the owner, tenant and/or occupant of the building a rule nisi requiring the owner, tenant and/or occupant to show cause on a date certain why the nuisance should not be abated. (e)  Remedy. In abating the public nuisance, the municipal court may order: (1)  That the property be vacated if the building, structure or dwelling is 50 percent deteriorated. (2)  That the property be voluntarily vacated by a date certain if the building is less than 50 percent deteriorated. (3)  That a landlord initiate dispossessory proceedings to evict tenants engaged in illegal drug activity. (4)  That the property be voluntarily demolished if the building, structure or dwelling is 50 percent deteriorated. (5)  That the property be involuntarily demolished if the building, structure or dwelling is 50 percent deteriorated. (6)  That the property be voluntarily cleaned and closed where it is less than 50 percent deteriorated. (7)  That the property be involuntarily cleaned and closed where it is less than 50 percent deteriorated. (8)  That the property be voluntarily transferred to the City of Atlanta/Fulton County land bank authority, provided that the land bank authority agrees to abate the nuisance. (9)  That the property be referred by the chief of police to the United States attorney for possible forfeiture pursuant to 21 USC 881. (10)  Any other remedy deemed appropriate in abating nuisances in the state. (f)  Exceptions. (1)  Those buildings, dwelling units and structures that are subject to the city's historic preservation ordinance, shall be exempt from this section to the extent that demolition is authorized. (2)  Those buildings which have been granted a nonconforming use pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city shall not lose such nonconforming use while the property is subject to the process authorized by this section. (3)  Public property such as that owned by the city housing authority is exempt from this section only to the extent that seizure of the property is authorized. (Code 1977, § 17-9016) 
Sec. 74-172. - Junked motor vehicles. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Junked motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled, which is without current registration and license tag and inspection sticker, and which is one or more of the following: (1)  Wrecked; (2)  Dismantled; (3)  Abandoned; (4)  Partially dismantled; or (5)  Inoperative. (b)  Nuisance declared. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot, tract, parcel of land or premises in the city to suffer, permit or allow any junked motor vehicle to be parked, let or maintained thereon; and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a junked motor vehicle on the real property of another. The presence of such a junked motor vehicle shall constitute a public nuisance per se, except that it shall not be a nuisance to maintain, in an otherwise lawful manner: (1)  Any motor vehicle in an enclosed building; (2)  Any motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or (3)  Any motor vehicle on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles in conformance with the zoning ordinances of the city. (c)  Exception. Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under other provisions of law. (d)  Section not exclusive. This section is not the exclusive regulation within the city. It shall be supplemental and in addition to the other regulatory statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (e)  Notice. Except in circumstances where the public health and safety require an immediate hearing before the municipal court as set forth in subsection (f) of this section, the commissioner of public works shall give written notice to the owner of the vehicle or the person in possession, charge or control of the real property affected, that, in the opinion of the commissioner, a public nuisance exists. Such notice shall be deemed adequate when attached to the vehicle so as to be visible to persons outside the vehicle. Such notice shall state that action to eliminate the nuisance is requested within the number of days specified in the notice, and shall further state that, if such action is not taken within the time specified, summons will be issued requiring the party notified to appear in the municipal court to have there determined whether a nuisance exists and should be abated. (f)  Hearing. If the commissioner of public works shall determine that such a nuisance exists on any property within the city, it shall be the duty of the commissioner to issue summons to the owner of the real property affected, persons in possession of the real property affected, and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the junked motor vehicle unless identification numbers are not available to determine ownership, to appear before a judge of the municipal court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5 to determine whether a nuisance exists and should be abated. (g)  Service. Summons or complaints issued in accordance with subsection (f) of this section shall, in all cases, be served upon owners and persons in possession of such real property, and owners of the junked motor vehicle whose identity is known; and the return of service signed by the public officer or agent or an affidavit of service executed by a duly authorized citizen of this state reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon such person personally or by leaving such copy at the place of such person's residence shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owners and parties in interest. (1)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the city, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such summons or complaint to be served upon such party or parties by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party or parties or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen that such party or parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence shall be conclusive as to such service. (2)  Nonresidents of the state shall be served by publishing the same once each week for two weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. A copy of such complaint or summons shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected by the complaint or summons. A copy of such complaint or summons will also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notices in the county in which the property is located, and such filing of the summons or complaint shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to such nonresidents by registered or certified mail. (3)  If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities and the guardian or personal representative resides outside the city in this subsection or is a nonresident, such person shall be served as provided in this subsection in such cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has not guardian or personal representative or if such minor or insane person lives outside of the city or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of such person's residence, which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person; in the case of other persons who live outside of the city or who are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such persons. (4)  If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or summons upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided for nonresidents of the state as set out in this section, or service may be perfected upon any person holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. (h)  Failure to abate. If, upon a hearing as provided for in this section, a judge of the municipal court shall find that a nuisance exists, and further orders any party to abate such nuisance within a specified time, then each ten days that the nuisance is maintained subsequent to the expiration of the time fixed in the judgment shall constitute an offense. (i)  Abatement by city. If the nuisance, as adjudged by the municipal court, is not abated as ordered within ten days from the date of such adjudication, then the commissioner of public works is authorized to remove any junked motor vehicle from the property in question. The cost to the city of this abatement shall be charged to parties adjudged responsible for such nuisance abatement. If the owner of the real property affected has been adjudged responsible for abatement, and the charges remain unpaid for a period of 30 days after payment is due, the mayor or designee shall cause an execution to be issued against the owner of the property for those charges. The execution shall be a lien on the property and, when recorded in the general execution docket of the county, shall be a lien on all property of the defendant in execution from the date of such recording. (Code 1977, §§ 9-6001(10), 9-6031, 9-6032, 17-9015) State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 74-173. - Unclean vacant lot. (a)  Nuisance declared. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vacant lot, tract, or parcel of land in the city to permit the accumulation of trash and other refuse upon said property to the extent that it endangers the public health, safety or welfare. The accumulation of such trash and other refuse shall constitute a public nuisance per se. (b)  Notice to owner to remedy condition. Except in urgent circumstances where the public health and safety require an immediate hearing within the municipal court as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, the commissioner of public works shall give written notice to the owner, or the person in charge or control of such property stating that in the opinion of the commissioner the conditions existing upon that property constitute a nuisance, setting forth action to be taken to eliminate the objectionable conditions, and requesting that it be made within the number of days specified in the notice. The notice shall further state that unless objectionable conditions are voluntarily removed within the time specified it will be the duty of the commissioner to cause summons to be issued requiring the party notified to appear in the municipal court to have there determined whether the conditions involved constitute a nuisance and should be abated. (c)  Court of appearance. If the commissioner of public works shall determine that conditions constituting a nuisance exist on any property within the city, it shall be the duty of the commissioner to issue summons to the owner of the property, persons in possession, and all parties in interest, to appear before the judge of the municipal court as provided by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5 to determine whether or not such conditions constitute a nuisance and should be abated. (d)  Hearing; failure to comply with order to abate. If, upon a hearing as provided for before the judge of the municipal court, the judge shall find that the conditions set out in this section exist and that those constitute a nuisance, and further orders the person to abate within a specified time, then each ten days that the condition adjudicated to be a nuisance by the judge is maintained subsequent to the expiration of the time fixed in the judgment shall constitute an offense. (e)  Action of commissioner upon failure to abate nuisance within specified time. Upon the adjudication by the judge of the municipal court that a nuisance exists, and notwithstanding the provisions set out in this section, if the owner of the property has not abated the nuisance after the expiration of five days from the date of the adjudication by the judge of the municipal court, then the commissioner of public works shall cause the nuisance to be abated and the objectionable conditions to be removed from the property. The commissioner of public works shall be authorized to cause the removal of trash and refuse from the property and to charge the cost and expense thereof to the owner. If the owner of the real property affected has been adjudged responsible for abatement, and the charges remain unpaid for a period of 30 days after payment is due, the mayor or designee shall cause an execution to be issued against the owner of the property for those charges. The execution shall be a lien on the property and, when recorded in the general execution docket of the county, shall be a lien on all property of the defendant in execution from the date of such recording. (f)  Service of summons issued by public officers; return as evidence of service. (1)  Summons or complaints issued in accordance with subsection (c) of this section shall, in all cases, be served upon owners and parties in interest, and the return of service signed by the public officer or agent or an affidavit of service executed by a duly authorized citizen of this state reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon the owners and parties of interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of residence shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owners and parties in interest. (2)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the city, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such summons or complaint to be served upon such party by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen that such party was served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence, shall be conclusive as to such service. (3)  Nonresidents of this state shall be served by causing a copy of the complaints or summons to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected by the complaint or summons. Where the address of such nonresident is known, such as the address on file with the tax assessor, a copy of such complaint or order shall be mailed to such person by registered or certified mail. A copy of such complaint or summons will also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notices in the county in which the property is located, and such filing of the summons or complaint shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. (4)  If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities and the guardian or personal representative resides outside the city or is a nonresident, such person shall be served as provided in this section in such cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or if such minor or insane person lives outside of the city or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of such person's residence, which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person. In the case of other persons who live outside of the city or who are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. (5)  If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit to the effect, then the service of such complaint or summons upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided for nonresidents of the state as set out in this section, or service may be perfected upon any person holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. (Ord. No. 2002-57, § 1, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 74-174. - Graffiti abatement. (a)  Definition.     "Graffiti" is defined according to O.C.G.A. 17-15A-2 as "any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface. (b)  Prohibited acts. It shall constitute a nuisance and shall be unlawful for: (i)  any person(s) to deface, alter, modify, change, draw, damage or destroy by spraying or use of paint, or marking of ink, dye or any other similar substance on public and/or private buildings or structures, an inscription, slogan, drawing or modification, or otherwise damage private or public property in contradiction of other City Ordinances, by or through the application of "graffiti" as defined herein; (ii)  any person exercising control over or having a legal or equitable interest in a parcel of real property to permit graffiti to remain on public and/or private buildings or structures located thereon after the expiration of the time to remove in accordance with subsection (c). (c)  Notice to remove. No person exercising control over or having a legal or equitable interest in a parcel of real property shall be subject to citation for permitting graffiti to remain on public and/or private buildings or structures located thereon without first having been given 30 days from the date of written notice, in accordance with the provisions of Section 10 of the Atlanta Housing Code, to remove the graffiti. (d)  Removal by inmates. Labor by inmates from the Atlanta City Detention Center or by a person sentenced to perform community service by the Atlanta Municipal Court may be used to remove or obliterate unlawfully placed graffiti on public property. The rules and regulations governing such use of labor by inmates shall be directed by the City of Atlanta's Department of Corrections and subject to state law as well as the rules and regulations of the Board of Corrections of Georgia. (e)  Enforcement. Any person empowered by the City of Atlanta to issue citations may issue citations as a violation of Sec. 1-8. (Ord. No. 2008-83(08-O-2136), § 1, 11-24-08; Ord. No. 2011-26(11-O-0943), § 1, 6-29-11) 
Secs. 74-175—74-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLOOD AREA REGULATIONS[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), §§ 1—17, approved May 29, 2013, repealed the §§ 74-201—74-207, and enacted new §§ 74-201—74-209 as set out herein. The former sections 74-201—74-207 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 74-201. - Intent and disclaimer. (a)  Intent. The intent of this article is to regulate and restrict uses and structures within both traditional and historically modified floodplain areas of the City of Atlanta in order to protect life and property, to prevent or minimize the hazards and damage which follow periods of severe inundation and to reduce the public cost of rescue efforts, relief efforts and flood control activities made necessary by such inundation; to protect the natural function and character of the traditional floodplain and surrounding areas; and to enable owners of property within the City of Atlanta to qualify for national flood insurance. (b)  Disclaimer of liability. The Atlanta City Council finds the degree of flood protection required by this article to be reasonable and consistent with historically established and nationally accepted levels of protection based on scientific and engineering practices. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the floodway, traditional floodplain, historically modified floodplain, special flood hazard area, or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 1, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-202. - Flood insurance study and maps adopted.     The Federal Emergency Management Agency flood insurance study, flood hazard boundary map and flood insurance rate map, for the City of Atlanta, Georgia, revised June 22. 1998, and as it may be revised, shall constitute the official flood maps for the city. Revisions of such maps shall include but not be limited to future conditions maps. All land shown on said maps as lying within a "special flood hazard area," and all other land subject to inundation during the base flood, as confirmed by a flood study or a field run survey, shall be subject to the regulations set forth in this article. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 2, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-203. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Ancillary structures means structures that are not principal structures and are not intended for occupancy. Such structures shall include, but not be limited to, fences, carports, tool sheds, decks, patios, pools, playgrounds, and picnic facilities.     Appeal means a request for a review of the commissioner's interpretation of any provision of this article.     Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood.     Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood.     Combined sewershed means a sewershed with sewers that were designed to collect and transmit both stormwater and wastewater and that functioned as combined sewers as of September 24, 1998, as determined by the commissioner.     Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of watershed management, or an authorized designee.     Development means a land development or land development project.     Elevated structure means an existing structure which has been raised or rebuilt in compliance with this article.     Flood protecting means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to a structure which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate, improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents.     Floodway means any channel through which water passes at depths or velocities capable of discharging a base flood without increasing the elevation to which floodwaters would rise by more than one foot anywhere in a special flood hazard area.     Footprint area means the enclosed area of the horizontal dimensions of a structure as defined by the exterior walls and as projected on the ground. Footprint area shall not include any decks, patios, porches, carport, or multiple floors for the purpose of this calculation.     Highest observed flood means the water surface elevation of the highest flood on record in the department of watershed management or as measured from the lowest grade adjacent to the structure to the top of the high water mark.     Historically modified floodplain means an area in a combined sewershed, in which significant portions of the historic "natural" stream have been enclosed in a pipe (excluding bridges, roadway culverts and short pipe segments) and is subject to periods of severe inundation.     Infrastructure means any public or private road, bridge, drainage system, sewer, water main or other utility and related appurtenances.     Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction. Paving or any other installation of impervious cover.     Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development.     Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking.     Lowest floor means the lowest enclosed area of a structure, including the basement. An unfinished, flood-resistant area below an elevated structure used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such area is built in compliance with this article.     Mapped floodplain means those areas of land subject to periods of severe inundation which are shown on the official flood maps of the city and which are subject to the regulations contained in this article.     Multi-family residential structure means multiple dwellings and lodgings as defined in Atlanta City Code section 16-29.001(12)(b).     Nonresidential structure means any structure that is not a single-family residential structure or a multi-family residential structure. Examples of nonresidential structures include, but are not limited to, restaurants, service stations, shopping centers, office buildings, theaters, warehouses, manufacturing facilities, food processing facilities, hotels, libraries, churches, schools, and municipal, county, state, and federal government buildings.     Sewer basin means all portions of the city's wastewater collection and transmission systems tributary to and hydraulically linked to a trunk sewer entering a wastewater treatment facility. Each sewer basin in the city is typically independent of other sewer basins.     Sewershed means a subdivision of a sewer basin that typically consists of hydraulically linked sewers that are tributary to a point in the sewer system.     Single-family residential structure means any single-family dwelling as defined in Atlanta City Code section 16-29.001(12)(a).     Special flood hazard area means the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1—30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the flood hazard boundary map or the flood insurance rate map), and all other areas subject to inundation during the base flood.     Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the value of the structure before the damage occurred, as provided in 44 C.F.R. § 59.1.     Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure taking place during a ten-year period in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the structure prior to the improvement, as provided in 44 C.F.R. § 59.1 and Section 2 of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District's Model Floodplain Management/Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (2006).     Traditional floodplain means any area of land presently having natural or man-made contours of elevation at or below the base flood elevation shown on the flood maps and those areas of land which are not so shown on the flood maps where inundation is likely to occur during a base flood as determined from evidence of prior flooding or as determined by hydrologic studies to establish the probable depth of such floodwaters.     Unmapped floodplain means those areas of land subject to periods of severe inundation which are not shown on the official flood maps of the city, which are otherwise subject to the regulations contained in this article.     Value of the structure means (1) the actual cash value of the structure as set out in "Table 100 Building Valuation Data" at appendix A, section 104.2 of the Atlanta City Code, and as permitted by FEMA Publication 213 page 10, or (2) the appraised value of the structure according to the property tax records in the Fulton County or DeKalb County tax assessor database immediately prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement. In the event there is a conflict between these two values, the lower value of the structure shall apply, in accordance with Atlanta City Code section 1-2. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 3, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2015-36(15-O-1246), § 1, 7-15-15 ) 
Sec. 74-204. - Permits required. (a)  Permit required. Use of lands and buildings, and construction, reconstruction, repair, modification or demolition of any structure within all floodplains, including special flood hazard areas, shall require review and approval of a permit by the commissioner. (b)  Flood study or field run survey required. The Federal Emergency Management Agency flood maps, more particularly described in section 74-202, adopted by the city are used for general reference purposes only. A flood study or a field run survey may be required to determine the location and extent of the floodplain area on a specific parcel. (i)  Flood study. In an unmapped floodplain or in a mapped floodplain where elevation has not been established, a flood study may be required in order to establish the base flood elevation. Such a flood study shall address, at a minimum, impact to upstream, downstream and adjacent properties, and the free flow of flood waters. (ii)  Field run survey. In order to establish the horizontal extent of the vertical floodplain elevation, a field run survey may be required to establish the actual location of the limit when proposed development is proximate to the limits of a floodplain/floodway. (iii)  A flood study or field run survey required under this subsection shall be certified by either a professional engineer or registered land surveyor. (c)  Review and approval. Any proposal which includes any of the activities described in this article shall be submitted to the commissioner for review before any such activity is commenced. The commissioner may authorize the approval of any of such activities upon a finding, based on detailed plans and specifications submitted with the proposal, that the activity can be completed and occupied or used in full compliance with the requirements of this article. No part of any such activity shall be commenced before such permit approval has been issued and all other permits and licenses required by applicable law have been issued or obtained. (d)  Permit revocation. The commissioner may recommend the revocation of any such permit when the commissioner determines the activity is not being accomplished, or that the land is not being used or occupied, as shown on the plans and specifications approved by the commissioner. A permit approval so revoked may be reinstated upon application by the holder under such rules and conditions as are established by the commissioner consistent with the requirements of this article and other applicable laws. (e)  Protection of existing flood storage and from flooding. The commissioner shall not, by authorizing the approval of a permit under the authority of this article, authorize any use of land, any extension or enlargement of a use of land which existed before the original date of enactment of the provisions of said article, or the commencement of any of the activities described in this article, where the effect thereof would be to decrease the volume of existing flood storage on that land or to increase flooding conditions upstream, downstream or adjacent to that land. (i)  Protection of floodways. The floodway shall be that as defined in the flood insurance study, City of Atlanta, Georgia, Fulton and DeKalb County, Federal Emergency Management Agency, revised June 22, 1998, and as it may be subsequently revised or extended. On those watercourses and rivers regulated hereunder where the floodway has not been defined in the said flood insurance study and until such time as these watercourses and rivers are defined in an officially adopted or revised flood insurance study, the floodway shall be defined as the channel of the watercourse or river and the adjacent areas of the defined or undefined floodplain that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot upstream of, downstream of, or at the point being considered. No fill or encroachments shall be placed within the defined floodway that would impair the ability to carry and discharge the waters resulting from the 100-year base flood. (ii)  Floodplain protection. The commissioner shall not authorize the approval of any permit authorizing the placement of fill or stored materials, or the construction of any building or other structure within the floodplain. Earth-disturbing activities in the floodplain shall be permitted only when the resulting configuration shall allow stormwater to enter the floodway by sheet flow (not channelized flow) and results in no loss of existing flood volume. Any earth-disturbing activities within a floodplain shall be subject to requirements of stream bank buffer limits and should be constructed using best management practices for soil erosion and sedimentation control. The use of compensating excavation or contouring; procedures to modify flood hazard limits may apply to install necessary public roadway and utilities within the flood limits to support existing and new property(s) which are not within the flood limits or to restore riparian buffer areas. Restoration of riparian buffer areas includes streambank stabilization projects that utilize natural channel design principles and the removal of a pipe or culvert to restore a stream channel with a minimum of a 25-foot vegetated buffer on each side of the channel. All applications for permits issued by the commissioner which would allow any use or construction wholly or partly in a special flood hazard area shall include detailed plans and specifications which demonstrate that no expansion of a special flood hazard area would result from the work which would be authorized by any such permit. No such permit shall authorize any proposed use or construction which would have a finished elevation less than two feet higher than the nearest base flood elevation and that would be closer than 15 feet from the nearest base flood elevation, and no such permit shall be issued until the plans and specifications submitted are in compliance with this article and have been authorized by the commissioner. Any comments or requirements endorsed on such plans and specifications or on an addendum thereto, by the commissioner shall become a part of any permit issued for the work covered by the plans and specifications and shall be enforced as are all other requirements applicable to such permit. (iii)  Reserved. (iv)  Modification to existing structures or existing usages of the floodplain in violation of, but predating the provisions of this article. Minor modifications and routine maintenance of uses and structures which were lawful prior to the original date of enactment of the provisions of this article, including existing structures, fills, pavements, utilities, manufactured homes, mobile homes, mobile home sites and other facilities, shall be subject to the following restrictions: (A)  Permitted modifications of existing structures or existing usage. Any modification to an existing usage, when such existing usage is in violation of this article, that enhances the protection of life or property or which is reasonably necessary to the maintenance and upkeep of the property concerned and which does not extend the scope and magnitude of the existing violation of these regulations, is permitted provided the value of such modification or maintenance does not exceed 50 percent of the value of the structure or total existing usage prior to such modification or maintenance, excluding the value of the land but including the value of existing structures, utility service connections, fills, pavements, slabs, mobile home sites and other facilities which can be reasonably demonstrated as an integral part of that existing usage. (B)  Modifications requiring additional measures. Any improvement, modification or maintenance and any repairs or reconstruction required by any reason, including damages arising from normal deterioration, flood, other natural act or accident, of any existing usage where such existing usage is in violation of this article, shall bring that existing usage under the scope of the regulations set forth in this subsection; and that existing usage shall be brought into compliance with this article, providing that the total value of such improvement, modification, maintenance, repair or reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the value of the structure or existing usage before such improvement, modification or maintenance or before such flood, other natural act or accident, excluding the value of the land but including the prior value of structures, utility service connections, fills, pavements, slabs, mobile home sites and other facilities which can be reasonably demonstrated as an integral part of the existing usage prior to the event. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 4, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2017-43(17-O-1393), § 1, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 74-205.1. - Single-family residential structures in traditional floodplain areas. (a)  New development. A new single-family residential structure to be located on property encumbered by a traditional floodplain, floodway, or special flood hazard area shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. If a new single-family residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, development is prohibited. (b)  Substantially damaged or substantially improved structures. If an existing single-family residential structure located within the traditional floodplain, floodway, or special flood hazard area has sustained substantial damage or is proposed for substantial improvement, the structure shall be relocated not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. (c)  Elevating existing single-family structures. If, due to site conditions, an existing single-family residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-205.1(b), the structure may be elevated in accordance with either section 74-205.5(b) or section 74-205.5(c): provided however, section 74-205.5(a) shall apply to all elevated structures regardless of whether section 74-205.5(b) or section 74-205.5(c) applies. (d)  Flood protecting single-family residential structures. An existing single-family residential structure that has not been substantially damaged or is not proposed for substantial improvement can be flood protected, in accordance with section 74-205.5(d). A new single-family residential structure or an existing single-family residential structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement cannot be flood protected in order to comply with the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 5, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-205.2. - Multifamily residential structures in traditional floodplain areas. (a)  New development. A new multifamily residential structure to be located on property encumbered by a traditional floodplain, floodway, or special flood hazard area shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. If a new multifamily residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, development is prohibited. (b)  Substantially damaged or substantially improved structures. If an existing multifamily residential structure located within the traditional floodplain, floodway, or special flood hazard area has sustained substantial damage or is proposed for substantial improvement, the structure shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. (c)  Elevating existing multifamily structures. If due to site conditions, an existing multifamily residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-205.2(b), the structure may be elevated in accordance with either section 74-205.5(b) or section 74-205.5(c); provided however that section 74-205.5(a) shall apply to an elevated multifamily residential structure regardless of whether section 74-205.5(b) or section 74-205.5(c) applies. (d)  Flood protecting multifamily residential structures. An existing multifamily residential structure that has not been substantially damaged or is not proposed for substantial improvement can be flood protected in accordance with section 74-205.5(d). A new multifamily residential structure or an existing multifamily residential structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement cannot be flood protected in order to comply with the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 6, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-205.3. - Nonresidential structures in traditional floodplain areas. (a)  New development. A new nonresidential structure to be located on property encumbered by a traditional floodplain, floodway, or special flood hazard area shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. If a new non-residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, development is prohibited. (b)  Substantially damaged or substantially improved structures. If an existing nonresidential structure located within the traditional floodplain, floodway, or special flood hazard area has sustained substantial damage or is proposed for substantial improvement, the structure shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. (c)  Elevating existing non-residential structures. If, due to site conditions, an existing nonresidential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-205.3(b), the structure may be elevated in accordance with either section 74-205.5(b) or section 74-205.5(c); provided however that section 74-205.5(a) shall apply to an elevated nonresidential structure regardless of whether section 74-205.5(b) or section 74-205.5(c) applies. (d)  Flood protecting nonresidential structures. If, due to structural conditions, an existing nonresidential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal and the two foot vertical requirements in section 74-205.3(b), an existing nonresidential structure may be flood protected in accordance with section 74-205.5(d). (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 7, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-205.4. - Ancillary structures and infrastructure in traditional floodplain areas. (a)  Ancillary structures. Ancillary structures may be allowed in traditional floodplain areas if designed and constructed to minimize and mitigate impact on the traditional floodplain, allow for stormwater to enter the floodway by sheet flow (not channelized flow) and results in no net loss in flood storage volume. Ancillary structures shall not be allowed in the floodway. (b)  Infrastructure. Infrastructure may be allowed in traditional floodplain areas if designed and constructed to minimize and mitigate impact on the traditional floodplain area. Onsite sewage management systems (septic tanks) and wells are prohibited in traditional floodplains. Stormwater management systems may be allowed only if designed such that there is no net loss in flood plain storage volume. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 8, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-205.5. - Standards for elevating and flood protecting structures in traditional floodplain areas. (a)  Basic requirements for elevating structures. The following requirements apply to the elevation of any structure within the traditional floodplain area; (i)  Design and construction of elevated structures shall utilize methods and practices that minimize flood damage and current and future encroachment into the floodway and traditional floodplain; (ii)  The elevation of the structure's lowest floor shall be the greater of either: three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood; (iii)  Elevated structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin "Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements" August 2008, or as amended; (iv)  The area below the lowest floor of an elevated structure shall be flood resistant, unfinished, and designed with piers or wall openings to facilitate the natural flow of floodwaters under the structure; (v)  The unfinished and flood-resistant area below the lowest floor shall remain unoccupied and shall only be used for parking vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; (vi)  Stormwater management facilities and grease traps with backflow prevention devices that are properly designed to be isolated from flood waters may be allowed; (vii)  The interior portion of the area below the lowest floor shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; provided however, the minimum area necessary for access to upper floors may be finished with flood damage-resistant materials in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin "Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements" August 2008, or as amended; (viii)  Elevated structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; (ix)  Heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), electrical, ventilation, plumbing equipment (including water heater), and other service facilities shall be located at least three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood (whichever is greater) to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; (x)  Designs for complying with the requirements of this article shall be certified by either a professional engineer or architect; (xi)  Landings and stairs that allow for the natural flow of floodwaters will be allowed for minimum entry access; (xii)  If the proposed elevated structure is located in multiple flood zones or if multiple base flood elevations cross the site, the higher or most protective base flood elevation shall take precedence; (xiii)  The design shall provide for the drainage of floodwaters in not less than 72 hours pursuant to FEMA Technical Bulletin I (August 2008); and (xiv)  A file-stamped copy of an elevation certificate filed in the land records of the county in which the property is located shall be submitted to the commissioner prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. This elevation certificate shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor and shall document the elevation of the lowest floor relative to mean sea level and compliance with the ordinance. (b)  Elevation of existing structures via jacking on existing foundation. An existing structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement may be elevated by jacking, intact, on an existing foundation, provided the criteria of section 74-205.5(a) are met in addition to the following criteria: (i)  No elevated structure shall exceed the original geometric footprint area or horizontally expand living space into or over the traditional floodplain; (ii)  Foundations shall contain a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding as provided in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3 and Section 5 of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District's Model Floodplain Management/Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (2006); (iii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and (iv)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings provided they permit the flow of floodwater in both directions. (c)  Elevation of existing structures via demolition and rebuilding on an equivalent footprint area. An existing structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement may be demolished and relocated on the lot such that the passage of water is facilitated or the floodplain is otherwise enhanced or protected, provided the criteria of section 74-205.5(a) arc met in addition to the following criteria: (i)  No elevated structure shall exceed the original footprint area or increase the net encroachment into or over the floodplain; and (ii)  Foundations shall be designed to resist anticipated hydrodynamic loads, potential for debris impact, and scour pursuant to FEMA Technical Bulletin I (August 2008). Foundations shall be designed with the following criteria: (A)  The total area of the walls below the base flood elevation exposed to flood waters shall be at least 50 percent open. Wall openings shall be distributed along all walls exposed to flood waters; (B)  The bottoms of all wall openings shall be at grade; (C)  Garage doors not allowing the natural flow of floodwaters when closed shall not be considered wall openings; and (D)  Openings may be equipped with grilles, louvers, or bars provided they allow the natural flow of floodwater in both directions. (d)  Flood protecting structure. Flood protecting structures within the traditional floodplain is generally prohibited, unless expressly authorized by the provisions of this article. If expressly authorized under the provisions of this article, a structure may be flood protected in accordance with the following criteria: (i)  Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located three feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation; (ii)  Designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy, in accordance with the following; (A)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and (B)  A record of such certificate, which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood proofed shall be filed and recorded in the land records of the county in which the property lies; and (iii)  Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: (A)  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. (B)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and (C)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 9, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-206.1. - Single-family structures in a historically modified floodplain areas. (a)  New development. A new single-family residential structure to be located on property encumbered by a historically modified floodplain shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. (b)  Elevating new single-family structures. If, due to site conditions, a new single-family residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-206.1(a), the structure shall be constructed to be two feet above the high water mark or three feet above the nearest base flood elevation. Such a structure must also comply with section 74-206.5(a). (c)  Substantially damaged or substantially improved structures. If an existing single-family residential structure located within the historically modified floodplain has sustained substantial damage or is proposed for substantial improvement, the structure shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. (d)  Elevating existing single-family structures. If, due to site conditions, an existing single-family residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-206.1(c), the structure may be elevated in accordance with either section 74-206.5(b) or section 74-206.5(c); provided however, section 74-206.5(a) shall apply to all elevated structures regardless of whether section 74-206.5(b) or section 74-206.5(c) applies. (e)  Flood protecting single-family residential structures. An existing single-family residential structure that has not been substantially damaged or is not proposed for substantial improvement may be flood protected, in accordance with section 74-206.5(d). A new single-family residential structure or an existing single-family residential structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement may not be flood protected to comply with the provisions of this article. (f)  Fill in floodplain. The placement of fill in the historically modified floodplain area may be allowed if it can be demonstrated that there will be no increase of flood elevation or adverse impacts on any upstream, downstream or adjacent property. (g)  Regional mitigation. The demonstration of no increase of flood elevation or adverse impacts on any upstream, downstream or adjacent property, as required pursuant to section 74-206.1(f), may be achieved by contribution to a regional flood mitigation system located within the same sewer basin as the subject property, subject to approval by the commissioner. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 10, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2017-43(17-O-1393), § 2, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 74-206.2. - Multifamily structures in historically modified floodplain areas. (a)  New development. A new multifamily residential structure to be located on property encumbered by a historically modified floodplain shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. (b)  Elevating new multifamily residential structures. If, due to site conditions, a new multifamily residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-206.2(a), the structure shall be constructed to be two feet above the high water mark or three feet above the nearest base flood elevation. Such a structure must also comply with section 74-206.5(a). (c)  Substantially damaged or substantially improved structures. If an existing multifamily residential structure located within the historically modified floodplain has sustained substantial damage or is proposed for substantial improvement. the structure shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. (d)  Elevating existing multifamily residential structures. If, due to site conditions, an existing multifamily residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-206.2(c), the structure may be elevated in accordance with either section 74-206.5(b) or section 74-206.5(c); provided however, section 74206.5(a) shall apply to all elevated structures regardless of whether section 74-206.5(b) or section 74-206.5(c) applies. (e)  Flood protecting multifamily residential structures. An existing multifamily residential structure that has not been substantially damaged or is not proposed for substantial improvement may be flood protected in accordance with section 74-206.5(d). A new multifamily residential structure or an existing multifamily residential structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement may not be flood protected to comply with the provisions of this article. (f)  Fill in floodplain. The placement of fill in the historically modified floodplain area may be allowed if it can be demonstrated that there will be no increase of flood elevation or adverse impacts on any upstream, downstream or adjacent property. (g)  Regional mitigation. The demonstration of no increase of flood elevation or adverse impacts on any upstream, downstream or adjacent property, as required pursuant to section 74-206.2(f), may be achieved by contribution to a regional flood mitigation system located within the same sewer basin as the subject property, subject to approval by the Commissioner. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 11, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2017-43(17-O-1393), § 3, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 74-206.3. - Nonresidential structures in historically modified floodplain area. (a)  New development. A new nonresidential structure to be located on property encumbered by a historically modified floodplain shall be located not less than three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood. (b)  Flood protecting new non-residential structures. If, due to site conditions, a new nonresidential structure cannot be located not less than three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood, in accordance with section 74206.3(a), the structure may be flood protected in accordance with section 74-206.5(d). (c)  Substantially damaged or substantially improved structures. If an existing nonresidential structure located within the historically modified floodplain has sustained substantial damage or is proposed for substantial improvement, the structure shall be located not less than three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood. (d)  Elevating existing non-residential structures. An existing nonresidential structure required to be elevated in accordance with section 74-206.3(c) may be elevated in accordance with either section 74-206.5(b) or section 74-206.5(c); provided however that section 74-206.5(a) shall apply to an elevated non-residential structure regardless of whether section 74-206.5(b) or section 74-206.5(c) applies. (e)  Flood protecting non-residential structures. If, due to structural conditions, an existing non-residential structure cannot be located not less than three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood, an existing non-residential structure may be flood protected in accordance with section 74-206.5(d). (f)  Fill in floodplain. The placement of fill in the historically modified floodplain area may be allowed if it can be demonstrated that there will be no increase of flood elevation or adverse impacts on any upstream, downstream or adjacent property. (g)  Regional mitigation. The demonstration of no increase of flood elevation or adverse impacts on any upstream, downstream or adjacent property, as required pursuant to section 74-206.3(f), may be achieved by contribution to a regional flood mitigation system located within the same sewer basin as the subject property, subject to approval by the commissioner. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 12, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2017-43(17-O-1393), § 4, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 74-206.4. - Ancillary structures and infrastructure in historically modified floodplain areas.     Ancillary structures and infrastructure may be allowed in historically modified floodplain areas if designed and constructed to minimize and mitigate impact on the historically modified floodplain. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 13, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-206.5. - Standards for constructing, elevating and flood protecting structures in historically modified floodplain areas. (a)  Basic requirements for elevating structures. The following requirements apply to the elevation of any structure within a historically modified floodplain area: (i)  Design and construction of elevated structures shall utilize methods and practices that minimize flood damage and current and future encroachment into the floodway and historically modified floodplain; (ii)  The elevation of the structure's lowest floor shall be the greater of either; three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood; (iii)  Elevated structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin "Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements" August 2008, or as amended; (iv)  The area below the lowest floor of an elevated structure shall be flood resistant, unfinished, and designed with piers or wall openings to facilitate the natural flow of floodwaters under the structure; (v)  The unfinished and flood-resistant area below the lowest floor shall remain unoccupied and shall only be used for parking vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; (vi)  Stormwater management facilities and grease traps with backflow prevention devices that are properly designed to be isolated from flood waters may be allowed; (vii)  The interior portion of the area below the lowest floor shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; provided however, the minimum area necessary for access to upper floors may be finished with flood damage-resistant materials in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin "Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements" August 2008, or as amended; (viii)  Elevated structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; (ix)  Heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), electrical, ventilation, plumbing equipment (including water heater), and other service facilities shall be located at least three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood (whichever is greater) to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; (x)  Designs for complying with the requirements of this article shall be certified by either a professional engineer or architect; (xi)  Landings and stairs that allow for the natural flow of floodwaters will be allowed for minimum entry access; (xii)  If the proposed elevated structure is located in multiple flood zones or if multiple base flood elevations cross the site, the higher or most protective base flood elevation shall take precedence; (xiii)  The design shall provide for the drainage of floodwaters in not less than 72 hours pursuant to FEMA Technical Bulletin 1 (August 2008); and (xiv)  A file-stamped copy of an elevation certificate filed in the land records of the county in which the property is located shall be submitted to the commissioner prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. This elevation certificate shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor and shall document the elevation of the lowest floor relative to mean sea level and compliance with the ordinance. (b)  Elevation of existing structure via jacking on existing foundation. An existing structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement may be elevated by jacking, intact, on an existing foundation provided the criteria of Section 74-206.5(a) are met in addition to the following criteria: (i)  Foundations shall contain a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding as provided in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3 and Section 5 of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District's Model Floodplain Management/Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (2006); (ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and (iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings provided they permit the flow of floodwater in both directions. (c)  Elevation of existing structure via demolition and rebuilding on an equivalent footprint area. An existing structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement may be demolished and relocated on the lot such that the passage of water is facilitated or the floodplain is otherwise enhanced or protected provided the criteria of section 74-206.5(a) are met in addition to the following criteria: (i)  Foundations shall be designed to resist anticipated hydrodynamic loads, potential for debris impact, and scour pursuant to FEMA Technical Bulletin 1 (August 2008). Foundations shall be designed with the following criteria: (A)  The total area of the walls below the base flood elevation exposed to flood waters shall be at least 50 percent open. Wall openings shall be distributed along all walls exposed to flood waters; (B)  The bottoms of all wall openings shall be at grade; (C)  Garage doors not allowing the natural flow of floodwaters when closed shall not be considered wall openings; and (D)  Openings may be equipped with grilles, louvers, or bars provided they allow the natural flow of floodwater in both directions. (d)  Flood protecting structures. Flood protecting structures within the historically modified floodplain is generally prohibited, unless expressly authorized by the provisions of this article. If expressly authorized under the provisions of this article, a structure may be flood protected in accordance with the following criteria: (i)  Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located three feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation; (ii)  Designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy in accordance with the following; (A)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and (B)  A record of such certificate, which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood proofed shall be filed and recorded in the land records of the county in which the property lies; and (iii)  Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: (A)  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. (B)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and (C)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 14, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-207. - Enforcement.     The commissioner is authorized to enforce the requirements of this article in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. (a)  Violations. Any person in violation of this article shall be subject to the general penalty set out in section 1-8 and shall be required to modify or remove the violation to achieve compliance with this article. Each day during which violation or failure to comply continues shall he a separate violation. (b)  Stop work orders. The commissioner of the department of watershed management, and the commissioner of the department of city planning, or their respective designees, are each authorized to issue stop work orders to any person that violates this article. Stop work orders shall be effective immediately and remain in effect until corrective actions have occurred. (c)  Building permit. If the City of Atlanta determines that a permittee has failed to comply with any provision of this article, the commissioner of the department of city planning or said commissioner's designee may suspend or revoke the building permit. (d)  Withhold certificates of occupancy or completion. The commissioner of the department of city planning or said commissioner's designee is authorized to refuse to issue certificates of occupancy or completion for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on a site in violation of a stop work order until the owner has taken the remedial measures as set forth in the stop work order, or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. (e)  Flood damaged and unusable structures in a floodplain. If a structure has been flooded and sustained damage to a degree that renders the structure unusable or uninhabitable, or otherwise presents a threat to public health, safety, welfare and environment, the owner shall repair or demolish the structure. Any such structure that remains in a damaged state fair at least 24 months shall be declared a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief according to the provisions of article V of this chapter. (f)  Violations deemed public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided herein, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article that constitute a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment may be declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief according to the provisions of article V of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 15, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 74-208. - Relationship to other laws. (a)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for the riparian environment shall control. (b)  Relationship to 42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq. This article is enacted pursuant to the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq.). 44 C.F.R. § 60.1 et seq., and to implement the requirements of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-570 et seq. Words and phrases used in this article which are defined in the National Flood Insurance Program rules and regulations codified at 44 C.F.R. § 59.1 et seq. and effective December 1, 1976 (41 FR 46968 et seq.), and as they may be revised, shall have the meanings set out in such rules and regulations unless the context in which such words or phrases are used in this article clearly imports a different meaning, or unless otherwise defined herein. (c)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 16, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-209. - Indemnity agreements.     The city finds that the construction of new structures, the elevation and flood protecting of existing structures, the installation of a swimming pool or other in-ground water features, or the construction of a parking lot in a special flood hazard area generally will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. However, as stated in Atlanta City Code section 74-201(b), such improvements may be subject to inundation under certain conditions. Therefore, prior to the issuance of any permit for construction of a new structure, the elevation of an existing structure, the installation of a swimming pool or other in-ground water feature, or the construction of a parking lot in a special flood hazard area, the owner of the subject property shall execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement, in a form provided by the city, which shall state at a minimum, that owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the city for any damages or claims for damages, suits, costs, judgments losses, and injuries arising out of the owner's construction, maintenance, use or removal of said improvements. The indemnification shall be filed and recorded in the land records of the county in which the property lies and shall be a permanent covenant running with the land and shall be binding upon the successors in title of the owner. (Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 17, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-210. - Appeal. (a)  Within 30 days of the date of the denial or issuance of a permit, aggrieved or adversely affected parties may file an appeal with the commissioner. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall include a copy of the initial denial or issuance of the permit. (b)  Upon receipt of an appeal, and for good cause, the commissioner may suspend the permit, or applicable portions thereof, pending review. Within 30 days after receipt of an appeal, the commissioner shall make a determination and shall notify the appellant. (c)  The commissioner's determination may be appealed to the Superior Court of the County where the subject property is located. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of issuance of the commissioner's determination as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 and will be reviewed under the standard provided by O.C.G.A. § 50-13-19(h). ( Ord. No. 2015-36(15-O-1246), § 2, 7-15-15 ) 
Sec. 74-211. - Letter of map change.     If a property owner feels their structure is improperly shown in a 100-year floodplain, the commissioner will direct them to complete the Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) letter of map change process. ( Ord. No. 2015-36(15-O-1246), § 3, 7-15-15 ) 
Sec. 74-212. - Proposed change in use of existing encroachments. (a)  Traditional floodplain. Existing structures in the traditional floodplain that are proposed for a redevelopment that will change the structure category (e.g., a multifamily structure redeveloped to a nonresidential structure) must comply with the following: (1)  The proposed redeveloped structure shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. (2)  If due to site conditions, the redeveloped structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-212(a)(1), the structure may be elevated in accordance with sections 74-205.5(a) and 74-205.5(c). (3)  The proposed redeveloped structure must comply with the applicable requirements of section 74-205.1, 74-205.2 or 74-205.3. (4)  The type or degree of occupancy of the replacement structure must be less than the type or degree of occupancy of the original structure. (i.e. Multi-family or single-family occupancy may change to non-residential use but non-residential use may not change to residential). (b)  Historically modified floodplain. Existing structures in the historically modified floodplain that are proposed for redevelopment that will change the structure category (e.g., a multifamily structure redeveloped to a nonresidential structure) must comply with the following: (1)  The proposed redeveloped structure shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. (2)  If due to site conditions, the redeveloped structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-212(b)(1), the structure may be elevated in accordance with sections 74-206.5(a) and 74-206.5(c) (3)  The proposed redeveloped structure must comply with the applicable requirements of section 74-206.1, 74-206.2 or 74-206.3. (4)  The type or degree of occupancy of the replacement structure must be less than the type or degree of occupancy of the original structure. (i.e. Multi-family or single-family occupancy may change to non-residential use but non-residential use may not change to residential). ( Ord. No. 2017-43(17-O-1393), § 5, 7-26-17 ) 
Secs. 74-213—74-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RIPARIAN BUFFER REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 74-300. - Title, authority, and purpose. (a)  Title. This article may be cited as the "City of Atlanta Riparian Buffer Ordinance." (b)  Authority. This article is enacted pursuant to the city's authority under Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II (Home Rule and supplementary powers); O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. (Municipal Home Rule powers); Atlanta City Charter §§ 1-102(b), 1-102(c)(42), and 1-102(c)(46); and to implement the requirements of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-570 et seq. (c)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to maintain stream water quality and protect water resources by protecting buffer areas along the streams and wetlands of the city; to minimize development within such buffers by requiring authorization for any development; to provide additional protection for streams and wetlands within the city beyond the buffer areas mandated by the State of Georgia; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation, and water pollution; and to promote the safety, health, peace, and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 1, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-301. - Findings and applicability. (a)  Findings. The City of Atlanta finds that buffers adjacent to streams and wetlands are beneficial to water quality because they: (1)  Protect, restore, and maintain the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; (2)  Improve surface water, urban stormwater runoff, and groundwater quality by filtering pollutants, nutrients, sediment, and other contaminants; (3)  Reduce erosion and sedimentation; (4)  Protect and stabilize stream banks and stream channels; (5)  Maintain base flow of streams by aiding in groundwater recharge, and thereby protect dry weather low flows in streams; (6)  Contribute organic matter that is a source of food, energy, and habitat for the aquatic ecosystem; (7)  Provide tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat including but not limited to the moderation of water temperature in streams; (8)  Provide and protect riparian wildlife habitat and wildlife migration corridors; (9)  Offer educational and recreational opportunities; and (10)  Protect greenspace.     Therefore, the city finds that the protection of the streams, wetlands, and the areas adjacent to them is vital to the safety, health, peace, and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants. (b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to both public and private property within the city. This article shall be administered in its entirety by the department of watershed management unless otherwise specified herein. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 2, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-302. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: (1)  Authorized encroachment means development in. the buffer authorized by the commissioner allowing an activity otherwise prohibited by this article. (2)  Applicant means the person who applies for an authorized encroachment and who must be the owner of the real property containing the buffer or an authorized agent of the owner. (3)  Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of sound conservation and engineering practices, and vegetative measures to prevent or minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, as referenced in section 74-302(16). (4)  Buffer means the area of land lying adjacent to a wetland or stream in which development is prohibited or limited as more particularly set out in section 74-303. (5)  City means City of Atlanta. (6)  Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of watershed management or a designee. (7)  Department means the department of watershed management or its successor agency. (8)  Development means any human-made change to improved or unimproved property that includes, but is not limited to, construction of buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing and grubbing, clearing, grading, paving, installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling, storage of equipment or materials, or any construction activity. (9)  Effective date means the date of adoption by city council and approval by the mayor of the Riparian Buffer Ordinance on December 11, 2001. (10)  EPD means the Environmental Protection Division of the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources. (11)  Existing lot means a parcel of land that was both: (i)  approved by the director of the bureau of planning or incorporated in the city's official cadastral maps prior to the effective date, or approved later than the effective date but was initiated by an application for subdivision completed and filed on or before May 25, 2001, with all necessary supporting documentation according to the Atlanta City Code, and (ii)  recorded in the records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton or DeKalb County. (12)  Extreme hardship means a unique or special condition more particularly set out in section 74-306(b)(3) proposed by an applicant as grounds for the grant of an authorized encroachment on a new lot. (13)  Georgia Stormwater Management Manual means the guide, First Edition (August 2001 or as updated), published by the Atlanta Regional Commission and adopted by reference in section 74-508 of the Atlanta City Code, and commonly referred to as the "Blue Book." The Georgia Stormwater Management Manual is currently available from the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District ( http://www northgeorgiawater.com or http://www georgiastormwater.com ). (14)  Hardship means a unique or special condition, more particularly set out in section 74-306(a)(1), and not to include lesser property value by comparison to properties in the vicinity, proposed by an applicant as grounds for the grant of an authorized encroachment. (15)  Impervious cover or surface means any paved, hardened, or structural surface, regardless of material. Impervious cover or surface includes, but is not limited to buildings, rooftops, driveways, streets, roads, parking lots, swimming pools, dams, gaming courts, decks, any concrete or asphalt, and any other surfaces or structures that will substantially reduce or prevent the infiltration of water. (16)  Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia means the guide published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and adopted by reference in section 74-40(a) of the Atlanta City Code and commonly referred to as the "Green Book." The Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation and Control in Georgia is currently available from the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission ( http://www.gaswcc.org ). (17)  Mitigation means measures undertaken to protect, restore, or enhance a stream, wetland, or buffer in order to compensate for or reduce the adverse impacts of development within a stream, wetland, or buffer, and more particularly set out in section 74-306(d). (18)  New lot means a parcel of land that: (i)  was approved by the director of the bureau of planning after the effective date, and was not initiated by an application for subdivision completed and filed on or before May 25, 2001, and; (ii)  is recorded in the records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton or DeKalb County. (19)  Normal stream flow means any stream flow that consists of base flow during any period of the year under normal meteorological conditions. Base flow results from groundwater that enters the stream channel through sub-surface flow and includes spring flows into streams. Base flow does not include surface water entering stream channels immediately after precipitation. (20)  On-site sewage management system means a system that includes a septic tank, absorption field and any other elements intended to be used for management and disposal of sewage on-site, as specified in GA Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-26-.02(gg) and as regulated by O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-20 et seq. (20.1)  Redevelopment means a development project on a previously developed site. (21)  Stream means any watercourse that sustains normal stream flow during any period of the year under normal meteorological conditions. (22)  Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse in a well-defined channel that contains the base flow of the stream. (23)  Technical panel means at least three department of watershed management staff professionals designated by the commissioner in accordance with section 74-307 who hold periodic meetings, develop procedures, make determinations, and maintain the public record in order to process applications for authorized encroachments. (24)  Waters of the state means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3(16). (25)  Well means an excavation or constructed opening into the ground from which groundwater is sought or obtained. (26)  Wetlands means those areas, delineated in accordance with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation. Manual, 1987 as amended that under normal conditions contain hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrologic conditions reflecting temporary or permanent inundation or saturation by surface or ground water. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas and typically support a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. (27)  Wrested vegetation, point of means that point at the edge of a stream where vegetation has been moved or wrested as a result of normal stream flow or wave action. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 3, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2012-01(11-O-1840), § 3, 1-26-12) 
Sec. 74-303. - Buffer requirements.     From and after the effective date of this ordinance, no person shall conduct development within the buffers set out as follows: (a)  City of Atlanta Stream Buffer. Streams shall have a 75-foot, natural, undisturbed, vegetative buffer measured perpendicularly and horizontally on both sides of the stream from the point of wrested vegetation. (b)  City of Atlanta Wetlands Buffer. Wetlands shall remain in their natural state and shall have a minimum 25-foot, natural, undisturbed, vegetative buffer measured horizontally and perpendicularly on all sides of the wetland (where applicable) from the edge of the wetland as determined and delineated in accordance with section 74-401 et seq. of the Atlanta City Code. Wetlands lying in part or in whole within a stream buffer shall have a buffer that includes the extent of the wetland within the stream buffer, plus the wetland buffer. (c)  Water Supply Watershed Buffer. The water supply watershed buffer applies to streams that are both tributary to a water supply and within a seven-mile radius of the boundary of a reservoir. A map of the Water Supply Watershed Buffer (which currently consists of the Long Island Creek Basin) shall be maintained for public inspection in the department of watershed management. The following buffer requirements shall apply from and after January 13, 2009: (1)  A natural, undisturbed vegetative buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet measured perpendicularly and horizontally on both sides of the stream from the point of wrested vegetation. (2)  No impervious surfaces or on-site sewage management systems shall be constructed within a distance of 150 feet measured perpendicularly and horizontally on both sides of the stream from the point of wrested vegetation. (d)  Waters of the State Buffer. As required by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and section 74-43(c)(15) of the Atlanta City Code, waters of the state not otherwise covered by this article shall have a 25-foot, natural, undisturbed, vegetative buffer measured perpendicularly and horizontally from the point of wrested vegetation. (e)  Measuring of buffers. For purposes of measuring buffers set out in this section, if wrested vegetation is not present due to a human-made modification, removal, or replacement of the stream bank with a structure (e.g. concrete lining, gabions, retaining wall, or rip rap), the buffer shall be measured from the top of the structure or point of modification or removal. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 4, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2012-01(11-O-1840), § 4, 1-26-12) 
Sec. 74-304. - Stream crossing requirements.     Construction or repair of structures that cross streams, including but not limited to those exempt under section 74-305, shall be subject to the following: (a)  A hydraulic analysis prepared, signed, and sealed by an engineer registered to practice in the State of Georgia is required for any proposed stream crossing. The analysis shall demonstrate that the proposed crossing will not adversely impact upstream and downstream properties during a 100-year flood; and (b)  Free-span techniques shall be employed to prevent blockage or constriction of natural drainage ways; and (c)  Approximately perpendicular crossing angles shall be employed; provided, however, crossings shall be aligned to minimize buffer disturbance to the maximum extent practicable; and (d)  Best management practices shall be utilized, stream banks shall be properly stabilized, and buffers shall be vegetated in accordance with the City of Atlanta Buffer Revegetation Guidelines. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 5, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-305. - Exemptions.     Subject to protection of the buffer to the maximum extent practicable and compliance with stream crossing requirements set out in section 74-304, the construction, operation, and maintenance of the following are exempt from the authorized encroachment requirements of section 74-306: (a)  Existing public streets, utilities, and related appurtenances; (b)  Stream crossings for public or private utility lines, and for streets and stormwater infrastructure and related appurtenances required to be dedicated to the city; (c)  Public drinking water, public wastewater, and public stormwater infrastructure and related appurtenances and treatment facilities; (d)  Multi-use trails, pedestrian bridges, and associated appurtenances listed in the City of Atlanta Comprehensive Development Plan; provided, however, section 74-306(d) shall apply; (e)  A single driveway necessary to provide access to an existing lot; (f)  Environmental monitoring and remediation activities such as water quality monitoring, stream gauging activities, and soil and groundwater monitoring or remediation; (g)  Removal of dead, dying, diseased, or hazardous trees, provided, however, no grading or stump removal shall be conducted, and such removal is authorized by the city arborist pursuant to section 158-26 et seq. of the Atlanta City Code; (h)  Removal without replacement of existing impervious cover from the buffer; and (i)  Activities on owner-occupied. single-family, residential lots to protect, restore, or enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality, or aquatic habitat, or minor land disturbing activities as set out in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(3); provided, however, no grading shall be conducted. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 6, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-306. - Authorized encroachments.     The commissioner may authorize an encroachment to allow development within the buffer upon a showing by the applicant that due to site-specific conditions, the buffer required by this article would result in a hardship or extreme hardship; provided however, the grant of such encroachment shall require mitigation such that post-development conditions are at least as protective of water quality as pre-development conditions.     An authorized encroachment may be granted in accordance with the following: (a)  Existing lots of record. In addition to the requirements set out in (c), (d) and (e) of this section, the commissioner may grant an authorized encroachment subject to the requirements of this article on existing lots of record (as defined herein): (1)  The commissioner may grant an authorized encroachment subject to the requirements of this ordinance when literal enforcement of the required buffer would result in a hardship, and no reasonable alternative to an authorized encroachment exists; and (2)  No authorized encroachment shall be granted to an existing lot of record that allows for development less than or equal to 50 feet from a stream measured in accordance with section 74-303 of this article unless it is a redevelopment that meets the requirements of subsection 74-306(a)(3) of this article or a single- or two-family residential development; and (3)  No authorized encroachment shall be granted for redevelopment of an existing lot of record unless the redevelopment results in a net reduction of the buffer encroachment from the existing condition, the redevelopment is designed to minimize the degree and impact of the encroachment, and the result of redevelopment is an overall improvement of buffer's ability to provide water quality and other environmental benefits. (b)  New lots of record. In addition to the requirements set out in (c) and (d) of this subsection, the following shall apply to authorized encroachments on new lots of record (as defined herein): (1)  No authorized encroachment shall be granted to a new lot of record to achieve greater than the minimum total developable area for a property's zoning classification. (2)  No authorized encroachment shall be granted to a new lot of record to achieve greater than the minimum development requirements of a commercial lot. (3)  No authorized encroachment shall be granted to a new lot of record except in the case of an extreme hardship. An extreme hardship shall be based upon on a showing by the applicant (set out more particularly in section 74-308) that no reasonable alternative for compliance exists and denial of such authorized encroachment would result in one of the following: (i)  non-compliance with applicable state or federal regulatory law, including, in particular, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; or (ii)  severe and unavoidable hazard to public health or safety; or (iii)  severe and unavoidable harm to the environment; provided, however, neither lesser property value by comparison to properties in the vicinity, nor compliance with this or other applicable ordinances shall constitute grounds for extreme hardship. (c)  All lots of record. The following are applicable to all authorized encroachments. (1)  Authorized encroachments shall not be granted that reduce the buffer to a width less than the minimum standards established by O.C.G.A. §§ 12-2-8, 12-7-6, or federal law. (2)  Authorized encroachments shall not be granted for a distance, location, or activity that is greater than necessary to alleviate a hardship or extreme hardship imposed by a strict application of this article. (3)  Actions of a property owner that have created a hardship or extreme hardship shall not constitute grounds for granting an authorized encroachment. (4)  The granting of a zoning variance shall not create a right to an exemption under section 74-305 or the grant of an authorized encroachment under section 74-306. (5)  Authorized encroachments shall not be granted for wells, on-site sewage management systems, detention ponds, or underground stormwater detention facilities, except upon a showing by the applicant of an extreme hardship as set out in section 74-306(b)(3). (6)  Authorized encroachments shall not be granted for impervious gaming courts. (7)  Authorized encroachments shall be designed to maximize the area of the buffer where sheet flow discharge of stormwater occurs. The sheet flow of stormwater through the entire buffer shall be the goal of the design. However, where redirection of stormwater is necessary for drainage control, vegetated swales shall be utilized where practicable. (d)  Mitigation. Mitigation shall be required as a condition for the grant of an authorized encroachment in order to ensure that post-development conditions are at least as protective of water quality as pre-development conditions. Mitigation shall be proposed by the applicant in accordance with guidance prepared by the department of watershed management that shall include, at a minimum, the following options: (1)  Stormwater quality improvement measures or stormwater quantity reduction measures as specified by the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; (2)  Stream or wetland restoration; (3)  Buffer revegetation as specified in the City of Atlanta Buffer Revegetation Guidelines, which shall be maintained by the department of watershed management and available for public inspection; (4)  Reduction of run-off beyond pre-development levels; (5)  Removal of existing impervious surfaces; (6)  Buffer compensation; or (7)  Green Infrastructure or low impact development practices designed in accordance with the Coastal Stormwater Supplement of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 7, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2012-01(11-O-1840), §§ 1, 2, 5, 1-26-12) 
Sec. 74-307. - Technical panel.     The commissioner shall designate a technical panel for the review and processing of applications for authorized encroachments. The technical panel shall be comprised of at least three staff professionals in the department of watershed management certified by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 in the field of pollution, erosion, and sedimentation control at the plan reviewer level (Level II). Technical panel members shall serve for a period of two years renewable by the commissioner, and should have expertise in the following areas: stream buffer revegetation, erosion and sedimentation control, stream and wetland restoration, mitigation (as defined herein), and riparian habitat restoration. The technical panel shall meet not less than once monthly, shall develop procedural rules, maintain a docket, and make records available for review upon request. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 8, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-308. - Contents of an application for an authorized encroachment. (a)  Applicants shall apply for an authorized encroachment on a form supplied by the department and in a format specified by the department. An application shall include, at a minimum, the following showings by the applicant: (1)  Documentation that the lot was recognized by the city either on or before the effective date of this ordinance (as defined herein), or after the effective date of this ordinance; (2)  A written description of the project, including details of the buffer disturbance (3)  Documentation of hardship or extreme hardship should the authorized encroachment application be denied; (4)  Alternative plans which attempt to meet the same development goals as the original site plan while preventing buffer intrusion, and an explanation of why the alternative development is not feasible; (5)  Demonstration that impact to the stream buffer will be minimized and that impact only occurs to the extent necessary to remove a hardship or extreme hardship; (6)  Signature of the applicant; and (7)  A site plan that depicts the physical characteristics of the property, including, at a minimum, the following: (i)  Waters of the state, streams, wetland delineation, floodplain boundaries, other natural features, and all buffers as determined by a field survey; (ii)  Property boundaries, size, existing and proposed topography, slopes, soil types, vegetation, and other relevant physical characteristics of the property; (iii)  Locations of both existing and proposed structures, utilities, stormwater facilities, impervious surfaces, and the boundaries of the area of soil disturbance both inside and outside of the buffer. The area of the buffer to be impacted shall be accurately and clearly delineated, and shall show the total area and length of buffer disturbance; (iv)  Erosion and sedimentation control measures in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia to prevent the migration of sediment into streams, wetlands, or waters of the state; (v)  100-year flood components for all streams with elevations and contour locations as they cross the property. Where 100-year flood elevations have been determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Maps, or where other studies deemed acceptable by the department exist, those elevations shall be used. In areas that have not been studied by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as shown on flood insurance rate maps, the commissioner may require a 100-year flood study prepared in accordance with Atlanta City Code Chapter 74, Article V, and prepared by a professional engineer or hydrogeologist currently licensed in the State of Georgia; (vi)  Proposed mitigation for the buffer disturbance in accordance with section 74-306(d). (b)  The commissioner may require other information deemed necessary to evaluate an application including, but not limited to, engineering analysis of stream dynamics, cross sections and profiles, details of proposed mitigation, and modifications to site plans. (c)  The applicant shall certify that all information provided in the application and all supporting documentation is true and correct. The omission or misrepresentation of material fact in connection with the application shall be grounds for denial. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 9, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-309. - Technical review.     Within 30 days of receipt of a substantially complete application, the technical panel shall conduct a technical review, which shall include, at a minimum, an evaluation of the following: (a)  Whether the application meets the requirements of section 74-308 and provides sufficient information to proceed with review; (b)  Whether the application contains a disqualifying characteristic that makes the applicant ineligible for an authorized encroachment; (c)  Whether the proposed encroachment is on a wetland, 100-year floodplain, or other location that is inappropriate for development; (d)  Whether the property owner has demonstrated a hardship or an extreme hardship; (e)  Whether, in light of the showings by the applicant required by section 74-308, the applicant has demonstrated that the location and extent of the proposed buffer encroachment has been minimized; (f)  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; (g)  Whether, in light of the mitigation proposed by the applicant in accordance with section 74-306(d), the post-development conditions will be at least as protective of water quality as pre-development conditions; (h)  Whether the proposed development meets all other requirements of this ordinance; and (i)  Whether the property to be affected by the authorized encroachment has no reasonable use given, but not limited to, the current zoning if the authorized encroachment is denied.     Upon completion of technical review, the technical panel shall either request modifications, or notify the applicant that technical review is complete and that the applicant may proceed with public notice as required by section 74-310, or in the event compliance with the applicable criteria is not possible, deny the application for authorized encroachment. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 10, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-310. - Public notice of application, public comment, and maintenance of public record.     A public notice and comment period is required as a condition for the grant of an authorized encroachment. The purpose of public notice and comment is to provide an opportunity for comment on the proposed encroachment, and to provide the technical panel with relevant information consistent with the requirements of this ordinance. The applicant shall complete the following public notice requirements upon notification by the technical panel that technical review is complete: (a)  Public notice and comment period. The public notice and comment period shall be 30 consecutive calendar days from the date the sign(s) required by section 74-310(b)(3) is(are) posted. Comments shall be submitted to the attention of the riparian buffer technical panel in the department of watershed management. Comments shall be timely and must identify the application to which they pertain. Public comments shall be made part of the application file. (b)  Notice requirements. The applicant shall notify the public of the application for an authorized encroachment in accordance with this section. The commissioner is authorized to develop standards and procedures for posting of notice, which shall, at a minimum, include the following: (1)  The applicant shall notify all owners of real property adjoining the stream or wetland for a distance of 200 feet upstream and 500 feet downstream as measured from the property line contiguous to the stream or wetland that an authorized encroachment is being requested. The notice shall be sent via certified mail return receipt requested, shall contain both a copy of the application and the information listed in section 74-310(c), and shall be postmarked the same date the sign(s) required by section 74-310(b)(3) is(are) posted; and (2)  The applicant shall notify the chairperson of the NPU in which the subject property is located that an authorized encroachment is being requested. The notice shall be sent via certified mail return receipt requested, shall contain both a copy of the application and the information listed in section 74-310(c), and shall be postmarked the same date the sign(s) required by section 74-310(b)(3) is(are) posted; and (3)  The applicant shall post at least one sign on the property for which the authorized encroachment is being sought in a format as determined by the department or in accordance with the following specifications: (i)  Post one sign adjacent to each street the property abuts for every 600 feet of frontage; (ii)  The sign shall contain the words "stream buffer encroachment" in letters not less than three inches high; (iii)  The sign shall be legible and posted in a conspicuous place on the property so it can be easily viewed from the public street on which the property fronts; (iv)  The sign shall be at least one and one-half feet by two feet; (v)  The sign shall contain all information in section 74-310(c); and (vi)  The sign shall remain in place for a minimum of 30 consecutive calendar days. (c)  Notice contents. The notice required by this section shall include the following information: (1)  The property address where the encroachment is being proposed; (2)  The scope of the proposed encroachment; (3)  The authorized encroachment application number; (4)  The location where plans may be reviewed and the date by which comment may submitted as set out in section 74-310(a); and (5)  The current address and contact information, including phone number, for the riparian buffer technical panel, department of watershed management. (d)  Certification. Upon completion of public notice and comment period, the applicant shall certify to the technical panel that all public notification requirements have been fulfilled and shall provide documentation of compliance including, but not limited to, dated photographs of the sign(s), copies of required letters, and certified mail return receipts. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 11, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2012-01(11-O-1840), § 6, 1-26-12) 
Sec. 74-311. - Processing of applications for authorized encroachments. (a)  Public comment. Following the receipt of certification of completion of public notice, the technical panel shall determine whether public notice was completed in accordance with section 74-310. (b)  Determination. After due consideration of public comments, the technical panel shall issue a determination within 30 days after receipt of certification of completion of public notice and comment period and notify the applicant of the determination in writing. The technical panel may make findings of fact and conclusions to support its determination. The technical panel may take any of the following actions on an application for an authorized encroachment: (1)  Issue the authorized encroachment as requested in the application; (2)  Issue an authorized encroachment with written, site-specific conditions necessary to ensure conformity to the requirements and stated intent of this article; or (3)  Deny the application. (c)  Expiration. An application shall expire when there has been no activity on the application for a period of 180 days. With respect to an application not approved for issuance of an authorized encroachment, "no activity" shall mean that the applicant has not responded to the technical panel's notification that additional information or corrections are required before further processing of the application can take place. (d)  Term. An authorized encroachment may be transferred to subsequent property owners; provided, however, changes to the site plan as set out in section 74-308(a)(7) require resubmission of the application. The authorized encroachment shall expire if a building permit is not issued for the proposed encroachment within 30 months of the date the encroachment is granted. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 12, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-312. - Notice of disposition. (a)  Following the grant of an authorized encroachment, the applicant shall notify each of the following parties of the technical panel's determination under section 74-311(b) via certified mail return receipt requested within ten calendar days of receipt of notice: (1)  All property owners notified pursuant to section 74-310(b)(1); and (2)  The chairperson of the NPU in which the subject property is located. (b)  The notice required by section 74-312(a) above shall state the technical panel's determination, the location where the application and related records are available for inspection, and the deadline for appeal as set out in section 74-313(a). (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 13, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-313. - Appeal. (a)  Within 30 days of the date of issuance of a determination by the technical panel, aggrieved or adversely affected parties may file an appeal with the commissioner. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall include a copy of the technical panel's determination.     Appellants shall submit a copy of the appeal to the technical panel. Upon receipt of an appeal and for good cause, the commissioner may suspend the authorized encroachment pending review. Within 30 days after receipt of an appeal, the commissioner shall make a determination and notify the appellant. (b)  The commissioner's determination may be appealed to the superior court of the county where the subject property is located. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of issuance of the commissioner's determination as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 and will be reviewed under the standard provided by O.C.G.A. § 50-13-19(h). (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 14, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-314. - Relationships to other laws and regulations. (a)  Relationship to O.C.G.A. § § 12-2-8 and 12-7-6. (1)  The City of Atlanta Stream Buffer shall overlay the state waters buffer recognized by section 74-43(c)(15) of the Atlanta City Code, and created by O.C.G.A. §§ 12-2-8 and 12-7-6. If an applicant applies to EPD for a state waters buffer variance under O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6, the applicant must also apply with the city for an authorized encroachment, and these applications may be considered concurrently. (2)  No provision of this article shall be interpreted as relaxing or exempting any requirement of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-2-8 or 12-7-6. The commissioner shall not grant an authorized encroachment to stream buffers otherwise regulated by the Environmental Protection Division, Department of Natural Resources, State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 absent the grant of a stream buffer variance from EPD. (3)  Receiving a stream buffer variance from EPD from the operation of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 is not grounds for the commissioner to grant a similar authorized encroachment. (b)  Relationship to the Metropolitan River Protection Act. No provision of this article shall be interpreted as relaxing or exempting any requirement of the Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-453. Further, the requirements of this article are intended to fulfill the requirements of the Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-453, which mandate that local jurisdictions adopt regulations governing the use of all land which is in the drainage basin of any tributary flowing into the Chattahoochee River Corridor (2,000-foot Chattahoochee River Corridor), which at a minimum, include buffer areas of adequate width as determined by local governing authorities along all flowing streams in the drainage basin of any tributary, in which buffer areas there shall be no development. (c)  Relationship to Chapter 74 Article VIII of the Atlanta City Code (Wetland Protection Regulation). (1)  The commissioner shall not grant an authorized encroachment allowing development in a wetland under the jurisdiction of the United States Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to § 404 of the Clean Water Act absent the grant of a United States Army Corps of Engineers permit. (2)  No section of this article shall be interpreted as relaxing or exempting any requirements of section 74-401 et seq. of the Atlanta City Code, § 404 of the Clean Water Act, or any jurisdictional wetland disturbance permitting procedures under the jurisdiction of the United States Army Corps of Engineers. (3)  The City of Atlanta Wetland Buffer shall overlay any buffers or other protections that may be required by federal law. If an applicant applies to the Department of the Army for a wetland disturbance permit, the applicant must also apply with the city for an authorized encroachment, and these applications may be considered concurrently. Receiving a United States Army Corps of Engineers permit is not grounds for the commissioner to grant a similar authorized encroachment. (d)  Relationship to O.C.G.A., 12-5-570 et seq. The water supply watershed buffer is adopted, effective January 13, 2009, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-570 et seq. and GA Comp. R. & Regs. §§ 391-3-16.01 et seq.     As required by O.C.G.A. § 12-5-570 et seq., from and after January 13, 2009, new facilities located within seven miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir that handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by the Department of Natural Resources, State of Georgia, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the Department of Natural Resources, State of Georgia. (e)  Relationship to Chapter 74 Article II of the Atlanta City Code (Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control). Erosion and sedimentation control best management practices as set forth in Chapter 74 Article II of this Code shall be implemented to prevent the migration of any sediment into a stream, wetland, waters of the state, or buffer, if such practices are not already required by this or other ordinances. (f)  Relationship to plat approval process for lot creation. No new lot shall be created, and the commissioner shall not approve any preliminary or final subdivision plat, that requires an authorized encroachment in order to comply with minimum lot development requirements as set out in section 74-306(b)(1) or section 74-306(b)(2), or in Parts 15 and 16 of the City of Atlanta Land Development Code. In addition, the following requirements shall apply: (1)  All riparian buffers shall be shown on the plat; (2)  For any new development, the riparian buffer shall be physically delineated in accordance with City of Atlanta Buffer Revegetation Guidelines. (g)  Conflict with other laws. No section of this ordinance shall be interpreted as relaxing or exempting any requirements of Chapter 74 Article II, Chapter 74 Article VI, or Chapter 158 Article II of the Atlanta City Code. In the event of a conflict between or among any provisions of this article, or any other laws, regulations, or policies, the requirements that are most protective of water quality shall apply. Violation of this article shall not preclude the prosecution of a violation of other sections of this Code which may apply. (h)  Liability. Neither the issuance of a building permit nor compliance with this article shall relieve any person from civil liability to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, or constitute the assumption of such liability. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2009-01(08-O-2281), § 1, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 15, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-315. - Nonconformities.     Structures, or impervious surfaces, existing as of the effective date of this article, and as amended, shall be deemed existing nonconforming for the purposes of this article. No structure or impervious surface shall be horizontally expanded to occupy greater land area inside the buffer; altered in a manner that changes the quantity, velocity, or quality of stormwater runoff; or moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the buffer without an authorized encroachment. Any replacement or reconstruction activity within the buffer shall occur within the original footprint or shall require compliance with the provisions of this article. No authorized encroachment is required by this article for repairs, restoration, and renovation performed upon existing structures and impervious surfaces which are considered to be existing nonconforming as of the effective date of this article. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 16, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-316. - Buffer management and maintenance. (a)  In the event that development is conducted within 25 feet of any buffer, the buffer shall be physically protected by placing currently approved tree protection fencing at the buffer boundary or the limits of construction, whichever is more protective of the buffer. If an authorized encroachment has been granted, the limits of the encroachment shall be similarly delineated. (b)  The owner of the property containing a buffer as defined herein shall be responsible for maintenance of the buffer and shall inspect the buffer periodically for evidence of degradation in regard to the purposes listed in section 74-301 and compliance with all other provisions of this article. Corrective actions shall be taken by the owner in a manner to ensure compliance with the terms of this article. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 17, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-317. - Enforcement.     The commissioner is authorized to enforce the requirements of this article in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. (a)  Any person who conducts development within a buffer that is in violation of this Code shall be subject to the general penalty set out in section 1-8 (a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof) and shall be required to restore or remove the unpermitted encroachment and revegetate the area per the City of Atlanta Buffer Revegetation Guidelines. Each day during which violation or failure to comply continues shall be a separate violation. (b)  Notice of violation. If the City of Atlanta determines that a person has failed to comply with any provision of this article, it may issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served on the applicant, owner, or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. (c)  Stop work orders. The commissioner of the department of watershed management, and the commissioner of the department of city planning, and the commissioners' designee(s) are each authorized to issue stop work orders to any person that violates any provision of this article. Stop work orders may include a specific area and activity, or the entire site and all activities. Stop work orders are effective immediately and shall remain in effect until the necessary corrective actions or remedial measures have occurred. Stop work orders shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. (d)  Refusal to issue certificates of occupancy or completion. The commissioner of the department of city planning or said commissioner's designee is authorized to refuse to issue certificates of occupancy or completion for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on a site until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial measures as set forth in the notice of violation or stop work order, or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. (e)  Suspension, revocation, or modification of building permit. If the City of Atlanta determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with any provision of this article or with the terms and conditions of an authorized encroachment, the commissioner of the department of city planning or said commissioner's designee may suspend, revoke or modify the building permit that was issued authorizing the development, and following implementation of remedial measures or mitigation to protect water quality, may reinstate the building permit. (f)  Suspension, revocation, or modification of authorized encroachment. If the City of Atlanta determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the requirements of an authorized encroachment, the commissioner may suspend, revoke or modify the authorized encroachment, and following implementation of remedial measures or mitigation to protect water quality, may reinstate the authorized encroachment. (g)  Restoration or removal of encroachment. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, development within a buffer that is in violation of this article shall constitute a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful. The solicitor or city attorney is authorized to file such actions as may be necessary to remedy the encroachment in the buffer, including petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or any other appropriate legal action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate an unlawful use or activity. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 18, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17) 
Secs. 74-318—74-320. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), §§ 19—21, approved April 27, 2010, repealed §§ 74-318—74-320, which pertained to liability; conflict with other regulations; and relationship to Metropolitan River Protection Act. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 74-321. - Severability.     Should any section, subsection, clause, or provision of this article be declared to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this article in whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. (Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 22, 4-27-10) 
Secs. 74-322—74-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WETLAND PROTECTION REGULATIONS[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, approved Nov. 26, 2002, established art. VIII, §§ 74-401—74-405 to read as herein set out. Sections 3 and 4 of said ordinance provided that the Generalized Wetland Map (Exhibit B) referenced in the text of Article VIII, Wetland Protection Regulations, is hereby adopted, and incorporated into and made a part of Article VIII, Wetland Protection Regulations, by reference, and that the Generalized Wetland Map (Exhibit B) shall be kept on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk. 
Sec. 74-401. - Purpose and intent.     The intent of this article is to protect the environmental integrity of freshwater wetlands within the City of Atlanta. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through the permitting process. (Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, 11-26-02) 
Sec. 74-402. - Definitions.     For purposes of interpreting this article, the following definitions shall apply:     Jurisdictional wetland determination means an official, written statement or map signed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.     Jurisdictional wetland means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.     Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an authority designated by the Corps.     Wetland means an area inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. (Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, 11-26-02) 
Sec. 74-403. - Coordination with the Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Permitting Process.     This section is included pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-2-8 and is intended to provide applicants for a development or demolition permit with notice when the proposed activity may require a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers permit due to potential impacts upon jurisdictional wetlands, and to coordinate the City permitting process with the Corps of Engineers permitting process. (a)  Permitting process. Prior to the issuance of a development or demolition permit, the commissioner of the department of watershed management, or designee, shall review plans; verify the certification required in section 74-403(c) below; and determine if the applicant is to be referred to the Corps of Engineers for a jurisdictional wetland determination. As a general rule, applicants and landowners should endeavor to avoid development and/or demolition activities in or near wetlands. (1)  If the proposed activity is not located within 50 feet of a wetland shown on the generalized wetland map, city permitting procedures shall proceed. (2)  If the proposed activity is located within 50 feet of a wetland shown on the generalized wetland map, the department of watershed management shall refer the applicant to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for a jurisdictional wetland determination and receive proof of such determination from the Army Corps of Engineers prior to the issuance of any city development or demolition permit. (i)  If the Corps of Engineers determines that a Department of the Army permit or letter of permission is required for the proposed activity, the city shall not issue a development or demolition permit for the proposed activity until after the issuance of the Department of the Army permit or letter of permission. (ii)  If the Corps of Engineers determines that the proposed activity does not require a Department of the Army permit, city permitting procedures shall proceed. (b)  Generalized wetland map. The generalized wetland map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. Wetlands shown on the generalized wetland map do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands and cannot serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or a delineation of wetland boundaries as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. No action by the City of Atlanta pursuant to these regulations relieves the landowner or applicant from federal or state permitting requirements. The generalized wetland map may be amended as more detailed information regarding the exact location and boundaries of wetlands becomes available. Not all wetlands in the City of Atlanta may be shown on the generalized wetland map and the omission of wetlands from the generalized wetland map does not relieve the applicant or property owner from compliance with applicable laws regarding wetlands. (c)  Additional requirements. Upon application for a development or demolition permit, applicants shall be required to certify that they have reviewed the generalized wetland map and to certify whether or not the proposed activity is to occur within 50 feet of a wetland shown on the map. The City of Atlanta may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, 11-26-02) 
Sec. 74-404. - Monitoring and enforcement procedures. (1)  If the City of Atlanta discovers a violation of this article that also may constitute a violation of any provisions of the Clean Water Act as amended, the City of Atlanta shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. (2)  The commissioner of the department of watershed management and/or his designee is authorized and empowered to enforce the requirements of this article in accordance with the procedures of this section. The department of watershed management shall have authority to issue stop work orders, citations, and/or revocation of permits in the event of any violation of this article. (3)  Any enforcement activities for violations of the provisions of this article which are also violations of article II and III of chapter 74 for land-disturbing activities shall be undertaken pursuant to the provisions of article II and III of chapter 74. (4)  Any enforcement activities for violations of the provisions of this article which are also violations of chapter 158 for vegetation shall be undertaken pursuant to the provisions of chapter 158. (5)  In addition to any other sanctions listed in this article, a person who fails to comply with the provisions of this article may be liable to the city in civil court for any costs incurred by the city to enforce or correct violations of this article. (Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, 11-26-02) 
Sec. 74-405. - Severability.     Should any section, subsection, clause, or provision of this article be declared to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this article in whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. (Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, 11-26-02) 
Secs. 74-406—74-425. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 74-426. - Statement of findings.     It is hereby determined that: (1)  Discharges to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; (2)  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. (3)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. (4)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; (5)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the storm sewer system of the city; (6)  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the storm sewer system of the city; (7)  Therefore, the City of Atlanta must adopt this article to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the storm sewer system of the city is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-427. - Statement of policy and intent. (a)  The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. (b)  This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: (1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta by any person; (2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the storm sewer system of the city; (3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the storm sewer system of the city; and (4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-428. - Definitions.     Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence.     Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.     Commissioner means the Commissioner of the Department of Watershed Management or his designee.     Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.     Department means the Department of Watershed Management (DWM).     Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm sewer system of the city, except as exempted in section 74-437 of this article.     Illegal connection means either of the following: (a)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the department of watershed management; or (b)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.     Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).     National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.     Storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: (1)  Owned or maintained by the City of Atlanta; and (2)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works.     Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.     Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.     Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.     Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.     Publicly-owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act, which is owned by a state or municipality (as defined by section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act). This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works.     State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person.     Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.     Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow.     Violator means any person, business or commercial entity violating any provision of this article or allowing any person or persons under their control or authority to violate any provision of this article. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-429. - Applicability.     The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-430. - Compatibility with other regulations.     This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-431. - Responsibility for administration.     The police and the commissioner of the department of watershed management or his designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Secs. 74-432—74-435. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS AND NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS 
Sec. 74-436. - Prohibition of illicit discharges.     No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-437. - Exemptions.     The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: (1)  Water line flushing discharging potable water performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; (2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, discharges from fire hydrant flushing, and other discharges as being necessary to protect public health and safety; (3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-438. - Prohibition of illegal connections.     The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the storm sewer system of the city is prohibited. (1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. (2)  A person violates this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta, or allows such a connection to continue. (3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the commissioner of the department of watershed management. (4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the department of watershed management requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the department of watershed management. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-439. - Industrial or construction activity discharges.     Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the department of watershed management prior to allowing discharges to the sewer system of the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-440. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities.     The commissioner of watershed management or any duly authorized agent of the department may, upon the permission of the property owner, enter on and inspect any and all public and private property in the city to determine by inspection that those properties are or not free of any condition which may be in violation of this article. For the purpose of this duty, the agent of the department of watershed management is eligible to apply for status as a code enforcement agent under section 98-1. In order to enforce code provisions and issue citations, the agent of the department of watershed management must apply for and receive status as a code enforcement agent. (1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner, agent of the owner or operator of any property or facility within the city shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the department of watershed management. (2)  The owner, agent of the owner or operator of any property or facility within the city shall allow the department of watershed management ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. (3)  The department of watershed management reserves the right, upon the approval of the property owner, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. (4)  Any judge of the municipal court may grant permission to the department of watershed management to require the owner, agent of the owner or operator of any private property or facility to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the department of watershed management. a.  It is prohibited for any person to interfere in any way with the proper sampling and monitoring operations of any equipment or devices. b.  All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. (5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner, agent of the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the department of watershed management and any obstruction shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. (6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Department of Watershed Management access to a facility is a violation of this article. (7)  If the department of watershed management has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the department of watershed management is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the department of watershed management may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 2006-74, § 1, 10-11-06) 
Sec. 74-441. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. (a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta, or State Waters, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. (b)  Said person shall notify the department of watershed management in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. (1)  If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. (2)  Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. (c)  Any notification made to the City of Atlanta is not exclusive of any state or federal notification requirements. (d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Secs. 74-442—74-445. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
Sec. 74-446. - Violations. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction. (b)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, any judge of the municipal court shall have the power to authorize the commissioner of the department of watershed management to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and restore the property. The department of watershed management is authorized to recover the total amount of all costs of the abatement as outlined in sections 74-450 and 74-453. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-447. - Notice of violation.     Whenever the department of watershed management finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the commissioner may order compliance by written notice of violation. (1)  The City of Atlanta may serve notice to abate a violation, by mailing such notice to the last-known address of the alleged violator. (2)  The notice of violation shall contain the following information: a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the department of watershed management by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. (3)  Such notice may require actions including, but not limited to any of the following: a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-448. - Appeal of notice of violation. (a)  Administrative remedy. (1)  Prior to any final order to comply with any notice of violation, the alleged violator shall be given the opportunity to appeal any notice of violation issued by the department to the commissioner of watershed management. (2)  The city acting by and through its commissioner of watershed management shall review the notice of violation, the reasons submitted by the alleged violator for determining such conditions not to be in violation, and shall issue a decision in writing. (3)  If such decision is to affirm, overturn or modify said notice of violation, the commissioner shall set forth the reasons for doing so. (b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by such decision, after exhausting his or her administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of the county wherein which such alleged violation occurred or is proposed to occur, for review of such written decision. (c)  The commissioner of the department of watershed management shall conduct the review process for any notice of violation, as described in this section. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-449. - Enforcement measures after appeal.     If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of any decision of the Superior Court upholding the decision of the department of watershed management and the commissioner, then representatives of the department of watershed management may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent of the owner or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-450. - Costs of abatement of the violation. (a)  Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. (1)  The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within ten days of such notice. (2)  If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. (b)  Any person or business shall be liable to the city for the total amount of all costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating a violation. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-451. - Enforcement.     The primary authority and responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be vested in the commissioner of watershed management. Upon a determination that a person is in violation of this chapter, the commissioner or his designee shall give written notice of violation that indicates they are in violation of a section in this chapter, and they may or issue a citation requiring the violator to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this chapter. Upon a finding that a section of this chapter has been violated, the violator shall be subject to one or more of the penalties provided in section 74-452 of this article. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-452. - Penalties. (a)  For any violations of this article, any person violating the provisions of this article may be subject to the following penalties: (1)  First violation. Upon conviction, a fine not less than $50.00 and not more than $1,000.00 and a probationary period not to exceed 90 days. (2)  Second violation. Upon conviction, a fine not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or probationary period not to exceed 180 days with a period of confinement in the city jail not to exceed ten days, or both. (3)  Third violation. Upon conviction, a fine not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or a probationary period not to exceed one year with a period of confinement in the city jail not to exceed 30 days, or both. (4)  Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. (b)  In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the department of watershed management shall deem appropriate, after the department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the violator may be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. (c)  Businesses and commercial entities. In addition to any other penalty imposed under this article, if any person or business performing work under any contract with the city is found guilty of violating this section, the city may terminate the contract by giving written notice of the termination to the person or business. The contract shall be null and void upon delivery of such notice. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-453. - Violations deemed a public nuisance.     In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment may be declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief according to the provisions of Article V of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-454. - Remedies not exclusive. (a)  The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the department of watershed management may seek cumulative remedies. (b)  The department of watershed management may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-455. - Severability.     If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Secs. 74-456—74-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - POST DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
Sec. 74-501. - Introduction.     It is hereby determined that: (a)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; (b)  Land development projects and other land use conversions can also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; (c)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; (d)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment projects by the use of structural and nonstructural measures, such as the conservation or restoration of open space and greenspace areas; (e)  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution; and (f)  Therefore, the City of Atlanta has established this set of regulations governing the management of post-development stormwater runoff and the ongoing maintenance of stormwater control systems for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges and control systems in order to reduce or minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 1, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-502. - Purpose and intent. (a)  The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment by focusing on the types of frequently occurring storm events that generate the most water quality impacts. (b)  Proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet those purposes through the following objectives: (1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; (2)  Establish post-construction stormwater management and site planning and design criteria to protect natural resources from the direct impacts of the land development process, and to preserve and/or restore natural hydrologic conditions on development sites; (3)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management methodologies, stormwater better site design practices, peak rate and/or runoff reduction, and the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas by establishing minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; (4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; (5)  Coordinate site design plans with the City of Atlanta's greenspace protection plan; (6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for operation, inspection, maintenance, and repair of private structural stormwater control facilities and private commitments for nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety or the environment; (7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term compliance; and (8)  Protect public health and safety by reducing the risk of localized flooding and reducing the amount of runoff entering public rights-of-way. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-503. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval.     Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.     Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of watershed management or a designee.     Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the City of Atlanta, other government agency, or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership.     Demolition means removal of an existing building, structure, or other impervious surface.     Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge.     Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.     Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities.     Development means a land development or land development project.     Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement.     Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities.     Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater.     Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more.     Flooding means a volume of water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and overflows onto adjacent lands.     Grading means altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions and slopes; this includes, but is not limited to, stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and includes the land in its cut or filled condition.     Greenfield means land in its natural condition.     Greenspace means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a vegetated state.     Green infrastructure means an interconnected natural system and/or engineered system that strengthens and mimics natural hydrologic functions and processes through the use of plants and soil to slow, filter, evapotranspire, and infiltrate stormwater runoff close to its source; or the capture and reuse of stormwater runoff.     High risk operation means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater as consistent with facilities operating under a Standard Industrial Code (SIC) or requiring coverage under the Georgia General NPDES Stormwater Permit for Discharges from Industrial Activities or as identified as a highly visible pollutant source (HVPS) per the City of Atlanta's Stormwater Management Plan (SWMP) developed in accordance with the requirements of the City of Atlanta's NPDES Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) permit.     Hotspot means an area with, or having potential for a high level of pollution and/or contamination within a larger area of low adverse environmental impact or normal environmental quality.     Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.     Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural percolation of water into soil, which includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and standard concrete or asphalt surface.     Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an entity which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.     Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which, when properly recorded in the deed records of the Superior Court of Fulton or DeKalb County, whichever is applicable, constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project.     Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation, as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.     Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover.     Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development.     Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking.     National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit means the applicable national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued by the State Environmental Protection Division and in effect at the time of application for a post-development stormwater plan approval.     New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site.     Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.     Nonstructural stormwater management practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels.     Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site.     On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site.     Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding up to the 25-year frequency storm events.     Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgage or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site.     Percolation means the process of absorption of stormwater runoff into the subsoil.     Permit means the permit issued by the City of Atlanta to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity.     Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require.     Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the City of Atlanta. Where phased development or plan approval occurs, which includes but is not limited to demolition, preliminary grading, roads and utilities, the existing conditions at the time prior to issuance of the first project-related approval or permit shall represent pre-developed conditions, in accordance with section 74-513(d).     Project means the portion of the proposed development in terms of the area of land to be disturbed.     Q means the peak rate of discharge.     Redevelopment means a land development project or addition on a previously developed site.     Regional stormwater management facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for site-specific on-site controls may be either eliminated or reduced.     Responsible party means the owner or owner's agent.     Runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation.     Runoff reduction means the interception, evapotranspiration, infiltration or capture and reuse of stormwater runoff.     Single-family residential development means development or redevelopment of a lot containing a single one- or two-family dwelling as defined in section 16-29.001(12) of the City of Atlanta's Zoning Ordinance.     Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located.     Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches, practices and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management.     Stormwater management means the collection, retention, detention, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flooding, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare.     Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff.     Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice.     Stormwater management plan means the document(s) describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article.     Stormwater management site plan means an engineering drawing depicting how and where stormwater management facilities and practices will be installed on the site.     Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site.     Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site.     Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release, or the velocity of flow of such runoff.     Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose; whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 3, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-504. - Applicability. (a)  Development and redevelopment. This article shall apply to all development and redevelopment, except single-family residential development, unless exempt pursuant to section 74-504(d). The standards found in this article apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following: (1)  New development that involves the creation of any impervious cover; or (2)  New development that involves land development activities of one disturbed acre or more; or (3)  Redevelopment that involves land development activity of one disturbed acre or more; or (4)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition, or demolition and replacement of 500 square feet or more of impervious cover; or (5)  Demolition that leaves in place more than 500 square feet of impervious cover within the area of demolition, unless building permit application for replacement structure or use which includes appropriate stormwater management is in place. (b)  Single-family residential. Sections 74-513(a), 74-513(b), 74-515 and 74-516 of this article shall apply to a single-family residential development, unless exempt pursuant to section 74-504(d). For the purposes of this article, a single-family residential development shall include the following: (1)  Development or redevelopment of any site involving the construction of a single-family residence; or (2)  Addition or modification that involves the creation, addition, or demolition and replacement of 1,000 square feet or more of impervious cover to any single-family residential site.     A single-family residential development shall not include development or redevelopment of a site intended to be developed as a larger common plan of development or sale as defined in Atlanta City Code Section 74-37. (c)  High risk operation and hotspot. This article shall apply to any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that meets the definition of hotspot or high risk operation, which includes, but is not limited to, fueling stations or industrial facilities with potential for runoff pollution. (d)  Exemptions. The following activities are exempted from sections (a), (b) and (c) above, but shall be subject to the minimum requirements in section 74-516: (1)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within properly zoned agricultural areas resulting in less than 1,000 square feet of impervious surface; (2)  Regrading or reshaping existing athletic fields or public parks resulting in less than 1,000 square feet of new impervious surface; (3)  Installations, repairs, or modifications to storm drains, drainage structures, stormwater management facilities, or other drainage facilities to improve drainage capabilities; (4)  Installations, repairs, or modifications to sanitary sewer facilities to expand or improve sanitary sewer service capabilities; (5)  Work specifically related to the installation, repair, or maintenance of utility service connections, including but not limited to sewer, water, electric, telephone, and gas, to existing facilities; (6)  Installations of dumpster pads with drains connected to sanitary sewers; (7)  Installations or modifications to existing structures to accommodate Americans with Disability Act (ADA) requirements, including but not limited to elevator shafts, handicapped access ramps and parking, and enlarged entrances or exits; (8)  Installations or modifications to existing structures to address health and safety issues or compliance with Atlanta City Code requirements, including but not limited to. fire escapes, stairways, and additional exits; (9)  Installations to existing structures of incidental mechanical or electrical equipment placed on areas of previously existing impervious surfaces; (10)  Installation of hardscape less than 5,000 square feet, such as uncovered parking, pedestrian, or patio areas, which utilize pervious pavement or other appropriate infiltration techniques; (11)  Incidental maintenance or repair of existing impervious paved surfaces which impact less than 1,000 square feet; (12)  Overlays or resurfacing of existing impervious paved surfaces; (13)  Any work permitted in the public rights-of-way such as the installations of sidewalks, driveway aprons, and street cuts, or projects on private property necessitated by activities in the public rights-of-way; (14)  Sidewalks or trails 15 feet wide or less where runoff is directed via sheet flow toward vegetated areas at least twice as wide as the paved area, provided that the potential for erosion is adequately addressed; (15)  Stream bank stabilization or restoration activities, or activities solely for the purpose of environmental remediation; (16)  Replacement of an existing driveway to access a single-family residential development; or (17)  Any minor work which in the professional judgment of the commissioner is deemed in the best interest of the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2005-46, § 1, 7-26-05; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 4, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-505. - Designation of ordinance administrator.     The commissioner of the department of watershed management or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 5, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-506. - Compatibility with other regulations. (a)  The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. (b)  During any permitted construction activity, erosion and sedimentation control best management practices as set forth in Article II of Chapter 74 shall be implemented to prevent the migration of any sediment into any perennial streams, intermittent streams, stream buffer, and waters of the state. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04) 
Sec. 74-507. - Severability.     If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04) 
Sec. 74-508. - Stormwater design manual.     The City of Atlanta will utilize the policy, criteria and information, including technical specifications and standards, in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, the applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement and any relevant rules, regulations, or policies of the City of Atlanta, including Chapter 74 of the Code of Ordinances, or procedures of the department of watershed management in effect at the time of application for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 6, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-509. - Permit procedures and requirements. (a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. (b)  Any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall obtain a building permit or other appropriate approval from the City of Atlanta. (c)  A permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: (1)  Stormwater consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 74-510; (2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 74-511; (3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 74-517; (4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 74-518, if applicable; and (5)  Permit application and plan. (d)  The approved stormwater management plan shall obligate the responsible party to accomplish all land clearing, construction, development and drainage in accordance with the stormwater management plan. Any and all permits for development activities may be revoked at any time if the construction of stormwater management facilities is not conducted in strict accordance with approved plans. (e)  Applicant or responsible party shall obtain all state and federal permits required for the proposed development activity in addition to the plans and permits required by the City of Atlanta. (f)  The City of Atlanta shall inform the applicant or responsible party whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the City of Atlanta shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same. (g)  Upon a finding by the department of watershed management that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement meet the requirements of this article, the City of Atlanta may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. (h)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or responsible party shall be subject to the following requirements: (1)  The applicant or responsible party shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; (2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; (3)  The City of Atlanta shall be allowed access to the site for inspection and enforcement; and (4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the department of watershed management. (i)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or responsible party shall submit the stormwater engineer's certification and as-built plan as required by section 74-519(b). If the as-built differs substantially from the approved plan but is still acceptable to the City of Atlanta, then the applicant or responsible party shall update the recorded inspection and maintenance agreement upon approval of the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 7, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-510. - Stormwater consultation meeting. (a)  When a development, redevelopment or demolition of a site that meets at least one of the applicability criteria found in section 74-504(a) is proposed, the owner, developer, engineer, or agent shall participate in a consultation meeting with the department of watershed management to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and ideas for stormwater management designs utilizing green infrastructure and runoff reduction techniques. The owner, developer, engineer, or agent shall receive a consultation meeting certification at the conclusion of the consultation meeting. This consultation meeting shall be held prior to approval of a preliminary plat or the submittal of an application for a permit in accordance with the following procedure: (1)  The department of watershed management shall schedule a consultation meeting within five business days from the date a written meeting request is received by the department of watershed management, office of site development. (2)  Failure of the department of watershed management to schedule a consultation meeting within the time required by this section shall waive the requirements of section 74-510(a) and a copy of the written meeting request submitted to the department of watershed management, office of site development by the owner, developer, engineer, or agent attached to the permit application shall meet the requirement of the consultation meeting certification in section 74-509(c)(1). (3)  If no consultation meeting is requested or attended by the owner, developer, engineer, or agent prior to the submittal of a permit application, the department of watershed management may delay review of the permit application until such meeting is held; provided however that when the land development activity involves only an application for the erection of a structure governed by Chapter 16-28A of the Zoning Code, the requirements of section 74-509(c)(1) and section 74-510(a) shall not apply. (b)  To assist the department of watershed management's review of the land development project and to assist the applicant or responsible party with the creation of a stormwater management plan, the following information should be submitted prior to or at the time of the consultation meeting: (1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which shall illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys; boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. (2)  Infiltration rates. Infiltration rates shall be determined by soil surveys, on-site soil analysis, or percolation test. If a site has been previously developed or graded or contains urban soil types, a percolation test is required. (3)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources in existence prior to the commencement of the project. This inventory shall address resources both on the site and in the surrounding area that is or may be impacted by the project. This inventory shall also include a description of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks, including but not limited to drinking water well setbacks and septic setbacks. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that present constraints for development. (4)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system that identifies the scope and magnitude of the project and related stormwater requirements, and identifies how stormwater better site design techniques will be used to reduce the need for structural stormwater controls. The plan shall also include: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 8, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-511. - Submittal requirements for stormwater management plans. (a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 74-513. (b)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, the Coastal Stormwater Supplement and the City of Atlanta's submittal requirements for commercial and single-family residential development. Plans and studies shall be presented in a format that itemizes each of the requirements in section 74-511(c), including performance criteria set forth in section 74-513. (c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the applicable design requirements and forms found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, the Coastal Stormwater Supplement and the City of Atlanta's submittal requirements for commercial and single-family residential development. This includes but is not limited to the following: (1)  Common address and legal description of site; (2)  Vicinity map; (3)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys; boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces; (4)  Infiltration rates. Infiltration rates shall be determined by soil surveys, on-site soil analysis, or a percolation test. If site has been previously developed or graded or contains urban soil types, a percolation test is required; (5)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources in existence prior to the commencement of the project. This inventory shall address resources both on the site and in the surrounding area that is or may be impacted by the project. This inventory shall also include a description of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks, including but not limited to drinking water well setbacks and septic setbacks. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that present constraints for development; (6)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines in section 74-513; (7)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall be calculated in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 74-513; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For a subdivision of land or planned development, post-development runoff volumes, rates, and velocities shall be calculated based on the built out conditions of the entire parcel to be subdivided, regardless of future ownership of individual lots. Estimates of impervious surfaces shall be made based on maximum allowable lot coverage in accordance with section 16-29.001(38) of the City of Atlanta's Zoning Ordinance when meeting the performance criteria in section 74-513 (c) through (i). The developer of said subdivided parcel may provide the runoff reduction/water quality measures in accordance with sections 74-513(a) and (b) for individual lots and must be reflected accordingly on the final plat; (8)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: a map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 74-513; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans, TMDL implementation plans, and/or local greenspace protection plan; (9)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; (10)  Construction phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the City of Atlanta Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control provisions found in Article II of Chapter 74, the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, and any NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. Prior to the approval of the stormwater management plan, the applicant or responsible party shall submit a proposed staged construction and inspection control schedule for approval; otherwise, the construction and inspection control schedule will be for the entire drainage system. No stage work related to the construction of stormwater management facilities or BMPs shall proceed until the next proceeding stage of work, according to the sequence specified in the approved staged construction and inspection control schedule, as inspected and approved. Runoff reduction and water quality measures shall be installed in the final phase of construction to prevent clogging; (11)  Stormwater landscaping plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved; (12)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. This plan will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include a narrative describing how stormwater management system is designed to function, including capture, runoff control, water quality treatment, channel protection and flood protection, a narrative describing ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for all stormwater management facilities and practices as shown on the stormwater management site plan, an inspection and maintenance schedule, description of maintenance tasks, identification of responsible parties for ongoing maintenance, description of funding source, and a review of access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan; (13)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant or responsible party must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Such easements shall be reflected in all plats and surveys; (14)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. The owner must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with section 74-517; and (15)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant or responsible party shall certify and provide documentation to the City of Atlanta that all applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the site development and stormwater management plan. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 9, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-512. - Off-site facilities. (a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional stormwater management facility. The off-site or regional stormwater management facility, if applicable, must comply with the following: (1)  The off-site or regional stormwater management facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose; (2)  The off-site or regional stormwater management facility must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices; (3)  There must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility; and (4)  On-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. (b)  A stormwater management plan that shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional stormwater management facility must be submitted to the department of watershed management. (c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department of watershed management that the use of an off-site or regional stormwater management facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: (1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; (2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; (3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; (4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or (5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 10, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-513. - Performance criteria for stormwater management.     For new developments, the following performance criteria shall be applied to the area of the site impacted by the proposed work. For redevelopment, the following performance criteria shall be applied to the area of the site impacted by the proposed work, provided that the impacted area does not exceed 35 percent of the previously developed area. If the impacted area exceeds 35 percent of the previously developed area, the following performance criteria shall be applied to the entire development, including the previously developed area: (a)  Stormwater runoff reduction. The stormwater runoff volume generated by the first one inch of rainfall shall be retained on-site in order to help maintain pre-development site hydrology and help protect the local watershed from several indirect impacts of the land development process, including decreased groundwater recharge, decreased baseflow and degraded water quality. A stormwater management system is presumed to comply with this criteria if: (1)  It includes green infrastructure practices that provide for the interception and evapotranspiration, infiltration, or capture and reuse of stormwater runoff, that have been selected, designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the information presented in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; or constitutes an alternative practice responsibly designed and documented by the engineer to reproduce the intent of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; and (2)  It is designed to provide the amount of stormwater runoff reduction from the runoff generated by the first one inch of rainfall as specified in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. (b)  Water quality protection. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if it satisfies the stormwater runoff reduction criteria in section 74-513(a). However, if any of the stormwater runoff volume generated by the first one inch of rainfall cannot be reduced or retained on the development site, due to site characteristics or constraints, such as, a high water table, surface bedrock, contaminated soils, low soil infiltration rates, or the presence of a high risk operation or hotspot, the remaining volume shall be increased by a multiplier of 1.2 and shall be intercepted and treated in one or more stormwater management practices that provide at least an 80 percent reduction in total suspended solids loads in accordance with the following criteria: (1)  The practice shall be sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; (2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural management practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; or constitutes an alternative practice responsibly designed and documented by the engineer to reproduce the intent of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; and (3)  Runoff from a high risk operation or hotspot land use activity identified by the City of Atlanta is adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural management practices and pollution prevention practices. (c)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following approaches: (1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation with native vegetation of the applicable stream buffer pursuant to Chapter 74, Article VII: Riparian Buffer Requirements; (2)  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; and (3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. For redevelopment projects that create, add, or demolish and replace less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface and meet the performance criteria of Section 74-513(a) and (b), stream channel protection is not required. (d)  Overbank flooding protection. For new development (greenfield), overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by attenuating the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate up to the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. For redevelopment, overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by reducing the peak discharge rate up to the 25-year, 24-hour storm event in accordance with the following formula: PIC = Pre-development Impervious Cover PDRR = Peak Discharge Rate Reduction For sites where previous demolition has removed impervious surfaces, pre-development peak discharge rate calculations and percentage of impervious coverage shall be calculated based on pre-demolition conditions. For sites that have been demolished and have remained fallow and stabilized with vegetation for a minimum of five years, they shall be considered as having pre-development conditions of 20 percent impervious cover for purposes of calculating peak discharge rate reduction. For land development permitted post-2004 and served by appropriate stormwater management facilities, subsequent redevelopment of the same area is not required to further reduce the peak discharge rate, provided that the site continues to meet the reduction previously achieved. For redevelopment projects that create, add, or demolish and replace less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface and meet the performance criteria of section 74-513(a) and (b), overbank flooding protection is not required. (e)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by attenuating and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event without any increase in peak discharge rate, such that flooding is not exacerbated. For redevelopment projects that create, add, or demolish and replace less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface and meet the performance criteria of section 74-513(a) and (b), extreme flooding protection is not required. (f)  Structural stormwater controls. (1)  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from City of Atlanta before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City of Atlanta may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. (2)  Applicant or responsible party shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. (g)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The applicant or responsible party may take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume and runoff reduction requirements. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. (h)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: (1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; (2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan, pursuant to section 74-511, using the methods included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and (3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. (i)  Rules for dam safety and any other applicable federal, state, or local requirement. Any land development activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 11, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-514. - High risk operation and hotspot requirements.     In addition to the provisions of this article, developments and redevelopments that meet the definition of high risk operation or hotspot shall meet the following criteria: (a)  No portion of the area of risk shall bypass the stormwater management system; (b)  At a minimum, treatment method must be as specified in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and be designed for the specific pollutant of risk; and (c)  The commissioner may, at his discretion, create additional and specific policies regarding these types of operations. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 12, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-515. - Single-family residential plan requirements.     In addition to the requirements in sections 74-513(a), 74-513(b), and 74-516, single-family residential developments not otherwise exempt from this Article, under section 74-504(d), shall submit a grading plan and an erosion and sediment control plan to the site development section of the department of watershed management identifying the following: (a)  Existing and proposed ground contours and elevations; (b)  Sanitary and storm sewers, structures and easements; (c)  Location, configuration and finished floor elevations for existing and proposed building structures; (d)  Location, configuration and finished elevations for existing and proposed paved areas; (e)  Erosion and sediment control practices in conformance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6; and (f)  Plan shall be signed and sealed by State of Georgia registered architect, landscape architect, engineer or land surveyor. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 13, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-516. - Minimum requirements.     For all development and redevelopment activities, including single-family residential and those which are otherwise exempt from this article, the following minimum requirements shall apply: (a)  Lots and buildings shall be developed in a manner to ensure that stormwater exiting individual parcels or lots under post-developed conditions does not adversely impact the adjacent parcels or lots as a result of concentrated flows, flooding, erosion, or deposits of silt or sediment; (b)  The stormwater discharge from a downspout, cistern, or any water collection device shall be located a distance of no less than ten feet from common property line and oriented so direction of concentrated flow is not toward the adjacent property line; (c)  Discharge from any downspout described in (a) must be dissipated, infiltrated, or diverted such that flows will not be concentrated; and (d)  No person shall erect, construct, or otherwise permit any obstruction that prevents the natural or contained flow of water to any component of the stormwater system of the City of Atlanta, unless such obstruction is allowed as part of a permit approved pursuant to this article. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 14, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-517. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance. (a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder for which the City of Atlanta requires ongoing maintenance, the owner or responsible party shall execute an inspection and maintenance agreement. Such agreement shall be submitted prior to the issuance of any such permit and shall be binding on all appropriate successors in title of the site. Inspection and maintenance agreements may terminate or be amended if superseded by subsequent development approved by the City of Atlanta. Any applicant for development will be required to obtain an inspection and maintenance agreement for all proposed and existing stormwater management facilities on the property. (b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement must be approved by the City of Atlanta; and upon approval, recorded in the deed records of the Superior Court of Fulton or DeKalb County, whichever is applicable, prior to issuance of permit. (c)  Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor in title. If portions of the site are sold or otherwise transferred, the inspection and maintenance responsibility shall pass to the appropriate successor in title. Such transfers shall designate for each portion of the site, the responsible party to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance and shall be recorded in the deed records for the property. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. (d)  Where a stormwater maintenance facility exists on any property to be subdivided, including, but not limited to, subdivisions, planned developments, multifamily developments, or mixed use developments, the facility shall be owned in accordance with the following: (1)  If a property owners' association is created, in accordance with the Georgia Property Owners' Association Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220, et seq.), the stormwater maintenance facility shall be treated as a common area, and the following provisions, at a minimum, shall be included in the property owners' association's bylaws or covenants: a.  Governance by the Georgia Property Owners' Association Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220, et seq.) or a successor to that Act that grants lien rights to the association for maintenance expenses and tax obligations; b.  Automatic compulsory membership in the property owners' association of all lot purchasers and their successors in title; c.  A fair and uniform method of assessment and collection/payment for dues, maintenance, and related costs; d.  Perpetual and continued inspection and maintenance liability for the required stormwater facility; e.  Filing of all required covenants, declarations, and restrictions with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton or DeKalb County, whichever is applicable; and f.  Prior arrangement for the transfer of ownership of the stormwater maintenance facility in fair and equal parts to all lot owners in the case of the property owners' association dissolving. (2)  If a property owners association is not created, the stormwater maintenance facility shall be owned by all appropriate successors in title to the land in the development sold or otherwise transferred. Costs associated with the inspection and maintenance of the stormwater facility shall be assessed equitably among all of the lots in the development. (e)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall comply with the requirements of the department of watershed management and include, at a minimum, a description of the property, appropriate details of the stormwater management plan, an operations and maintenance plan, and a plan for annual inspection. (f)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Atlanta may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 74-520 of this article. (g)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder, the owner or responsible party shall execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement, in a form provided by the City of Atlanta, which shall state at a minimum, that the owner or responsible party shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of Atlanta for any up-stream or down-stream damages due to structural, design, installation, maintenance or any other failure of the stormwater management facility. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 15, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-518. - Performance and maintenance bonds.     Bonding requirements shall be in parallel with those included for erosion control application requirements, pursuant to section 74-39(b)(5). Prior to release of the bond, all stormwater facilities shall be intact and functioning as designed and in accordance with this article. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 16, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-519. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. (a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City of Atlanta or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the City of Atlanta. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. (1)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: a.  The date and location of the inspection; b.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; c.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and d.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. (2)  If any violations are found, the responsible party shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. (b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and prior to final inspection pursuant to section 74-43(f) or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant or responsible party is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants or responsible parties are required to submit an electronic format as determined by the department of watershed management, and a paper format of the actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the as built configuration for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the City of Atlanta is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 17, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-520. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. (a)  Absence of an inspection and maintenance agreement. The absence of an inspection and maintenance agreement shall not relieve the owner or responsible party from performing proper maintenance and inspection of the stormwater management facility. If the owner or responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of this article, the City of Atlanta may correct the violation as provided in section 74-520(e) hereof. (b)  Pre-existing facilities. For facilities constructed prior to the effective date of this article, the owner or responsible party shall perform proper maintenance of the stormwater management facility as required by the indemnification agreement. If the owner or responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of this article, the City of Atlanta may correct the violation as provided in section 74-520(e) hereof. (c)  Maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. The following shall apply to all sites regardless of the existence of an inspection and maintenance agreement: (1)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. (2)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the owner or responsible party. Such inspection shall be conducted in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement pursuant to section 74-517, or, in the absence of an inspection and maintenance agreement, in accordance with the requirements of this article. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City of Atlanta shall notify the party responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail, or by delivery in person of a notice of violation to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Failure of the City of Atlanta to provide such notice shall not relieve the owner or responsible party from performing proper maintenance and inspection of the stormwater management facility. If the owner or responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Atlanta may correct the violation as provided in section 74-520(e) hereof; and (3)  An annual inspection shall be performed and attested to by a qualified professional (certified Level II Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission Specialist) with results reported to the department of watershed management. Any deficiencies noted in either operation or maintenance of the facility must be included in the report along with the proposed remedies required and a time table for their implementation. If substantial deficiencies are found, a follow-up inspection to confirm correction of said deficiencies shall be performed and reported to the department of watershed management. (4)  Inspection programs by the City of Atlanta may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine inspections, random inspections, inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations, and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to reviewing maintenance and repair records, sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities, and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. (d)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall maintain records of all maintenance and repairs and provide copies to the department of watershed management upon request. (e)  Failure to maintain. If an owner or responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement or indemnity agreement, the City of Atlanta, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City of Atlanta may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. (Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 18, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-521. - Notice of violation. (a)  Notice of violation. If the City of Atlanta determines that an owner or responsible party has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan, inspection and maintenance agreement, indemnity agreement, or any provision of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such owner or other responsible party. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible party in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: (1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible party; (2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; (3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; (4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; (5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and (6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the municipal court by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, or where a person is taking action without a required permit, such a notice of violation must be appealed within 24 hours). (Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 19, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-522. - Enforcement. (a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in section 74-523 may be in addition to and shall not prevent such equitable relief. (b)  All development and redevelopment activities, including single-family residential development, shall comply with the following: (i)  Lots and buildings shall be developed in a manner to ensure that stormwater exiting individual parcels or lots under post-developed conditions does not adversely impact the adjacent parcels or lots as a result of concentrated flows, flooding, erosion, or deposits of silt or sediment; (ii)  The stormwater discharge from a downspout, cistern, or any water collection device shall be located a distance of no less than ten feet from common property line and oriented so direction of concentrated flow is not toward the adjacent property line; (iii)  Discharge from any downspout described in (a) must be dissipated, infiltrated, or diverted such that flows will not be concentrated; and (iv)  No person shall erect, construct, or otherwise permit any obstruction that prevents the natural or contained flow of water to any component of the stormwater system of the City of Atlanta, unless such obstruction is allowed as part of a permit approved pursuant to this article.     Failure to comply with the requirements of this subsection shall be a violation of this article subject to the enforcement provisions and penalties outlined in this article. (c)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The City of Atlanta may enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. (d)  Any enforcement activities for violations of the provisions of this article which are also violations of Article II of Chapter 74 for land-disturbing activities shall be undertaken pursuant to the provisions of Article II of Chapter 74. (e)  Any enforcement activities for violations of the provisions of this article which are also violations of Chapter 158 for vegetation shall be undertaken pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 158. (Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 20, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-523. - Penalties. (a)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed within the time provided in the notice of violation for appeal to the municipal court, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. (b)  Notice. Upon expiration of the notice, the City of Atlanta may notify the person in violation of its intent to seek penalties and of any other enforcement to be taken under this section. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Atlanta shall first notify the owner or other responsible party in writing of its intended action, and shall provide not more than 72 hours (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, or taking action without a required permit 24 hours notice shall be provided) to cure such violation. In the event the owner or other responsible party fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Atlanta may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: (1)  Stop work order. The City of Atlanta may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the owner or other responsible party. It shall stop all activities at the site except for the work required to remedy the violation or violations. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the owner or other responsible party has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein. (2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City of Atlanta may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the owner or other responsible party has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. (3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City of Atlanta may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the owner or other responsible party has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. Suspension, revocation or modification of a permit shall not prohibit the responsible party from taking the necessary remedial measures to cure the violations. (4)  Civil penalties. In the event the owner or other responsible party, fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within the time provided in the notice of violation, or such greater period as the City of Atlanta shall deem appropriate after the City of Atlanta has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City of Atlanta may issue a citation for the violation of this article and impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per violation, depending on the severity of the violation, for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. (5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the City of Atlanta may issue a citation to the owner or other responsible party, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. Imposition of criminal penalties shall be a separate and distinct action from the imposition of civil penalties pursuant to subsection (4) of this section. (6)  Liability. Implementation of this section does not reduce liability under any other applicable state or federal law, rule, or requirement. (c)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law. Each remedy listed in this subsection may be sought and imposed for each day of violation and the department of watershed management may seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 21, 2-13-13) 
Secs. 74-524—74-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - LITTER CONTROL 
Sec. 74-601. - Purpose and intent.     The purpose of this article is to provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: (a)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the City of Atlanta of any and all littering on public or private property; and (b)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the City of Atlanta and prevent harm to the public health, safety, and general welfare, including the potential degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. (Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-602. - Applicability.     This article shall apply to all public and private property within the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-603. - Compatibility with other regulations.     This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. (Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-604. - Severability.     If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-605. - Definitions.     The following definitions will apply to this article except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     "Handbill" means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, placard, paper, booklet, flyer or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original which: (1)  Advertises or contains advertisement for sale of any merchandise, product, service, business, opportunity; or (2)  Directs attention to any business or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of promoting sales; or (3)  Directs attention to or advertises an event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged.     "Litter" means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds; ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and, glass containers, broken glass, dead animals, or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "solid waste" as such term is defined in Chapter 130 of this Code.     "Property open to the public" means the right of way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof, waterways and drainage systems, any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands, or forests, and residential, commercial, or industrial, properties.     "Unsolicited newspaper" means one that has not been ordered, subscribed to or requested by the recipient. (Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-606. - Unlawful disposal of litter. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, dump, sweep, push, blow, deposit, or leave litter on any private property or property open to the public within the City of Atlanta unless the litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, dump, sweep, push, blow, deposit, or leave litter in any public or private gutter, street, right of way, waterway, or storm water collection system within the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-607. - Distribution of handbills and unsolicited newspapers. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, deposit, leave, place, or to cause the throwing, depositing, leaving, or placing of any commercial or noncommercial handbill or unsolicited newspaper on any property open to the public within the City of Atlanta, however, it shall not be a violation of this article to hand out or to distribute handbills or unsolicited newspapers to any person or persons. (b)  Handbills or unsolicited newspapers placed on private property shall be placed or deposited in a manner reasonably designed to prevent the handbill from being blown or drifted about such private property or property open to the public, including streets, storm water catchment and conveyance systems and other public places. (c)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed an authorization to place handbills in mailboxes when such use is prohibited by federal law or by postal regulations. (d)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to deposit or leave, or to cause the depositing or placing of any commercial or noncommercial handbill or unsolicited newspaper on any parked vehicle within the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2008-61(08-O-1247), § 1, 7-16-08) 
Sec. 74-608. - Vehicle loads causing litter.     It shall be unlawful to transport by any type of vehicle, a load which is falling, shifting, blowing, dropping or in any way escaping from the vehicle. All loads being transported throughout the city limits shall use a tarpaulin or other appropriate cover to secure the load. (Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-609. - Maintenance of litter receptacles and placement of litter. (a)  Maintenance of litter receptacles. To facilitate the proper disposal of litter, all litter receptacles provided by commercial businesses and institutions for the use of public patrons shall be well-maintained and regularly emptied. The types of businesses and institutions required to meet this provision include but are not limited to, fast-food outlets, shopping centers, convenience stores, supermarkets, service stations, commercial parking lots, motels, hospitals, schools, government facilities, and public transportation facilities. (b)  Placing materials into receptacles. A person or persons placing litter, including household garbage and recyclables, in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles, shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public or private property. (Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-610. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. (a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or throw, deposit, dump, place or leave litter in any manner within the city limits of the City of Atlanta. Any person that violates the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to penalties as provided by this section. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. (b)  Citations. Any person who violates this article shall be issued a citation that requires the person to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this chapter. (c)  Penalties. Upon a finding that a section of this ordinance has been violated, the violator shall be subject to one or more of the following penalties: (1)  A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 a day. (2)  Reimbursement to the City of Atlanta for the reasonable cost of removing any litter thrown, deposited, dumped, placed or left in violation of this chapter. (3)  Probation by order of the court in the form of mandatory litter cleanup of any public property, public street or right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed one mile. (4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. (Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-611. - Enforcement.     Any person empowered by the City of Atlanta to issue citations may issue citations to enforce compliance with this chapter. (Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Secs. 74-612—74-699. - Reserved. 
Chapter 75 - SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), approved Dec. 9, 2003, amended ch. 75 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said chapter pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 2003-93, § 2(Exh. A), approved May 27, 2003. 
Sec. 75-1. - Policy. (a)  The City of Atlanta shall integrate green and/or sustainable building principles and practices into the design, construction, and operations of all city facilities, and city-funded projects to the fullest extent possible and at minimum to the extent described in section 75-19. Furthermore, the city shall provide leadership and guidance to encourage the application of green building practices in private sector development. This policy is expected to yield long-term cost savings to the city's taxpayers due to substantial improvements in life-cycle performance and reduced life-cycle costs. (b)  In addition, the city shall evaluate all land purchases for future development on the basis of reducing environmental impacts that include but are not limited to transit, pedestrian and bicycle accessibility, urban and brown fields redevelopment, on-site stormwater mitigation capacity, vegetation and habitat restoration, and renewable energy opportunities. (Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 1, 7-26-17 ) 
Secs. 75-2—75-15. - Reserved. 
Sec. 75-16. - Purpose.     The purpose of the City of Atlanta's policy on sustainable building is to require the city's commitment to environmental, economic, and social stewardship, to yield cost savings to the city taxpayers through reduced operating costs, to provide healthy and productive work environments for staff and visitors, and to contribute to the city's goals of protecting, conserving, and enhancing the region's environmental resources. Additionally, the city shall help to set a community standard of sustainable building. (Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03) 
Sec. 75-17. - Organizations affected.     All city departments and offices and their contractors responsible for financing, planning, designing, developing, constructing and managing city-owned facilities and buildings. (Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03) 
Sec. 75-18. - Definitions.     Sustainable building: Sustainable building means the integration of building materials and methods that promote environmental quality, economic vitality, and social benefit through the integrated design, construction and operation of the built environment. Sustainable building merges sound, environmentally responsible practices into one discipline that looks at the environmental, economic and social effects of a building or built project as a whole. Sustainable design encompasses the following broad topics: energy use, water use, indoor environmental quality, materials selection, stormwater infiltration and the building energy management.     Life cycle cost analysis: An inclusive approach to costing a program, facility, or group of facilities that encompasses planning, design, construction, operation and maintenance over the useful life of the facilities and finally any decommissioning or disassembly costs. Life cycle cost analysis looks at the net present value of design options as investments. The goal is to achieve the highest, most cost-effective environmental performance possible over the life of the project.     LEED TM rating system: LEED TM stands for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design, and is a voluntary, consensus-based, market-driven green building rating system developed by the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC). It is based on existing, proven technology and evaluates environmental performance from a "whole building" perspective. LEED TM is a third-party certifying system designed for rating new and existing commercial, institutional, and multi- family residential buildings.     Renovation: Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a property, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the property before the improvement or repair is started. (Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 2, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-19. - Policy and goals. (a)  It is the policy of the City of Atlanta to finance, plan, design, construct, manage, renovate, maintain, and decommission its facilities and buildings using sustainable practices and means. This applies to new construction and renovations in which the total project square footage includes at least 5,000 gross square feet of occupied space. (b)  The LEED TM rating system and Reference Guide shall be used as a guidance for design and as a measuring tool to determine what constitutes sustainable building by national standards. (c)  Facilities and buildings over 5,000 gross square feet of occupied space shall at a minimum incorporate sustainable design criterion as defined by this article. Design and project management teams are required to achieve LEED TM Silver Certification. (d)  At the time facilities are required to be audited and comply with retro commissioning requirements per Part 8, Chapter 2, Article J of the City's Land Development Code, Part III of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances, facilities shall obtain LEED TM Existing Buildings: Operation & Maintenance or the most recent equivalent. (Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 3, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-20. - Procedures and responsibilities. (a)  The commissioners of all city departments or their designee(s) whose responsibilities include planning, designing, constructing or renovating city-owned, city-managed, and city-leased facilities are responsible for ensuring facilities and buildings comply with section 75-19. (b)  The manager office of buildings or designee is responsible for coordinating city departments any educational and technical resources available that support and promote sustainable design and construction of city facilities. (c)  The commissioners of all city departments or their designee(s) are responsible for completing LEED TM training. (Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 4, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-21. - Budgeting and financing.     All capital construction which falls under this policy is required to budget LEED TM design standards in the conceptual development of a city funded facility and/or the CDP/CIP process through the department of planning. Budget planning and life cycle cost analysis to achieve LEED TM Silver Certification and LEED TM Existing Buildings: Operations & Maintenance Certification is required. (Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 5, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-22. - Training.     LEED TM training will be coordinated through the office of buildings or designee and/or other sponsoring departments. (Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 6, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-23. - Request for proposal.     The commissioners of all city departments whose responsibilities include planning, designing, constructing or renovating city-owned facilities are responsible for submitting a request for proposal (RFP) to the department of procurement specifying the mandatory requirement of complying with the sustainable development design guidelines per section 75-19 of this article. (Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03) 
Sec. 75-24. - Implementation. (a)  The sustainable development design standards shall be forwarded to the department of planning and community development for review consistent with the above referenced policy objectives, and incorporated in the CDP and CIP process. (b)  The department of procurement shall assist and review all RFQ/RFP documents to ensure consistency with this article and with the city's sustainable purchasing and green infrastructure policies. (Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 7, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-25. - Exemptions.     Many projects do not meet the policy criteria, including some buildings smaller than 5,000 gross square feet, roadways, and other infrastructure. City facility construction projects that are unoccupied or serve specialized functions (e.g. pump station, garage, storage building, etc.) are not subject to the city's sustainable development design guidelines. These projects shall implement City of Atlanta Sustainable Development Design Guidelines and strategies to the maximum extent practicable.     Even though projects may become exempt from the city's required sustainable development design guidelines, project managers and design teams are encouraged to apply the relevant portions of City of Atlanta Sustainable Development Design Guidelines and to develop goals that increase the environmental, social, and economic benefits of the project. In addition, all exempted projects shall comply with benchmarking requirements per Part 8, Chapter 2, Article J of the City's Land Development Code, Part III of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. (Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 8, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-26. - Facility design prerequisites.     All city departments and offices and their contractors responsible for financing, planning, designing, developing, constructing and managing city funded projects shall include the following prerequisites when designing a facility (as consistent with the USGBC LEED TM Rating Standards): (1)  Compliance with Atlanta Code of Ordinances, Article II, Section 74-35, Erosion and Sedimentation Control. (2)  Fundamental building systems commissioning: Verify and ensure that fundamental building elements and systems are designed, installed, and calibrated to operate as projected. (3)  Minimum energy performance: Establish minimum energy performance for buildings and respective systems of buildings. Energy and water efficiency of those buildings and respective systems is to be measured, managed, and optimized on an ongoing basis. (4)  CFC Reduction in HVAC&R equipment: Reduce ozone depletion. (5)  Recycling: Implement a comprehensive recycling program that reduces waste generated by building occupants. (6)  Minimum indoor air quality: Establish minimum indoor air quality (IAQ) performance to prevent the development of indoor air quality problems in buildings. (7)  Environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) control: Prevent exposure of building occupants and systems to ETS. (8)  Education: Educate appropriate city personnel responsible for operations and maintenance of those systems throughout the building's lifecycle. (Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 9, 7-26-17 ) 
Secs. 75-27—75-50. - Reserved. 
Chapter 78 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Emergency services, ch. 70; fire hydrants, § 154-91 et seq. Land development code reference— Impact fee for emergency services, § 19-1001 et seq. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; constitutional grant of power to provide for fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; fire safety and protection, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 78-1. - Persons allowed in vicinity of fires.     No person, except firefighters, the mayor, members of the council, the police force, the owners of the property, their agents and the agents of insurance companies, shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of any fire, without being ordered there by the fire chief. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the fire chief shall be arrested and charged therefor. (Code 1977, § 11-3025) 
Sec. 78-2. - Placing trash or obstruction in front of firehouse.     It shall be unlawful for any person willfully and knowingly to put any trash or other obstruction in front of any firehouse. (Code 1977, § 11-3030) 
Secs. 78-3, 78-4. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-5. - Additional qualifications of fire chief; functions and duties of fire and rescue department. (a)  In addition to the qualifications provided in section 2-221, the fire chief shall possess at least five years experience at a senior supervisory level in management and administration of fire prevention and protection services. This experience must have been gained by virtue of previous government employment. (b)  The fire and rescue department shall have the following functions and duties: (1)  Protection of life and property against fire; (2)  Protection of life and property for homeland security against weapons of mass destruction; (3)  Provision of first responder, basic life support and/or advance life support services against medical emergencies; (4)  Provision of first responder services to motor vehicle accidents against disentanglement and emergency medical needs; (5)  Provision of first responder services to emergencies involving hazardous waste materials, high angle rescues, tunnel rescues, trench rescues, water rescues and building collapse; (6)  Protection of life and property against emergencies at the airport; (7)  Administration and enforcement of appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations related to fires and explosions; (8)  Regulation of the installation and use of any equipment that prevents a hazard as to fires or explosions, including fire escapes, emergency exits, fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment that may be installed in or outside any vehicle, structure, building, grounds or underground passageway; (9)  Initiation and conduct of programs of public education in fire prevention and safety. (10)  Detect and prevent arson. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 70, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2004-74, § 3, 10-20-04) 
Secs. 78-6—78-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF FIRE AND RESCUE[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-74, § 1, adopted 10-20-04 renamed article II to read as herein set out. Charter reference— Department of fire, app. IV, §§ 1(e), 21 et seq. Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq.; personnel, ch. 114; police and fire promotions, § 114-226 et seq. Related laws reference— Firefighters pensions, § 6-366 et seq. State Law reference— Local fire departments, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 78-26. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Department means the department of fire and rescue. (Ord. No. 2004-74, § 2, 10-20-04) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-27. - Application of article.     This article shall apply to all persons employed as firefighters by the department and to all future officers and employees of the department. (Code 1977, § 11-3001(a)) 
Sec. 78-28. - Assignment of certain positions without competitive examination; removal or transfer of certain persons. (a)  The fire chief or designee is authorized, in the fire chief's discretion, to make assignments to the positions of fire apparatus operator, firefighter/rescue technician, section chief, battalion chief, assistant chief and deputy chief, without the use of written competitive examinations. (b)  Any fire apparatus operator, firefighter/rescue technician, section chief, battalion chief, assistant chief or deputy chief in the department may be removed or transferred at the pleasure of the fire chief. Such person so removed or transferred shall resume the nondiscretionary rank or title in the department held immediately prior to such person's appointment to fire apparatus operator, firefighter/rescue technician, section chief, battalion chief, assistant chief or deputy chief. Such person shall be notified in writing of the removal or transfer. (Code 1977, § 11-3001(b)) 
Sec. 78-29. - Assistance to fire chief by other city officers and employees.     It shall be the duty of all city officers and employees to aid in all proper ways in carrying out this article and such rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be prescribed by the fire chief under this article and to afford the fire chief or designee all reasonable facilities and assistance to inspect all books, papers, documents and accounts applying or in any way appertaining to any and all officers, places, positions and employments subject to civil service. (Code 1977, § 11-3003) 
Sec. 78-30. - Hearings and investigations before fire chief.     All hearings and investigations before the fire chief or the fire chief's designee shall be governed by this article and by rules of practice and procedure to be adopted by the fire chief, and in the conduct thereof neither the fire chief nor the fire chief's designee shall be bound by the technical rules of evidence. No informality in any proceedings or hearing or in the manner of taking testimony before the fire chief or the fire chief's designee shall invalidate any order, decision, rule or regulation made, approved or confirmed by the fire chief. (Code 1977, § 11-3004) 
Sec. 78-31. - Uniforms for personnel. (a)  Sworn members. The council shall provide a uniform or uniform allowance each year to the uniformed members of the department, the costs thereof not to exceed $600.00. In lieu of providing uniforms to members who perform fire duties but who do not wear uniforms, the council shall pay the sum of $600.00 per year, half of this sum to be paid in March of each year and half in September. (b)  General fire employees. The council shall provide a uniform each year to non-sworn members of the department who are required to wear uniforms, the cost thereof not to exceed $300.00 per year. (Code 1977, § 11-3008; Ord. No. 1997-43, § 1, 8-11-97) 
Sec. 78-32. - Appointment of firefighting personnel to special duty during a period of temporary disability.     The fire chief may, with the approval of the chief financial officer, appoint firefighting personnel, who have been temporarily disabled due to injuries received in the line of duty, to special duty within the department for a period not to exceed six months. This appointment shall be contingent upon the ability of the employee to perform service other than firefighting, on a full-time basis in another area of the department, and upon the disability of the employee, during this period, being diagnosed as a temporary disability by a qualified physician. The period of special duty may be extended after six months upon approval of the chief financial officer. Salaries for these employees shall be paid from a special appropriation account established by the chief financial officer for that purpose. (Code 1977, § 11-3010) 
Sec. 78-33. - Probationary period for fire recruits.     Any person selected as a fire recruit shall be duly notified and, upon accepting and reporting for duty, shall be appointed for a probationary period that shall commence upon appointment and continue until six months after the completion of the required training at the fire academy. If the conduct and efficiency shall at any time during the probationary period be unsatisfactory to the fire chief or the fire chief's designee, the person shall be notified in writing, relieved from duty and the person's name stricken from the list. If the person's services during this probationary period have been satisfactory to the fire chief, the person shall be so notified in writing and the person's name placed on the list of regular firefighters. (Code 1977, § 11-3011) 
Sec. 78-34. - Authority to cut wires.     The fire chief or other authority acting under the fire chief is authorized to cut any wires, electric or otherwise, which shall be deemed necessary to preserve life or property without incurring any liability on the part of the city therefor. (Code 1977, § 11-3006) 
Sec. 78-35. - Unauthorized use of uniforms.     It shall be unlawful for any person, without authority, to wear the uniform or any distinctive part thereof or anything similar to a distinctive part thereof, which has been designed and approved by the uniform committee of the department of fire and rescue. (Code 1977, § 11-3009; Ord. No. 2004-74, § 2, 10-20-04) 
Secs. 78-36—78-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE SAFETY STANDARDS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Charter reference— General fire safety powers, app. I(24). Cross reference— Approval required for permit for theater or assembly hall using electricity, § 14-4; approval of carnivals, sideshows and similar exhibitions, § 14-7; fire protection requirements for tent shows, § 14-12; fire protection for wrestling or boxing exhibitions, § 14-41; applicability of fire code to Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, § 22-67. Land development code reference— Building regulations, § 8-2001 et seq. State Law reference— Fire safety standards, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.; application of fire codes to existing buildings, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-200 et seq., 25-2-14.1. 
Sec. 78-56. - State safety fire rules and regulations adopted.     The rules and regulations promulgated for the prevention and destruction of life and property by fire, explosion and related hazards in this state by the state safety fire commissioner, under authority of the powers vested in and duties imposed upon the state safety fire commissioner by O.C.G.A., title 25, chapter 2, (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.) are adopted as the rules and regulations of the city. The rules and regulations of such statute shall govern inspections made for the purpose of eliminating fire hazards in the city.     The city also adopts all amendments, which the safety fire commissioner for the state may make from time to time to the rules and regulations promulgated by that office unless such amendments are specifically excluded or superseded by this Code. (Code 1977, § 8-2002; Ord. No. 1998-69, § 1, 10-13-98) Charter reference— Adoption of standard codes of technical regulations by reference, § 2-404. State Law reference— Adoption of codes by reference, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 
Sec. 78-57. - Fire prevention code adopted, incorporated by reference; amendments. (a)  For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the safeguarding to a reasonable degree of life and property from hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises, the most recent edition of the International Fire Code, including Appendices B, C and D thereto, as currently adopted by the State of Georgia and amended by Chapter 120-3-3 of GA Safety Fire Commissioner Rules and Regulations, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are altered, amended or repealed in this article, is incorporated in this article by reference as the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta. (b)  The Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta, (being also the most recent edition of the International Fire Code, as currently adopted and amended by the State of Georgia) is amended to apply within the City of Atlanta in the following respects: (1)  Sub-Paragraph 104.6.3 (Fire Records), Paragraph 104.6 (Official Records), Section 104 (General Authority and Responsibilities) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "104.6.3 Fire Records. The chief of the fire rescue department shall keep in the office of the fire safety division a record of all fires and all facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses are covered by insurance, and if so, in what amount. Such records shall be made daily from the reports made by the fire department officers and inspectors. All such records shall be public." (2)  Paragraph 104.9 (Alternative materials and methods), Section 104 (General Authority and Responsibilities) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "104.9 Alternative materials and methods. The fire chief or his designee (fire marshal) shall have the power to accept use of alternative materials or alternative methods of construction upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his/her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code. The fire chief shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. Approved alternate shall be at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the Code in quality, fire resistance, durability and safety. The particulars of such alternate when granted shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant." (3)  Sub-Paragraph 104.9.3 (New material processes, or occupancies which may require permits), Paragraph 104.9 (Alternative materials and methods), Section 104 (General Authority and Responsibilities) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall be added to read as follows: "104.9.3 New material processes, or occupancies which may require permits. The chief of the fire rescue department and the fire marshal shall determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, that new materials, processes, or occupancies shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The fire marshal shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons." (4)  Paragraph 105.4 (Construction Plans Approval), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "105.4 Construction Plans Approval. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, or alter any commercial building without construction documents approval by the fire chief or his designee for fire department accessibility, fire hydrant requirements, Life Safety Code requirements for assembly occupancies and flammable and combustible liquid tank installations." (5)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.8 (Compressed gases), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "105.6.8 Compressed gases. A permit shall be required for the storage, handling, or use at normal temperature and pressure of more than 200 cubic feet of flammable compressed gas or 6,000 cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas." (6)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.25 (Lumber yards, woodworking plants and or any other type of wood working operations an operational permit is required), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "105.6.25 Lumber yards, woodworking plants and or any other type of wood working operations an operational permit is required. No person shall store in excess of 50,000 board feet of lumber without a permit." (7)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.27 (LP [Liquid Propane] Gas), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "105.6.27 LP (Liquid Propane) Gas. No person shall install or maintain any LP Gas container without a permit. Where a single container or the aggregate of interconnected containers is over 200-gallon water capacity, the installer shall submit plans to the fire official. A permit shall not be required for the installation or maintenance of portable containers of less than 120-gallon water capacity. EXCEPTION: A permit shall not be required for individual containers with a 500-gallon water capacity or less serving occupancies in Group R-3, which are located outside the Fire District as outlined in Section 8-2074 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances." (8)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.30 (Open Burning), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "105.6.30 Open Burning. The burning of construction debris, organic debris from stumps, branches, and other land clearing efforts and any and all other outdoor burning, other than cooking fires, is prohibited within the city limits." (9)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.39 (Repair garages and motor fuel-dispensing facilities), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "Section 105.6.39 Repair garages and motor fuel-dispensing facilities. No person shall use any building, shed or enclosure as a place of business for purpose of repair, maintenance or service of any motor vehicle, marine or fleet motor fuel-dispensing facilities therein, without a permit." (10)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.39.1 (Repair garages and motor fuel-dispensing facilities, prohibited areas), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall be added to read as follows: "Section 105.6.30.1 Repair garages and motor fuel-dispensing facilities, prohibited areas. No person shall use any public way, street, alley, or portion of an airport ramp, or apron as a place of business for the purpose of: repair, maintenance or service of any motor vehicle, marine or fleet motor fuel-dispensing facilities therein." (11)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.47 (Fire Inspection and Operational Permit Fees), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall be added to read as follows: "Section 105.6.47 Fire Inspection and Operational Permit Fees. (a)  The Fire Chief of the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department or his designee is authorized to charge and collect fees, on a yearly, one time or location basis for the issuance of permits or activities including storing of certain materials that constitute fire hazards for which permits are required by the Fire Prevention Code, and certain activities not requiring a fire permit shall be in accordance with the following schedule of charges. In addition to the annual fees described in city ordinance § 105.6.47, a $25.00 processing fee shall be charged. (1)  FIRE SAFETY INSPECTION FEES: (A)  Existing Occupancies. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12 (2) fire inspection shall be performed in order to issue permits or authorize occupancy as required. The annual fees therefore shall be as follows: i.  There shall be an inspection fee of $200.00 for a business having up to 3,000 square feet. ii.  There shall be an inspection fee of $250.00 for a business having 3,001 square feet to 10,000 square feet. iii.  There shall be an inspection fee of $350.00 for a business having more than 10,000 square feet. v.  There shall be an inspection fee of $450.00 for high-rise structures up to 70,000 square feet. vi.  There shall be an inspection fee of $650.00 for high-rise structures of more than 70,001 square feet. (B)  OPERATIONAL PERMITS: Operational permits are required to conduct certain operations or businesses. In addition to Fire inspection fees, operational fees may be required for certain activities as listed. Multiple operations performed at the same location shall be charged a single inspection fee pursuant to § 105.6.47(a)(1). However, each operation shall be individually accessed permit fees and may incur cumulative fees. These fees shall not apply to structures that are exempt pursuant to O.C.G.A. 25-2-12(2). Permit approvals subject to site inspection. The minimum fee for any activity not listed shall be $50.00. Permit Classification Basis of Determining Fee MinimumFee MaximumFee Aircraft hanger $66.00 per hanger (permit is not required for residential aircraft hangers) $66.00 $132.00 Auto tire rebuilding $22.00 per buffing machine $22.00 $180.00 Auto wrecking yard $66.00 $66.00 $66.00 Junkyard $66.00 $66.00 $66.00 Waste material handling $132.00 $132.00 $132.00 Bowling pin refinishing and lane resurfacing $42.00 $42.00 $42.00 Combustible fibers 100—500 cubic feet-$22.00; 500+ cubic feet $13.00 per 1,000 cubic feet (Permit is not required for storage of less than 100 cubic feet.) $22.00 $180.00 Compressed gases Flammable: 200—1,000 cubic feet-$22.00; 1,000+ cubic feet-$13.00 per 1,000 cubic feet. Nonflammable: 6,000—10,000 cubic feet-$18.00; 10,000+ cubic feet-$13.00 per 1,000 cubic feet. (Permit not required for less than 200 cubic feet of flammable gas or 6,000 cubic feet of nonflammable gas.) $22.00 $18.00 $180.00 $180.00 Dry cleaning Type II: $35.00 per machine utilizing Class II flammable $35.00 $180.00 Type III: $35.00 per machine utilizing 140 degrees F. liquids $35.00 $180.00 Type IV: $35.00 per machine utilizing nonflammable liquids $35.00 $180.00 Explosive dust operations $114.00 $114.00 $114.00 Explosive/blasting agents $90.00 $90.00 $90.00 Blasting permits $90.00 (per location) city wide permit $156.00 $90.00 $156.00 Flammable finishes Dip tanks—$42.00 per tank $42.00 $222.00 Spray booths—$42.00 per booth not exceeding 25 sq. ft. $42.00 $222.00 $66.00 per booth in excess of 25 sq. ft. $66.00 $222.00 Flow coat operations $66.00 $66.00 Electrostatic spraying $66.00 $66.00 Auto undercoating $66.00 $66.00 Power coating $66.00 $66.00 Organic peroxides coating $66.00 $66.00 Duel component coating $66.00 $66.00 Flammable and combustible liquids Plan review-Tank removal installation A/G and U/G; $66.00 $66.00 Flammable and combustible liquids (R) Tank storage-$.036 per gallon of flammable liquid or combustible liquid $60.00 $500.00 Drum storage $42.00 $42.00 Storage cans $42.00 $42.00 Other forms of combustible/flammable liquid storage $42.00 $42.00 Fruit ripening process $42.00 $42.00 $42.00 Fumigation/toxic thermal insecticidal fogging $42.00 (per location) city wide permit-$114.00 $42.00 $114.00 Garage repair 42.00, plus $22.00 if permit is to include welding operation $42.00 $66.00 Hazardous chemicals Corrosives:55—110 gallons-$22.00; 110-500 gallons-$42.00; 500+ gallons-$66.00 $22.00 $66.00 Oxidizing materials: 500-1,000 pounds-$42.00; 1,000+ pounds-$66.00 $42.00 $66.00 Organic peroxides; 10-50 pounds $22.00; 50—100 pounds-$42.00; 100+ pounds-$66.00 $22.00 $66.00 Ammonium nitrate (fertilizer): 1,000+ pounds $66.00 $66.00 Highly toxic material and gases $66.00 $66.00 Radioactive materials-$66.00 for any amount in excess sealed source or more than 1 milli curie radium or other radioactive material in a sealed source, or where license is required. $66.00 $66.00 LPG or LNG (R) Plan review for installation $66.00 $66.00 Tank storage: $0.036 per pound per square inch (PSI) of LP or LNG liquid $60.00 $500.00 Lumberyards $66.00 $66.00 $66.00 Woodworking plants $66.00 $66.00 $66.00 Magnesium Permit required for 10 pounds per day or greater $42.00 $42.00 Oil burner Permit required for fuel oil burners utilizing in excess of 25 gallons inside the building; 60 $42.00 $42.00 Ovens Industrial baking $22.00 per oven $22.00 $132.00 Industrial drying $30.00 per oven $30.00 $222.00 Places of public assembly (NR) Plan review to include: Trade shows, exhibitions, displays, contests, etc. Note: Fees required for each individual set of plans includes site inspection. Activity not allowed in non-permitted facilities $79.00 $79.00 Places of public assembly special hazard building and structures (R) Buildings presenting special hazards to persons on property per O.C.G.A. 25-2-13 $50.00 $50.00 Places of public assembly Places of public permit for occupant load-$42.00 plus $0.42 per area permitted $42.00 $222.00 = 528 persons; eliminate maximum restriction Site development Plan review $50.00 $50.00 Combustible Material 2,500—5,000 cubic feet-$42.00; 5,000+ cubic feet-$22.00 per 1,000 cubic feet. (Permit not required for less than 2,500 cubic feet of combustible material) $42.00 $42.00 Matches Manufacturing $66.00 $66.00 Storage: 25—100 pounds-$22.00; 100+ pounds-$42.00 $22.00 $42.00 Mechanical refrigeration Refrigeration unit or system containing more than 20 pounds of refrigerant excluding air conditioning units or systems $42.00 $42.00 Tar Kettle Per location-$42.00 city wide permit-$114.00 $42.00 $114.00 Tent/carnival (NR) Per location: 200 up to 400 sq. ft. = $50.00 401—1,500 sq. ft. = $100.00 1,501—3,000 sq. ft. = $150.00 3,001—6,000 sq. ft. = $200.00 6,001—9,000 sq. ft. = $250.00 More than 9,001 sq. ft. = $300.00 Welding $42.00 $42.00 $42.00 High piled combustible stock 1,500-5,000 sq. ft.—$42.00; 5,000+ sq. ft.-$22.00 per 1,000 sq. ft. (permit is not required for less than 2,500 sq. ft.) $42.00 $114.00 Organic coating $66.00 $66.00 $66.00  ** (R)=Renewable (NR)=Non-Renewable (b)  A re-inspection fee of $200.00 shall be imposed for each re-inspection if a violation stated in the initial written notice has not been corrected. (12)  Paragraph 107.6 (Maintenance of exit ways in public assembly occupancies), Section 107 (Maintenance) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall be added to read as follows: "107.6 Maintenance of exit ways in public assembly occupancies. Every aisle shall lead to an exit door or to a cross aisle running parallel to the seats and leading directly to an exit and shall not be obstructed by persons, chairs, tables, or any objects." (13)  Paragraph 107.7 (Public Assembly Occupant Load Accountability), Section 107 (Maintenance) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall be added to read as follows: "107.7 Public Assembly Occupant Load Accountability. 107.7.1 Any place of public assembly with any number of persons beyond that previously approved by the fire chief, or his designee, in the occupancy permit that is issued prior to opening, shall be deemed to be an overcrowded condition. The owner shall not permit an overcrowded condition to exist, nor shall he/she allow the admittance of any person beyond that number of persons previously approved by the fire chief, or his designee. 107.7.2 Signs stating the maximum occupant content shall be conspicuously posted by the owner of the building in each assembly room, auditorium or room used for a similar purpose. It shall be unlawful to remove or deface such notice. This number shall be determined by the fire chief or his designee and shall be based on the capacity of the exits provided and area of the space under consideration. 107.7.3 Where standing room is permitted, the capacity of the standing area should be determined on the basis of seven square feet per person. 107.7.4 Owners and operators of public assembly facilities where alcoholic beverages are consumed shall be able to provide an immediate accountability of the number of occupants in said facility at any given time. 107.7.5 The use of numeric counting devices, such as but not limited to numeric clickers or means of accountability acceptable to the fire official, shall be utilized to meet the requirement of section 107.7.4. 107.7.6 Individual(s) responsible for occupant load accountability shall be stationed at each entrance of the facility and shall be equipped with a minimum of two numeric counting devices. One numeric counting device shall be designated to account for the number of patrons entering the facility and the other numeric counting device shall be designated to account for the number of patrons exiting the facility. (14)  Section 108 (Appeals) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "Section 108 Appeals. Whenever the fire marshal disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire marshal to the fire chief or his designee within five days of the fire marshal's decision. The fire chief shall respond in writing within ten days." (15)  Paragraph 109.4 (Violation Penalties), Section 109 (Violations) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "109.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provisions of the Code, or fail to comply with this or any other provisions made there under, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted or approved there under, or any certificate or permit issued there under, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed by a court of competent Jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severely, for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively, being guilty of an offense, punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00 for the first offense, not less than $1,000.00 for the second offense, and not less than $1,500.00 for the third offense. The maximum fine shall be $5,000.00. All fines may carry imprisonment of not more than six months, or work on the public streets or public works of the city for not more than six months, or by any one or more of these punishments. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse a violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense." (16)  Section 202 (General Definitions) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta is amended to include the following definitions: FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. Whenever the words fire code official is used in the International Fire Code, they shall be held to mean the fire marshal or a duly authorized representative(s). ASPHALT/TAR KETTLE or ROOFING KETTLE shall mean any portable equipment either with or without wheels, or any portable fueled heating devices such as, but not limited to MAPP, Butane, and LP- Gas fueled torches, used for heating tar, pitch, asphalt, or other similar substance for application or the repair of roofs, floors, pipes, or other objects. (17)  Section 303 (Asphalt/Tar Kettles) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "Section 303 Asphalt/Tar Kettles. (a)  Permit required. (1)  No roofing kettle, tar kettle or any other heating devices used in the application or repair process of applying roofing materials shall be operated without a permit from the fire chief or his designee (2)  An annual roofing kettle or tar kettle permit shall be displayed at the job site. If more than one job is performed at one time, a copy shall be made so that each job site has a copy. (b)  It shall be the responsibility of each company to notify the fire safety division (by telephone) as to the location and type of work being performed before the job is started. (c)  Location: (1)  No roofing or tar kettle shall be operated on or inside any building without written permission from the fire chief or his designee. (2)  No roofing kettle or tar kettle shall be operated within 25 feet of any combustible material or substance. (d)  Street protection. All improved streets shall be protected from burning by use of sand or noncombustible materials under roofing kettles or tar kettles. The street shall be cleaned of excess tar and other debris upon completion of the work (e)  There shall be a portable fire extinguisher complying with section 906 and with a minimum 3A: 40B:C rating within 25 feet (7,620mm) of each asphalt (tar) kettle during the period such kettle is being utilized, and one additional portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 3A: 40B:C rating on the roof being covered. (f)  Precautions against fires. (1)  No more than 600 pounds of combustible material or substance to be heated shall be stored within 25 feet of any kettle while same is in operation. (2)  No kettle using flammable liquid for fuel shall be refueled while in operation and any flammable liquid placed within 25 feet of a kettle shall be stored in an approved safety container where it shall be kept sealed or closed at all times while the kettle is in operation. (3)  No mop or other applicator which has been used or submerged in tar, pitch, asphalt or other similar substance in the process of black roofing, waterproofing, or insulating shall be left overnight in or within 25 feet of any building structure or combustible material or substance. (4)  A kettle operator, experienced with the equipment involved and familiar with the fire hazards, the precautions to be observed, and the use of the fire extinguisher facility, shall be required to be in attendance at the kettle at all times the kettle is being fired or heated and so remain until the temperature of the kettle and the contents does not exceed 350 degrees Fahrenheit, as may be determined by a thermometer that shall be provided and maintained at or near the kettle at all times. (g)  Roofing or tar kettles in transit. (1)  Open flame in a roofing or tar kettle while in transit is prohibited. (2)  Kettle doors or lids shall be closed and secured while in transit. (3)  Kettle not equipped with wheels shall not be fired or used when mounted on a truck, except if the truck body is of all metal construction and the kettle is securely attached to the truck. (4)  Firing of a small patch kettle while located in the bed of a truck is prohibited. (h)  Hi-boys. Hi-boys shall be constructed of noncombustible materials. Hi-boys shall be limited to a capacity of 55 gallons (208L). Fuel sources or heating elements shall not be allowed as part of a hi-boy. (i)  Fuel containers under air pressure and Fuel containers that operate under air pressure shall not exceed 20 gallons (76L) in capacity and shall be approved. (j)  Location of fuel containers. Fuel containers shall be located at least 10 feet (3,048mm) from the burner. EXCEPTION: Containers properly insulated from heat or flames are allowed to be within two feet (610mm) of the burner." (18)  Paragraph 311.5 (Placards), Section 311 (Vacant Premises) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "311.5 Placards. 311.5.1 Placard Specifications. Any building or structure determined to be unsafe, shall be placarded. This structure has been determined by the fire marshal of the City of Atlanta to be dangerous, unsafe, unsound and unfit for human habitation or occupancy and in violation of City of the Atlanta Fire Prevention Code and/or the Atlanta Housing Code or Commercial Institutional and Industrial Building Maintenance Code. The fire marshal shall notify the owner, operator or agent of the property by certified mail, return receipt requested, to his/her last known address that the building has been placarded and the reason therefore. 311.5.1.1 Placard location. Placards shall be applied on the front of the structure. All placards shall be placed a minimum of ten feet above grade and be visible from the street. Additional placards shall be applied to the side of each entrance to the structure and on penthouses. 311.5.1.2 Placard size and color. Placards shall be a minimum of 18 inches by 12 inches and a maximum of 24 inches by 24 inches in size with a red or green background, and a white reflective border. The border shall be a minimum 0.25 inch stroke and maximum of 0.5-inch stroke. All lettering on the placard shall be white reflective. 311.5.2 Placard legend. The color designation of the placards shall have the following meanings: 311.5.2.1 Green placards shall indicate that firefighters should proceed with caution and state the following: WARNING! BY ORDER OF THE FIRE MARSHAL, THIS STRUCTURE IS DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE. SECTION 78-57 OF THE ATLANTA FIRE PREVENTION CODE. 311.5.2.2 Red placards shall indicate that firefighters should not enter property (unless for life safety) and conduct defensive operations and state the following: WARNING! BY ORDER OF THE FIRE MARSHAL, THIS STRUCTURE IS DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE. SECTION 78-57 OF THE ATLANTA FIRE PREVENTION CODE. 311.5.3 Placard Lettering: 311.5.3.1 The lettering for the word "WARNING" shall be a minimum of 1.75 inch in height with a 0.5 inch stroke of white reflective type. 311.5.3.2 The lettering for "BY ORDER OF THE FIRE MARSHAL, THIS STRUCTURE IS DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE" shall be a minimum of 0.5 inch in height with a minimum stroke 1/16-inch stroke. 311.5.3.3 The lettering for the" SECTION 78-57 OF THE ATLANTA FIRE PREVENTION CODE" shall be a minimum of 3/8-inch in height with a 1/16-inch stroke. 311.5.4 Unlawful Entry. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon this property other than an authorized governmental licensee, the owner or his designated agent or contractor (upon written verification). It shall also be unlawful to occupy or to allow the occupancy of this property until rendered fit for human habitation or occupancy in a manner satisfactory to and approved by the bureau of buildings and/or the bureau of code compliance. Mutilation, unauthorized removal or defacing of this placard shall be an offense punishable by fine and/or imprisonment." (19)  Paragraph 403.1 (Fire Watch Personnel), Section 403 (Public Assemblages and Events) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "403.1 Fire watch personnel. Whenever in the opinion of the fire chief or his designee it is essential for public safety in any place of public assembly or any other place where people congregate, due to the number of persons, or the nature of the performance, exhibition, display, contest, or activity, the owner, agent, or lessee shall, at his expense, employ one or more experienced firefighters employed by Atlanta Fire Rescue Department as required and approved by the chief to be on duty at such place. Said firefighters shall be subject to the chiefs orders at all times when so employed, and shall be in uniform and remain on duty during the time such places are open to the public, or when such activity is being conducted. Before each such activity, said firefighter shall inspect the fire appliances provided to see that they are in proper place and in proper working order and shall keep diligent watch for fires, obstructions to means of egress and other hazards during the time such place is open to the public or such activity is being conducted and take prompt measures for extinguishment of fires that may occur and assist in the evacuation of the public from structures. The firefighters shall not be required or permitted while on duty to perform any other duties than those herein specified." (20)  Paragraph 404.2 (Approved Fire Safety and Evacuation Plan), Section 404 (Fire Safety and Evacuation Plans) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "404.2 Approved Fire Safety and Evacuation Plan. An approved fire and evacuation plan shall be prepared and maintained for the following occupancies and buildings: 1.  Group A, other than group occupancies used exclusively for purposes of religious worship that have an occupant load less than 2,000. 2.  Group B buildings having an occupant load of 500 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. 3.  Group E. 4.  Group H. 5.  Group I. 6.  Group R-1. 7.  Group R-2 college and university buildings. 8.  Group R-4. 9.  High-rise buildings. 10.  Group M buildings having an occupant load of 500 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. 11.  Covered malls exceeding 50,000 square feet (4,645 m2) in aggregate floor area. 12.  Underground buildings. 13.  Buildings with an atrium and having occupancy in Group A, E or M." (21)  Sub-Paragraph 408.2.3 (Crowd Manager Certification) is added to Paragraph 408.2 (Group A Occupancies), Section 408 (Use and Occupancy-Related Requirements) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: "408.2.3 Crowd Manager Certification. Each qualified crowd manager supervisor shall be required to carry on his/her person an identification card issued by Atlanta Fire Rescue Department certifying his/her minimum training in life and fire safety." (22)  Sub-Paragraph 503.3.1 is added to Paragraph 503.3 (Marking), Section 503 (Fire Apparatus Access Roads) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: "503.3.1 A fire department access sign shall be installed at all required secondary fire department access points of a property. The sign shall state: Fire Dept. Access, name of the business/property, property address, and emergency contact information. PROPER FIRE DEPT. ACCESS SIGNAGE INSTALLATION * (23)  Section 505 (Premises Identification) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: Section 505 Fire Department Address Guide for All Properties. 505.1 Single-family homes. Address shall be a minimum four inches high, with a 5/8-inch stroke and contrasting numbers. 505.2 Multi-family communities (apartments, condos, townhouses). Multi family communities (apartments, condos, townhouses) and street address numbers shall comply with the following: 505.2.1 Street Address Numbers. Street address shall be a minimum 12-inch high numbers with a two-inch stroke with contrasting background. (a)  Twelve-inch high numbers with a two-inch stroke are only acceptable when placed within approximately 75 feet of the road in which the property is addressed. 505.2.2 Building Numbers. Building numbers shall be: (a)  Minimum 18 inches high numbers with a three-inch stroke with contrasting background. (b)  Buildings under 100 feet long: a minimum of one number per building. (c)  Buildings over 100 feet in length require a minimum of two numbers per building. 505.3 Apartment Spread Numbers/Corridor Spread Numbers. Apartment spread numbers/ corridor spread numbers shall be: (a)  Apartment spread numbers shall be a minimum of seven-inch high numbers with a one-inch stroke with contrasting background. (b)  Corridor spread numbers shall be a minimum four-inch high number with a 5/8-inch brush stroke with a contrasting background. 505.4 Apartment Numbers. Apartment numbers shall be a minimum four-inch high numbers with a 5/8-inch stroke with contrasting background and visible from access road. 505.5 Large office and warehouse buildings. Large office and warehouse building addresses shall comply with the following: (a)  Address shall be a minimum of 24-inch high numbers with a four-inch stroke with contrasting background. (b)  Address must be visible from all access directions. (c)  Buildings over 500 feet long shall have two address locations if more than one access point is visible. (d)  Suite numbers are required for multi tenant complexes and shall be located over the front door and on the rear door with a six-inch high by one-inch brush stroke. 505.6 Shopping Centers, High Rise Buildings and Other Applications. Shopping centers, high rise buildings and other applications address numbers shall be: (a)  Minimum 12 inches high numbers with a two-inch stroke with contrasting background. Be visible from all access directions. Suite numbers are required over the door with a six inches high by one-inch brush stroke. (b)  Buildings beyond 100 feet from the street and 10,000 square feet or more would need to install 18-inch by three-inch address numbers. 505.7 Marquee and Monument. Addresses installed on a marquee or monument located next to the street will require numbers 12 inches high by two-inch brush stroke to be located a minimum of three feet above grade. Numbers shall contrast with the background. 505.8 Self Storage Buildings Facilities Signs. 505.8.1 Self Storage Buildings Facilities Signs shall comply with the following: (1)  The sign plate shall be 12 inches by 18 inches with a thickness of .080 aluminum construction. (2)  The sign face shall have a Brown reflective background with a white legend, using the standard 3M Scotchlite sign face number R7-32 or equivalent, with white screen printed lettering. (3)  The font style shall be Handel Gothic BT capital fonts. (4)  Signs are to be used for commercial applications only. 505.9 Address directory. General. An approved address directory shall be installed at properties with more than one principal building each building shall have building unit identification numbers, or when, in the opinion of the chief, emergency response may be delayed due to the physical layout of the complex. 505.9.1 Prior to construction, an address directory plan shall be submitted to the Atlanta Fire Rescue Fire Marshal's Office for approval via the City of Atlanta Building Department's plan submission process. 505.9.1.1 Dimensions. The number of buildings in the complex shall determine the dimensions of the directory. (1)  Complexes containing 12 or fewer buildings require three feet x three feet (2)  Complexes containing 13 to 30 buildings require four feet x four feet (16 square feet) site directory. (3)  Complexes containing 31 or more buildings require five feet by five feet (25 square feet) site directory. 505.10 Framing. Framing materials shall not encroach upon the face to the directory by more than one and one-half inches. Stanchions or supports shall not be included in the required size of the directory. 505.11 Protection. The directory shall be protected against vandalism and disfigurement by a clear polycarbonate cover, with a minimum one-eighth inch thickness, sealed to protect from weather. 505.12 Illumination. Address directories shall be internally illuminated utilizing white light. The directory must be illuminated from dusk to dawn. 505.13 Installation requirements. Support posts or stanchions shall be set on concrete. Directories with dimensions of three feet by three feet (nine square feet) shall be 36 inches above grade. 505.13.1 Directories with dimensions of four feet by four feet (16 square feet) and five feet by five feet (25 square feet) shall be 24 inches above grade. 505.14 Depictions. All depictions must be clear, easily understood and legible at a distance of eight feet. The directory shall depict structures, building numbers, units, apartment space numbers, tennis courts, swimming pools, canals, waterfronts, driveways, streets, laundry rooms, fire hydrants, and other areas determined by the chief. 505.15 Depictions shall comply with the following: 1.  Directories shall be a dark print on a contrasting light background. 2.  The name and address of the complex are required, but shall not exceed ten percent of the total size of the site directory. 3.  Swimming pools, canals, and waterway areas shall be translucent blue. 4.  Tennis courts shall be translucent green. 5.  Fire hydrants shall be a ¼-inch diameter black circle filled with a translucent yellow center. The abbreviation "HYD" must be affixed by the location of the hydrant on the directory. 6.  The directory shall be properly oriented to the viewer with a red symbol one inch in diameter, with the words "you are here" affixed at the appropriate location on the directory. 7.  There must be a north directional arrow affixed to the directory. This arrow must be a minimum of three inches in size. 8.  The building numbers must be one inch in diameter, located directly adjacent to the building on the driveway side. 9.  The colors used on site directory may not be duplicated to represent more than one item. 505.16 Setbacks. The directory shall be installed on the occupancy's property and at the location approved by the chief as follows: 1.  The directory shall be set back from the street or curbing at least 25 feet to allow emergency vehicles to clear the public right of way. 2.  Shall not exceed a distance of four feet from the edge of the property driveway facing the direction of oncoming traffic. 3.  Shall not conflict with traffic visibility zones as provided for by other ordinances. 4.  Shall be immediately visible and free from obstructions including architectural design and landscaping. 505.17 Prohibition. Information such as advertising or additional artwork shall not be allowed on the address directory. (24)  Sub-Paragraph 507.5.4.1 is added to Sub-Paragraph 507.5.4 (Obstruction), Paragraph 507.5 (Fire Hydrant Systems), Section 507 (Fire Protection Water Supplies) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: "507.5.4.1 No person shall stop, park, or leave any vehicle within a 15-foot radius of a fire hydrant." (25)  Sub-Paragraph 901.6.2.2 is added to Sub-Paragraph 901.6.2 (Records), Paragraph 901.6 (Inspection, testing and maintenance), Section 901 (General) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: "901.6.2.2 Medical First Aid Equipment. Automated External Defibrillator (AED). (A)  Cabinets containing automated external defibrillators shall not be blocked from use or obstructed from view of the public. (B)  Cabinets Identification. Cabinets shall be identified in an approved manner by a permanently attached sign. (C)  Tampering with AEDs. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or tamper with an AED or other Life Safety device, except for the purpose of training, recharging or making necessary repair, or when approved by the Fire Code Official. (D)  The owner of the AEDs shall be responsible for the maintenance, inspection and testing of the AEDs per manufacturers requirements. Written records of the maintenance, inspection and testing of all AEDs shall be kept on file for review by the fire code official. (E)  AEDs shall be operational at all times." (26)  Sub-Paragraphs 912.2.1.1 and 912.2.1.2 are added to Sub-Paragraph 912.2.1 (Visible Location), Paragraph 912.2 (Location), Section 912 (Fire Department Connections) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: "912.2.1.1 A fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of a fire department connection (FDC) and or Standpipe connection on all new commercial construction. 912.2.1.2 No transformer shall be located within a 20-foot radius of the following water connections: fire department, standpipe, sprinkler, test header, or a fire hydrant on all new commercial construction. EXCEPTION: The separation distance shall be reduced to ten feet when the transformer is separated by a non-combustible six-foot high wall on three sides, with the open side facing away from the water supply and or connection. A minimum three-foot clearance shall be provided between the transformer and the non-combustible wall on all sides, for maintenance, inspection, and testing functions." (27)  Sub-Paragraphs 1030.3.1 and 1030.3.2 are added to Paragraph 1030.3 (Obstructions), Section 1030 (Maintenance of the Means of Egress) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: "1030.3.1 Exit Doors. During the period of occupancy, no exit door shall be locked, bolted or otherwise fastened or obstructed by any means so that the door cannot be opened from the inside by the use of: a latch, knob, or by direct pressure applied to the door or to a panic release device. 1030.3.2 Hold Open Devices. The use of a hold open device on an exit door(s) shall not be used, unless the hold open device is tied directly into the building's fire alarm system. The hold open device shall automatically release the exit door(s) upon activation of the building's fire alarm system." (28)  Sub-Paragraph 2006.5.3 (Training), Paragraph 2006.5 (Fueling and Defueling), Section 2006 (Aircraft Fueling) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "2006.5.3 Training. Aircraft refueler apparatus shall be attended and operated only by persons instructed in methods of proper use and operation and who are qualified to use such refueler apparatus in accordance with minimum safety requirements. Each qualified operator shall be required to carry on his/her person an identification card issued by Atlanta Fire Rescue Department certifying his/her minimum training in fire safety." (29)  Sub-Paragraph 2006.5.6 (Leaving Fueling Vehicles Unattended) shall be added to Paragraph 2006.5 (Fueling and Defueling), Section 2006 (Aircraft Fueling) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: "2006.5.6 Leaving Fueling Vehicles Unattended. The driver, operator or attendant of a fueling apparatus shall not leave the fueling apparatus unattended, while it is connected to the aircraft, ground support equipment or the hydrant fueling system. The connection of a fueling apparatus to an aircraft, ground support equipment or the hydrant fueling system shall be considered as fueling process." (30)  Paragraph 2803.3 of Section 2803 (General Requirements) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "2803.3 Waste Removal. Saw mills, planning mills and other woodworking plants shall be equipped with refuse removal systems which will collect and remove sawdust and shavings as produced. Blower and exhaust systems shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of NFPA 91." (31)  Section 3316 (Motorized Construction Equipment) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "SECTION 3316 Motorized Construction Equipment 3316.1 Conditions of use. Internal-combustion-powered construction equipment shall be used in accordance with all of the following conditions: 1.  Equipment shall be located so that exhausts do not discharge against combustible material. 2.  Exhausts shall be piped to the outside of the building. 3.  Equipment shall not be refueled while in operation. 4.  Fuel for equipment shall be stored in an approved area outside of the building. 5.  Bonding and grounding precautions shall be utilized during all fueling operations of motorized equipment." (32)  Paragraph 3501.2 (Permits) of Section 3501 (General) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "3501.2 Permits. (a)  A permit shall be required of each company, corporation, partnership or owner operator performing welding or cutting operations except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section. This permit shall not be required for each welding or cutting job location. The company, corporation, partnership, or owner operator shall notify the fire safety division in advance where such work is taking place, except when such work is done in response to an emergency call that does not allow for the fire safety division to be notified in advance of the work. (b)  A permit shall not be required of any company, corporation, partnership, or owner-operator: (1)  Where the welding or cutting is performed in areas approved for the purpose, or (2)  Where an approved permit system is established for control of the hazards involved. (c)  Application for a permit required by this article shall be made by the company, corporation, partnership, or owner-operator performing the welding or cutting operations or by his duly authorized agent. (d)  A permit for welding or cutting operations shall not be issued unless the individuals performing such operations are capable of doing such work in a safe manner. Demonstration of a working knowledge of the provisions of this article shall constitute acceptable evidence of compliance with this requirement. (e)  Companies, corporations, partnerships, and owner-operators required to have a permit shall maintain a record of all locations where welding or cutting operations are performed and have it available for inspection by the fire safety division." (33)  Paragraph 3509.8 (Hose and Hose Connections) in Section 3509 (Piping Manifolds and Hose Systems for Fuel Gases and Oxygen) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall be added to read as follows: "3509.8 Hose and Hose connections. An approved listed flame arrester check valve shall be installed in every fuel gas hose not more than six inches (152mm) downstream from the point of connection to a cylinder or other fuel supply, preferably at the regulator. Any such flame arrester shall be approved for the specific gas used." (34)  Sub-Paragraph 5604.1.1 is added to Paragraph 5604.1(General), Section 5604 (Explosive Materials Storage and Handling) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: "5604.1.1 Prohibitions. The storage of explosive and blasting agents is prohibited within the fire limits as established by section 8-2074 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances except for temporary storage for use in connection with approved blasting operations; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to Wholesale and retail stocks of small arms ammunition, explosive bolts, explosive rivets or cartridges or explosive-actuated power tools in quantities involving less than 500 pounds of, explosive material." (35)  Sub-Paragraph 5704.2.9.5, Sub-Paragraph 5704.2.9 (Aboveground Tanks), Paragraph 5704.2 (Tanks Storage), Section 5704 (Storage), Chapter 57 (Flammable and Combustible Liquids) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "5704.2.9.5 Aboveground tanks inside of buildings. (1)  Tanks storing Class II and III liquids inside buildings shall be equipped with a device or other means to prevent overflow into the building including, but not limited to: a float valve, a preset meter on the fill line; a valve actuated by weight of the tank content; a low head pump which is incapable of producing overflow; or a liquid- tight overflow pipe at least one size larger than the fill pipe and discharging by gravity back to the outside source of liquid or to an approved location. (2)  Flammable or combustible liquids storage tanks in buildings shall be installed in accordance with NFPA standards adopted in GA Safety Fire Commissioner Rules and Regulations. (3)  Flammable and combustible liquids storage and day tanks which are utilized for buildings life safety systems emergency back-up shall be installed inside buildings located within the fire limits as established by the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances, Section 8-2074 in accordance with the following regulations: (a)  Tanks installed inside of a building shall be a secondary containment type tank, as defined in NFPA 30. (b)  All storage or day tanks in a building shall be located in the lowest story, cellar or basement. (c)  Installation of flammable or combustible liquid storage or day tanks on a roof of a building is prohibited. (d)  The aggregate capacity of all flammable or combustible liquid storage or day tanks in a building shall not exceed 15,000 gallons. (e)  A flammable or combustible liquid storage tank - 12,000-gallon maximum capacity - shall be located in a vault constructed in accordance with Section 3404.2.8 or inside a tank room constructed in accordance with the following regulations: 1.  Tank room shall be constructed of walls, floor and top having a fire-resistive rating of not less than four hours with the walls bonded to the floor. 2.  Tank room shall contain 100 percent of the total capacity of all tanks, and provided with a liquid-tight noncombustible sill raised not less than six inches above the floor. 3.  There shall be three feet clearance around the tank and between the top of the tank and ceiling of the tank room for movement of fire-fighting personnel and fire protection equipment. 4.  Tank room shall be provided with ventilation system per NFPA 30. 5.  Tank room shall be provided with a leak-detection system providing audible and visual alarm. 6.  Tank room containing tanks with an aggregate capacity of more than 500 gallons of flammable or combustible liquids shall be protected with an automatic suppression system designed in accordance with one of the following standards: (a)  NFPA 11, Standard for Low Expansion Foam; (b)  NFPA 12, Standard for Carbon Dioxide Extinguisher System; (c)  Automatic Suppression System approved by the Fire Marshal 7.  The individual capacity of any tank in a tank building shall not exceed 12,000.gallons. 8.  Warning placard shall be conspicuously posted on the door entering the tank room. The sign shall read 'Flammable Liquids, No Smoking or Open Flame'. 9.  Spill containment shall be provided for the fuel delivery vehicle. The delivery vehicle's spill containment shall be able to contain 110 percent of the vehicle's largest compartment." (36)  Sub-Paragraph 5704.2.9.6.1, Sub-Paragraph 5704.2.9.6 (Aboveground Tanks Outside of Buildings), Sub-Paragraph 5704.2.9 (Aboveground Tanks), Paragraph 5704.2 (Tanks Storage), Section 5704 (Storage), Chapter 57 (Flammable and Combustible Liquids) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "5704.2.9.6.1 Special requirements for aboveground tanks located outside of buildings. The storage of flammable and combustible liquids in aboveground tanks located outside of buildings within the fire limits as established by Section 8-2074 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances shall be in accordance with the following regulations: a)  Flammable or combustible liquid storage tanks shall be located at the level of fire department vehicle access. b)  A storage or a day tank shall be a secondary containment type tank as defined in NFPA 30. c)  A flammable or combustible liquid storage tank, 12,000 gallon maximum capacity, shall be located inside a vault constructed in accordance with Section 3404.2.8 or inside a tank building constructed in accordance with the following regulations: 1.  Tank building shall be constructed of walls, floor and top having a fire-resistive rating of not less than four hours with the walls bonded to the floor. 2.  Tank building shall contain 100 percent of the total capacity of all tanks, and provided with a liquid-tight noncombustible sill raised not less than six inches above the floor. 3.  There shall be three feet clearance around the tank and between the top of the tank and ceiling of the tank room for movement of fire-fighting personnel and fire protection equipment. 4.  Tank building shall be provided with a ventilation system per NFPA 30. 5.  Tank building shall be provided with a leak-detection system providing audible and visual alarm. 6.  Tank building containing tanks with an aggregate capacity of more than 500 gallons of flammable or combustible liquids shall be protected with an automatic suppression system designed in accordance with one of the following standards: a)  NFPA 11, Standard for Low Expansion Foam; b)  NFPA 12, Standard for Carbon Dioxide Extinguisher System; c)  Automatic suppression system approved by the fire marshal. 7.  The individual capacity of any tank in a tank building shall not exceed 12,000 gallons. 8.  Warning placard shall be conspicuously posted on the door into the tank room. The sign shall read "Flammable Liquids, No Smoking or Open Flame". 9.  Spill containment shall be provided for the fuel delivery vehicle. The fuel delivery vehicle's spill containment shall be able to contain 110 percent of the vehicle's largest compartment. EXCEPTION: Aboveground storage tanks shall be permitted at new commercial construction sites within the fire limits as established by Section 8-2074 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances shall be in accordance with the following regulations: a)  The design, construction and capacities of containers for the storage of Class I, II and Class IIIA liquids shall be in accordance with NFPA 30 and dispensing operations shall be in accordance with NFPA 30A. b)  Aboveground storage tanks containing Class I, II and Class IIIA liquids, shall not exceed 660 gallons (2498L) individual capacity. The aggregate capacity of the aboveground storage tanks shall not exceed 1320 gallons (4996 L) at any construction site. c)  Aboveground storage tanks at new commercial construction sites shall be double walled type or single walled with a dike. d)  Aboveground storage tanks at new commercial construction sites shall not be required to be in a vault. e)  A permit shall be required for the temporary storage and use of the aboveground storage tanks at construction sites. f)  Plans submission shall be required for the installation of any aboveground storage tank at a construction site, and the aboveground storage tanks shall not be installed until plans have been approved by the Atlanta Fire Rescue department. g)  Aboveground storage tanks shall be approved for aboveground storage of flammable and combustible liquids. h)  Skid tanks shall be prohibited within the City of Atlanta limits. i)  Spill containment shall be provided for the fuel delivery vehicle." (37)  Paragraph 5706.4 (Bulk Plants or Terminals), Section 5706 (Special Operations) in Chapter 57 (Flammable and Combustible Liquids) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "Section 5706.4 Bulk plants or terminals. (1)  Portions of properties where flammable or combustible liquids are received by tank vessels, pipelines, tank cars, or tank vehicles and which are stored or blended in bulk for the purpose of distributing such liquids by tank vessels, pipelines, tank cars, tank vehicles or containers shall be in accordance with Sections 5706.4.1 through 5706.4.10.4. (2)  No new bulk plant shall be constructed within 300 feet of any school, church amusement, instruction, religious worship or other meetings. Separation limits for other occupancy types shall be set by the authority having jurisdiction. No new bulk plant shall be constructed within the fire limits established by section 8-2074 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances." (38)  Paragraph 6104.2 (Maximum capacity within established limits), Section 6104 (Location of LP-Gas containers) in Chapter 57 (Liquified Petroleum Gases) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: "6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Within the fire limits as established by section 8-2074 of Code of Ordinances, the aggregate capacity of any one installation for storage of liquefied petroleum gas shall not exceed 200 gallons water capacity; except that in particular installations this capacity may be altered at the discretion of the fire official, after considerations of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed tanks, and degree of private fire protection to be provided." (Code 1977, § 11-3091; Ord. No. 1992-42, § 2, 7-9-92; Ord. No. 1994-68, § 1, 12-9-94; Ord. No. 1998-69, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2000-58, § 1, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 2002-15, § 1, 3-12-02; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 2004-76, 10-22-04; Ord. No. 2004-78, 10-22-04; Ord. No. 2008-26(08-O-0488), § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 2010-51(10-O-1450), § 1, 9-16-10; Ord. No. 2013-02(12-O-0397), § 1, 1-16-13; Ord. No. 2016-36(15-O-1170) , § 1, 6-24-15; Ord. No. 2017-01(16-O-1701) , § 1, 1-12-17) Charter reference— Adoption of standard codes of technical regulations by reference, § 2-404. State Law reference— Adoption of codes by reference, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); minimum required standards, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-20(9)(B)(VIII), 8-2-25(a). 
Sec. 78-58. - Cooperation with state officials.     The fire marshal for the city, together with all other city officials, department heads and employees, shall lend their cooperation to the state safety fire commissioner, state fire marshal and deputies or assistants whenever called upon by the fire marshal or such state officials in the enforcement of O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.) and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. (Code 1977, § 11-3022) 
Sec. 78-59. - Fire prevention week; teaching of fire prevention.     The department shall prepare a tentative program for fire prevention week each year. It shall devise means of acquainting the personnel of institutions, as well as the public at large, with the teachings and practices of fire prevention. (Code 1977, § 11-3023) 
Sec. 78-60. - Smoke abatement.     It shall be unlawful to burn yard rubbish, leaves, dried trash, rubber, zinc, lead or sulfuric acid or any other substance which emits smoke or noxious or poison gases within the city limits. Any person in violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided for in section 1-8. This excludes all large grubbing operations and the abatement of major storm debris where plans have been submitted and approved by the department of public works for the use of air curtain destructors, only in instances where chipping of the debris is not possible with chipping to be considered the city's priority. (Code 1977, § 11-3024) 
Sec. 78-61. - Obstructing fireplugs, cisterns.     It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with building material or otherwise any cistern or fireplug, such as would obstruct approaches thereto by the department. No person shall place any post nearer than 18 inches to any fire hydrant. (Code 1977, § 11-3027) Cross reference— Fire hydrants, § 154-91 et seq. 
Sec. 78-62. - Injury to or interference with fire alarm system.     It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, destroy or in any manner interfere with the electric fire alarm system of the city or with the batteries, boxes, stations, wires or other apparatus or appurtenances belonging thereto or used in connection therewith. (Code 1977, § 11-3029) 
Sec. 78-63. - Fire protection system for multifamily houses, trailer or mobile home camps, commercial properties. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Auto trailers, mobile homes or relocatable homes means vehicles designed to be used as homes or as living facilities which are movable or relocatable from one premises to another.     Commercial property means all property situated upon lots or plots of land within the city in which any type of business or warehousing is carried on or transacted.     Multifamily house, where located on any lot or plot of ground within the limits of the city, means a building designed for or occupied as a residence and having three or more dwelling units under one roof.     Owner of property means the owner of an apartment house project, trailer camp or commercial property who is declared to be any person who: (1)  Holds and declares that such person is the owner of the lot or plot of land; (2)  Returns the lot or plot of land for taxation; (3)  Has a recorded deed to the lot or plot of land; (4)  Is a lessor or lessee of the lot or plot of land; or (5)  Acts as agent in behalf of the owner, lessor or lessee of the property.     Person who controls the property means any person who acts in any regard for any person who has an interest in the property.     Trailer camp means any area used for the accommodation of two or more auto trailers, mobile homes or relocatable homes used as living facilities of two or more families, couples or any number of individuals. (b)  Duty to provide system. Any person who manages or controls any multifamily house, trailer camp or mobile home camp with ten or more dwelling units or commercial properties exceeding 10,000 square feet gross area, shall at such person's expense provide the following: (1)  Fire hydrants which shall be so located that all parts of any building on the premises of this owner of private property are within 500 feet of one or more fire hydrants as measured along the center of paved driveways or streets, public or private. (2)  Access to all fire hydrants via driveways which shall be not less than 20 feet in width and shall have minimum radii of 32 feet. (3)  Reasonable accessibility of the width and radii and maintain them 24 hours a day to allow the firefighting equipment of the city to enter upon the premises to effectively fight such fire or conflagration. (c)  Maintenance of accessibility. The owners of the properties described in this section shall take such protective measures as may be necessary to maintain the accessibility in width and turning radii, whether it be by parking devices, by fencing, by watchpersons or otherwise. (d)  Installation. Installation of the fire protection system shall be under the supervision of and shall conform to the standards of the department of water, including the following: (1)  Type of hydrants, valves and meters; (2)  Type of pipe; and (3)  Arrangement of system, including size of pipe, dead end, loop or gridiron system of water mains. (e)  Performance test. (1)  Tests of the department of fire protection system, including hydrants, valves and water supply, shall be conducted by the department of fire and rescue with periodic frequency conforming to the practices of the department of fire and rescue. (2)  The fire protection systems shall be maintained in conformance with standards of the fire and rescue department. If, upon tests, defects are discovered, the property owner or person who controls the property shall repair any defects within five days of notice from the fire and rescue department to the owner or person who controls the property. (3)  If after five days the defects have not been repaired, the city or a city designee may go onto the property and repair the fire protection systems with no additional notice to the property owner or person who controls the property. (4)  In the event the repairs are made by the city or its designee, the city shall bill the property owner or person who controls the property for repairs and shall be authorized to seek a judgment against the property owner and thereafter place a lien on the property if payment is not made within ten days. (5)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as giving the fire department or fire and rescue department employees any additional authority to enter into any buildings. (f)  Water supply. When the water supply is to be furnished by other than the city water distribution system, this water supply shall be subject to the approval of the department of water. (g)  Nonconforming property declared fire hazard. Any of the property described in this section which is not in conformity with this section is declared to be a fire hazard. (h)  Posting property constituting fire hazard. The fire chief is authorized to conspicuously post the property described in this section with a sign four feet by four feet reading: THIS PROPERTY CONSTITUTES A SPECIAL HAZARD IN EVENT OF FIRE. ATLANTA FIRE CHIEF All signs in place on the adoption date of this Code that complied with section 11-3032 of the 1977 edition of the Code of Ordinances, City of Atlanta, Georgia are ratified and confirmed. (i)  Noncompliance. Noncompliance with this section shall be dealt with in the following manner: (1)  The fire chief or a deputy shall inspect each property within the city limits to determine compliance or noncompliance. (2)  Upon determination being made of noncompliance, the fire chief or a deputy is authorized and directed to charge the owner, the person in control or the person who manages the property with a violation of this section. (j)  Determination of property as fire hazard by court. The court may, upon hearing the evidence of any charges so made, determine the property a fire hazard within the terms of this section and order the property closed until the terms of this section are complied with or may subject the persons responsible for the violation to punishment as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1977, § 11-3032; Ord. No. 1999-46, 5-26-99; Ord. No. 2004-74, § 2, 10-20-04) 
Sec. 78-64. - Supplemental fire and life safety provisions for new and existing hotels. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Corridor smoke detection and compartmentation system means an approved smoke detection system installed in public (exit access) corridors on typical floors. Such system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72E, but in no case shall smoke detectors be installed more than 30 feet on centers or more than 15 feet from any wall. The system shall be electrically interconnected to the building manual alarm system and in buildings seven stories or more in height shall have an annunciator panel located in an approved location to visually indicate the floor of actuation. Corridor compartmentation shall mean approved smoke partitions or doors in exit access corridors which divide such exit access corridors into at least two compartments. Doors used for compartmentation shall be of the swinging type having a fire protection rating of at least 20 minutes.     Existing hotel means a hotel which is already in existence at the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives.     Hotel means a dwelling or group of buildings under the same management in which there are more than 15 sleeping accommodations for hire, primarily used by transients who are lodged with or without meals, whether designated as a hotel, inn, club, motel or by any other name, including apartment hotels.     Limited automatic sprinkler system means an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in corridors along the corridor ceiling with one head installed opposite the center of and inside the room/corridor door opening onto exit access corridors. The sprinkler system shall be electrically interconnected to the building alarm system. The sprinkler system main valve shall be provided with a tamper switch which shall be electrically interconnected to a separate alarm system with a distinctive sound.     Self-closing device means, as applied to an interior room/corridor door, a device that will ensure door closing after having been opened for use.     Single-station smoke detector means an approved single-station smoke detector installed within each guestroom suite, continuously powered by the house electrical service and installed in an approved manner in accordance with room layout. When actuated, the detector shall initiate an audible alarm (rated at 85 decibels at ten feet) within the room.     Smokeproof tower means an approved stairway enclosure so designed that the movement into the smokeproof tower of products of combustion, produced by a fire occurring in any part of the building, shall be limited. Open air balconies which provide direct access from rooms to at least two remote exits may be considered as equivalent to smokeproof towers.     Sprinklered means an approved complete automatic sprinkler system installed throughout the entire building. The system shall be installed in accordance with the 1989 edition of NFPA pamphlet no. 13 pertaining to installation of sprinkler systems, except that sprinkler installation may be omitted in small compartmented areas such as closets not over 24 square feet and bathrooms not over 55 square feet. The sprinkler system shall be electrically interconnected to the building alarm system. The sprinkler system main valve shall be provided with a tamper switch which shall be electrically interconnected to a separate alarm system with a distinctive sound. (b)  New hotels. (1)  New hotels six stories or less in height shall be equipped with single-station smoke detectors and self-closing devices on room/corridor doors. (2)  New hotels seven stories or more in height shall be equipped with single-station smoke detectors, complete automatic sprinkler systems, self-closing devices on room/corridor doors. (3)  Such protection shall be in addition to all other requirements of the city's building code. (c)  Existing hotels. (1)  Existing hotels six stories or less in height which are not provided with a complete automatic sprinkler system shall be equipped with self-closing devices on all room corridor doors and with at least one of the following: a.  A limited automatic sprinkler system. b.  A corridor smoke detection and compartmentation system. c.  Single-station smoke detectors. d.  Smokeproof towers. (2)  Existing hotels seven stories or more in height which are not provided with a complete automatic sprinkler system shall be equipped with self-closing devices on all room corridor doors and at least two of the following: a.  A limited automatic sprinkler system. b.  A corridor smoke detection and compartmentation system. c.  Single-station smoke detectors. d.  Smokeproof towers. (3)  Existing hotels seven stories or more in height that are provided with a complete automatic sprinkler system shall be equipped with one of the following: a.  A corridor smoke detection and compartmentation system. b.  Self-closing devices on all room corridor doors. c.  Single-station smoke detectors. d.  Smokeproof towers. (4)  Such protection shall be in addition to all other requirements of the city's building code. (d)  Equivalent methods. The specific requirements of this section may be altered or modified to allow alternative design systems that will provide equivalent safety to life. (e)  Hotel emergency organization. (1)  Designated employees of hotels shall be instructed and drilled in the duties they are to perform during fire, panic or other emergency. Approved evacuation procedures shall be prepared by the hotel management. (2)  Drills shall be conducted on quarterly intervals by the entire complement. (Code 1977, § 11-3033(1)—(5)) 
Sec. 78-65. - High-rise residential occupancy for the elderly and handicapped. (a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "high-rise residential structure" means any structure six stories or more in height, whose primary purpose is residential occupancy for the elderly and handicapped. (b)  Access to room. Any person who or any corporation or any group which owns, manages or controls any high-rise residential structure shall at their expense provide access to all rooms by maintaining keys on the premises for all rooms used or occupied by tenants for living quarters. However, occupants who have installed locks that are other than those provided by the management shall be responsible for providing a duplicate key to the management, and the management shall notify the department of fire of refusals by occupants to provide duplicate keys. Each tenant shall upon occupancy be informed by the management of this chapter. (c)  Nonambulatory residents. All high-rise residential structures for the elderly and handicapped shall have the room numbers of all nonambulatory residents posted in fire panels located in the building and placards of not less than four inches by eight inches shall be placed on the doors of residents indicating that they are not ambulatory and will need assistance to evacuate the building in an emergency. (Code 1977, § 11-3034) 
Sec. 78-66. - Responsibility and authority of fire (arson) investigators. (a)  Fire (arson) investigators shall be responsible for investigating all cases of arson and other suspected incendiary fires within the city. (b)  Fire (arson) investigators shall also be authorized to execute general law enforcement powers limited to the arrest and imprisonment of arson offenders where in their judgment such arrest and confinement is necessary to secure the offender's appearance in court to answer the offender's offense. (Code 1977, § 11-3035) 
Sec. 78-67. - Fire lanes; authority to prevent blocking of private ways and alleys. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Fire lane means an area designated by a fire official which provides access for department of fire vehicles to buildings, department of fire connections and fire hydrants. This includes all alleys, including private alleys, private ways or driveways, where parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions can interfere with ingress or egress of department of fire vehicles and equipment.     Fire official means a fire officer or other designated authority or the fire officer's or authority's duly authorized representative charged with the administration and enforcement of the fire prevention code adopted in this chapter.     Master plat means an original plat drawn in accordance with this section.     Plat means a map created by the property owner and approved by the fire official which depicts the location and boundaries of land and all existing fire lanes in accordance with this section. Maps shall be drawn to scale.     Property owner means each person, possessing any estate or leasehold right in the property being designated as a fire lane. (b)  Authority. The fire chief or the chief's duly authorized fire official may properly designate fire lanes and prevent the blocking of any private alley, private way or driveway in the city by the parking of automobiles or otherwise. (c)  Posting of signs. The property owner is required to post signs meeting the following criteria in areas designated as fire lanes: (1)  Signs shall read: "No Parking—Fire Lane." (2)  Signs must meet design specifications furnished by the department of fire. (3)  One sign shall be posted at the beginning of the fire lane and one at the end of the fire lane and at intervals not more than 50 feet apart. (4)  Signs posted shall not be more than four feet from the edge of the curb and shall be visible from both directions of the driving surface. (d)  Painting of curbs. The fire chief or the chief's duly authorized fire official may order curbs adjacent to a fire lane to be painted red or another distinctive color. (e)  Parking in fire lane. No person shall park any motor vehicle or place any other property in a fire lane; however, this section shall not apply to the parking of an authorized emergency vehicle. (f)  Obstructing posted, private alley or driveway. Any person who shall park any vehicle of any character or place any other property in any private alley, private way or driveway which has been posted in accordance with this section and any person owning or occupying property abutting the private alley, private way or driveway who shall cause or permit the placing of anything therein which would impede or block the passage of fire trucks and equipment shall be guilty of an offense. (g)  Plats. Property which falls within the corporate limits of the city upon which fire lanes have been designated shall have all fire lane delineations visually depicted on a plat. These plats shall be designed by the property owner and submitted to the department of fire when notified to do so by a fire official. Each plat shall identify all building exterior walls, traffic and parking lanes and sidewalks. The areas to be designated as fire lanes shall be delineated in red ink. The plat shall state a scale of measurement and shall be on paper or series of pages of 8½ inches by 11 inches. The plat shall specify the name of the property, the location of the property, a brief legal description of the property and the length and width of the fire lanes, as approved by the fire official with whom all master plats shall be filed. (h)  Enforcement officials. Fire officials, police officers or other duly authorized law enforcement officials shall have the authority for enforcement of fire lanes. Fire officials, police officers or other duly authorized officials may cause to be removed to the nearest authorized place of impound or other place of safety any unattended vehicle or other property left standing in violation of this section. (i)  Summons, notice of violation. Enforcement of this section shall be through an action in municipal court by the issuance of a summons, which notice shall be given to property owners by registered mail. If the owner is not in compliance of such notice within 60 days of such notice, the owner will be in violation of this section. The notice shall be either left with the vehicle or other property or delivered to the property owner or person in possession thereof. For the purpose of such action, it shall be presumed that the registered owner of a vehicle is in control or possession thereof. (Code 1977, § 11-3007) Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 150-86 et seq. 
ARTICLE IV. - FEES FOR FIRE RESCUE SERVICES 
Sec. 78-68. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Deployment means a response of fire department resources to an incident for the purpose of mitigating the situation.     Hazardous condition means a situation involving a spill, leakage, or debris which presents a danger to the community or environment.     Level "0" means incidents which have: (1) no billing for services, (2) no value including no actions and (3) cancellations enroute or on scene.     Level "1" means incidents having minimal actions such as investigations and minor scene clean up. The amount charged for this type of action is a flat rate and shall not exceed $150.00.00.     Level "2" means incidents having actions such as basic emergency medical treatment, removal of minor debris and minor spill cleanups. The amount charged for this type of action is a flat rate and shall not exceed $300.00.     Level "3" means incidents having moderate actions with medium impact on resources, staffing and apparatus. The amount charged for this type of action is a flat rate and shall not exceed $500.00.     Level "4" means incidents having extensive demand on resources, staffing, and apparatus. The fee charged for this level of action shall be determined from fee schedule (Exhibit B).     Motor vehicle crash commonly referred to as an accident, which has been classified by the department of transportation as crash involving a vehicle with another or fixed object.     Non-emergency alarm means an incident that presents no immediate threat to human life.     Privately owned EMS means an emergency medical service that provides non-emergency transportations for profit and not supported by taxpayers. (Ord. No. 2009-30(09-O-0800), § 2, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 78-69. - Fee schedule. (a)    Fire Equipment Fee Fire rake $17.00 Shovels $17.00 Scoops $17.00 Brooms $12.00 All hand tools $12.00 Foam nozzle $55.00 Foam eductor $50.00 AFFF foam - per gallon $40.00 Class A foam - per gallon $25.00 SCBA pack $85.00 Hall runner $18.00 Portable tank $75.00 PPV fan - per hour $55.00 Generator, portable - per hour $55.00 Generator - per hour $55.00 Chain saw - per hour $45.00 Water extinguisher $22.00 Dry chemical extinguisher $45.00 CO 2 extinguisher $45.00 Scene lights $22.00  (b)    Federal Emergency Agency (FEMA)Schedule of Apparatus Rates CostCode Equipment Specs Size HP Fee 8690 Truck, Fire Pump Capacity 1000 gpm hour $75.00 8691 Truck, Fire Pump Capacity 1250 gpm hour $90.00 8692 Truck, Fire (Atlanta Fire) Pump Capacity 1500 gpm hour $95.00 8693 Truck, Fire Pump Capacity 2000 gpm hour $105.00 8694 Truck, Fire Ladder Ladder Length 75 ft hour $145.00 8695 Truck, Fire Ladder (Atlanta Fire) Ladder Length 150 ft hour $175.00 8792 Tractor Trailer 6 x 4 50,000 hour $70.00 8750 Small Vehicle (Chief Officer) hour $8.00  (c)    Apparatus/Personnel Personnel PersonnelHourly Rate Fee Class A Engine 3 $25.00/hour $75.00/hr Class A Engine 4 $25.00/hour $100.00/hr Aerial Ladder Truck 3 $25.00/hour $75.00/hr Aerial Ladder Truck 4 $25.00/hour $100.00/hr Rescue (Heavy) 6 $25.00/hour $100.00/hr Battalion Chief (Batt-1) 2 $25.00/hour $50.00/hr  (d)    HAZARDOUS MATERIAL EQUIPMENT Supplies/Service Fee Absorbent - per bag $17.00 Absorbent booms $40.00 Top sol $35.00 Disposable coveralls $30.00 Neoprene gloves $20.00 Latex gloves $6.00 Over boots $25.00 Disposable goggles $15.00 Gas plug kit $50.00 Plug and dike $65.00 Drum liners $10.00 Barricade tape $22.00 Removal of hazardous material $150.00 Disposal of hazardous material $150.00  (Ord. No. 2009-30(09-O-0800), § 3, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 78-70. - Non-resident vehicle accident and roadway fire fees. (a)  The City of Atlanta is hereby authorized to impose fees for services provided by the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department to insurance companies for accidents involving motor vehicles where the insured is determined to be at fault, and where; (1)  The coverage for such services is expressly provided by an insurance company to the insured and the services are lawfully billed to the insured; or where (2)  Emergency medical services are provided to the insured by the county or municipal corporation, whenever the insured's medical insurance covers the service provided and the insured assigns the right to collect to the service provider; or where (3)  Other services are provided to the insured by the county or municipality which are expressly authorized by state or federal law to be billed directly to an insurance company. (b)  The imposed fees shall be assessed for fire department responses to mitigate a hazardous condition caused by a vehicle crash or roadway fire. The responsible party of the vehicle crash or fire shall produce a valid auto insurance card and the department will bill the insurance company of the responsible party. Level 1—3 are flat rates determined by the services rendered. Level 0: No fee imposed Level 1: $150.00 - Flat Rate Services include: Basic Response Scene Investigation Minor Debris Removal Traffic Control Level 2: $300.00 - Flat Rate Services include: *Basic Response and Medical Treatment *Moderate Debris Removal *Traffic Control *Assist with Vehicle Removal *Clean up Hazardous liquids Level 3: $500.00 - Flat Rate Services include: *Basic Response *Basic or Advance Medical Treatment *Heavy Debris Removal *Traffic Control *Clean up Hazardous liquids *Minor Victim Extrication Level 4: Determined by fee schedule in section 78-70 Services include: *Multiple Unit Responses *Extrication of Multiple Victims *Usage of Multiple Hand Tools or power equipment *Complicated Incidents which require extensive staff, time, and services *Traffic Control exceeding 2 hours  (Ord. No. 2009-30(09-O-0800), § 4, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 78-71. - Commercial negligence hazardous materials fee. (a)  The City of Atlanta is hereby authorized to impose fees for services provided by the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department to commercial contractors or privately owned companies who have been determined by the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department to have caused a hazardous condition as the result of negligence. (b)  The imposed fees shall be assessed for fire department responses to mitigate a hazardous condition shall be determined per incident and shall be billed in accordance with the fee schedule contained in section 78-69. (Ord. No. 2009-29(09-O-0799), § 1, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 78-72. - Private emergency management service company assistance fee. (a)  The City of Atlanta is hereby authorized to impose a fee for providing privately owned emergency medical service companies assistance loading, unloading, or moving patients on non-emergency calls. (b)  The imposed fees shall be assessed for fire department assistance provided to privately owned emergency medical service companies shall be determined per incident and shall be billed in accordance with the fee schedule contained in section 78-69. (Ord. No. 2009-31(09-O-0801), § 1, 6-23-09) 
Chapter 86 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Health powers of city, § 1-102(c)(21), (29). Cross reference— Clean city commission, § 2-1876 et seq.; mayor's committee on drug control, § 2-1956 et seq.; animals, ch. 18; food establishments, § 30-691 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 38; environment, ch. 74; social services, ch. 126; solid waste, ch. 130; sewage disposal, § 154-196 et seq. Land development code reference— Swimming pools, § 8-2078. Related laws reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 5. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific constitutional grant of powers relative to public health facilities and services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 86-1. - Toilets on trains. (a)  All railroad and sleeping car companies running cars into the city shall keep their toilets securely locked and shall not permit them to be used by anyone while the cars are within the city limits; provided, however, that those toilets may be opened for use while the cars are standing in a station, if they are provided with proper watertight, flyproof receptacles of a design approved by the director, bureau of sanitary services which are properly kept in place. The toilets so used shall be served by the bureau of sanitary services at times and places specified by the director for the removal of excrement. (b)  Responsibility for failure to comply with this section shall be upon the persons operating trains and the persons having control of the tracks, together with all the officers, employees and agents of persons operating railroads who have it within their power or authority to comply or to enforce compliance with this section, and any of these persons may be convicted and punished for violation of this section. (Code 1977, §§ 14-10012, 14-10013) 
Sec. 86-2. - Adoption of regulations promulgated by Fulton County board of health and DeKalb County board of health.     The regulations promulgated by the Fulton County board of health are adopted by the city to apply in those portions of the city lying within Fulton County and to apply outside the city on any property owned by the city for airport purposes. The regulations promulgated by the DeKalb County board of health are adopted by the city to be applied in that section of the city lying within DeKalb County. (Code 1977, §§ 9-6002, 14-7001) 
Sec. 86-3. - Disposition of bodies of unidentified persons. (a)  Removal to hospital. Any unidentified person who shall die in the city, whose relatives are unknown by the person assuming to take charge of the body, shall be immediately removed to Grady Hospital, where the dead body shall be placed in a room subject to the orders of the medical examiner of Fulton County or DeKalb County, whichever has jurisdiction of the body. (b)  Examination of remains. The authorities of Grady Hospital shall, on receipt of the remains, examine them for identification, place all effects in a proper receptacle and hold the body for a period of eight hours, awaiting identification by relatives. (c)  Notice to police. Immediately upon the receipt of the dead body, the superintendent of Grady Hospital shall notify the department of police if it appears that the department has not been previously advised. The department shall immediately make fingerprints of the deceased person and use the prints in an effort to effect the person's identification. The department of police shall record carefully every mark of identification which may be found on the dead body and make a permanent record thereof. The personal description so far as ascertainable shall be entered, which shall include the weight, height, the color of hair, the sex, the race and any other feature which might aid in identification. (d)  Delivery to funeral director. Except as otherwise ordered by the medical examiner, if the body should not be identified and claimed by relatives within eight hours, the remains shall be under the direction of the medical examiner, and at the direction of the medical examiner the remains shall be sent to a reputable funeral directing establishment in the city by the hospital authorities for the purpose of embalming and preservation of the remains. (e)  Autopsies. No autopsies or postmortems are to be held on the remains of the person, except upon the order of the medical examiner or upon the written order of the nearest of kin, and then only when the order shall have the approval of the medical examiner. (f)  Surrender of remains. The remains shall not be surrendered by the hospital to any funeral director, except as provided in this section, for the purpose of embalming, except upon the written order of the medical examiner or upon written order of the next of kin delivered to the hospital with the written approval of the medical examiner. (Code 1977, § 14-7002) State Law reference— Georgia Death Investigation Act, O.C.G.A. § 45-16-20 et seq. 
Sec. 86-4. - Noise zone around hospitals, surgi-centers. (a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the term "surgi-center" means a medical facility that provides surgical services to patients who do not require overnight hospital care. The term "hospice" means a facility that provides housing, medical and emotional assistance to the terminally ill. (b)  Established. The streets in front of or surrounding hospitals, sanitariums, surgi-centers and hospices shall have what is known as a noise zone within a distance of 300 feet of the grounds thereof, in all directions. Where signs are erected along the street within a distance of 300 feet of the grounds of the hospital, sanitarium, surgi-center or hospice in all directions, this shall constitute the noise zone, whether these signs are erected by the city or by the authorities in charge of the hospitals, sanitariums, surgi-centers or hospices. (c)  Quiet to be maintained. It shall be unlawful for any person within a noise zone around a hospital, sanitarium, surgi-center or hospice to cry out the sale of wares therein, to use whistles, radios or other noise-making devices, to drive any vehicle at such rate of speed as shall create a disturbing noise, to drive any motor vehicle with the muffler cutout open or to make or cause to be made any loud noise in any manner whatsoever. (Code 1977, § 14-7005; Ord. No. 1997-37, § 1, 6-18-97) Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 106. 
Sec. 86-5. - Condemnation, disposal of decayed fruit, meat, other food. (a)  Duty of sanitation inspectors. It shall be the duty of the sanitation inspectors to condemn and require to be sent out of the city as garbage, by the owner or person in possession thereof, under direction of the director, bureau of sanitary services, all decayed or stale melons, fruits and vegetables and all unsound, tainted, offensive or unwholesome meats, fish, poultry, game or other articles of food kept or stored in any box or refrigerator, held or offered for sale at any of the fruit stands, stores or markets in the city or offered for sale from any car on any of the railroad tracks in the city. (b)  Violations. Any merchant, trader, dealer or other person who shall refuse to allow the sanitation inspectors opportunity to inspect such person's stock of melons, fruits, vegetables and meats, fish, poultry, game or foodstuffs of any kind or who shall, when any of this stock is condemned, refuse to remove it from the city as garbage shall be deemed guilty of an offense. (Code 1977, § 14-7006) State Law reference— Food generally, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 86-6. - Duty of owner to clean property; violations; penalties. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant of any lot or tract of land to allow the accumulation of garbage, rubbish, trash, debris or discarded articles or materials or to allow the excessive growth of grass, weeds or vines on any such lot or tract of land. (b)  Should any owner or tenant fail to completely clean and clear the premises within 14 days from the date of receipt of a notice of violation, such owner or tenant shall be charged with a violation of this section, and if convicted shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00. (c)  The notice required in subsection (b) above, shall be delivered personally or by certified mail. (d)  No notice shall be required for repeated violations of this code section at the same location in which case the owner or tenant may be charged with a violation of this section and a citation may be immediately issued. (e)  If the owner or tenant of a lot or tract of land has been found charged and convicted in violation of this code section within the immediately preceding twelve month period at the same location, such owner or tenant shall be punished by a fine of $1,000.00. (Code 1977, § 14-7091; Ord. No. 1998-79, § 1, 11-9-98) Charter reference— Authority relative to nuisances, § 1-102(c)(30). Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 130; vegetation, ch. 158. Land development code references— Commercial, institutional and building maintenance code, § 8-2079 et seq.; housing code, § 8-2221 et seq. State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; municipal nuisance abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Secs. 86-7—86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INDOOR AIR[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Smoking at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International, § 22-68; businesses, ch. 30; environment, ch. 74; smoking on MARTA buses, trains and rail cars, § 106-8; smoking in certain areas within city buildings and facilities, § 106-9. 
Sec. 86-31. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Bar means: (1)  An enclosed area which is primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages, wine, malt beverages and/or distilled spirits, for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages; and (2)  Any adult entertainment premises as defined in this Code. Although a food service establishment may contain a bar, the term "bar" shall not include the food service establishment dining area. The terms "wine," "malt beverages" and "distilled spirits" are defined in section 10-1.     Designated smoking area: (1)  In a food service establishment means an area of contiguous seating where smoking is permitted and which: a.  Is situated so existing barriers and ventilation systems are used to minimize the toxic effects of smoke; b.  Is marked by appropriate signs; and c.  Does not include service lines or cashier areas. (2)  In all other areas means any enclosed indoor area in which smoking is permitted. Such smoking area shall be clearly designated and separate from any area in which smoking is not permitted. In a place of employment, the designated smoking area shall be separated from a smoke-free work area by floor-to-ceiling walls or ventilation technology effective in reducing the effects of smoke on the smoke-free area other than portable air cleaning devices; provided, however, that no restrooms or employee lounges shall be "designated smoking areas."     Dining area means any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which food is served.     Employer means any person who employs one or more persons, including the legislative, executive and judicial branches of city government.     Food service establishment means any establishment for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts or other edible products. The term includes restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short-order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places which manufacture retail sandwiches, soda fountains, institutional cafeterias, both public and private, food carts, industrial cafeterias, both public and private, food carts, industrial cafeterias, catering establishments, food vending vehicles and operations connected therewith, and similar facilities by whatever name called. The term "food service establishment" shall not mean an establishment which does not provide seating or facilities for consumption of food on premises or a "food sales establishment" shall not include any dining area located within a health care, educational or child care facility. Food courts within enclosed shopping malls shall be treated as food service establishments under this article. When determining food service establishment seating capacity, outdoor seating will not be included in the total number.     Health department means the Fulton County health department.     Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, employee lounges, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. (1)  A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a child care facility or a health care facility. (2)  The dining area of a food service establishment shall not be treated as a "place of employment" under this article.     Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, restaurants, stores, offices, waiting rooms, lobbies, public transit, restrooms, enclosed shopping malls, educational, recreational and health care facilities, child care facilities, auditoriums, theaters, sports arenas, service lines, airports, and meeting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a child care facility or a health care facility.     Retail tobacco store means a retail store in which the sale of tobacco products designed for smoking comprises more than 50 percent of its receipts.     Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money.     Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other smoking equipment in any manner or form.     Sports arena means enclosed sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events.     Tobacco business means a sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, or other enterprise in which the primary activity is the sale, manufacture or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products or accessories, and in which the sale, manufacture or promotion of other products is merely incidental.     Work area means an area in a place of employment where one or more employees are routinely assigned and perform services for their employer. (Code 1977, § 9-8001) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-32. - Regulation of smoking. (a)  Smoking in public places. Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in all public places within all of Fulton County. (b)  Smoking in places of employment. Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking in all places of employment is prohibited in the following manner: (1)  Smoking shall be prohibited in auditoriums, gymnasiums, rest rooms, elevators, classrooms, hallways, employee medical facilities and rooms or areas which contain photocopying equipment or other office equipment used in common, and in company vehicles occupied by more than one person unless the occupants of such vehicle agree that smoking may be permitted. (2)  Smoking shall be prohibited in conference rooms and meeting rooms, unless everyone in that room agrees that smoking may be permitted. (3)  Notwithstanding the prohibitions in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, employers in places of employment shall: a.  Provide nonsmoking employees with a smoke-free work area. b.  Provide for contiguous nonsmoking areas in employee cafeterias and lunch rooms. The contiguous nonsmoking areas in employee cafeterias and lunchrooms shall be sufficient to meet employee demand. An employer may not determine that no such demand exists. c.  Not be required to make any expenditures or structural changes to create a smoke-free work area. If an employer cannot, after using its best efforts, comply with an employees' request for a smoke-free work area, the employer shall designate that employee's work area as a smoke-free work area. (Code 1977, § 9-8002) 
Sec. 86-33. - Exceptions.     The regulations of smoking pursuant to this article shall not apply in the following areas: (1)  Private homes, private residences, and private automobiles. (2)  Bars. (3)  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests, except for those rooms designated by such hotels and motels as no-smoking rooms. (4)  Retail tobacco stores and tobacco businesses. (5)  A designated smoking area in a food service establishment, provided that such designated smoking area shall not comprise more than 50 percent of a food service establishment's seating capacity. (6)  A designated smoking area in place of employment, except that no designated smoking area shall be permitted in any health care or child facility. (7)  Work areas in any place of employment so long as: a.  The work area is exclusively occupied by smokers; b.  Everyone in the work area reaches an agreement that smoking may be permitted; c.  The work area is subject to regular entrance by the public or nonsmokers; and d.  The work area is separate from a smoke-free work area by floor-to-ceiling walls or some other means, equally effective in reducing the effects of smoke on the smoke-free work area, other than portable air cleaning devices. (8)  A designated smoking area in a public place. (9)  Banquet or meeting rooms when these rooms are being used for private functions. (10)  Persons residing within long-term care facilities, as that terms is defined by state law, so long as the resident does not interfere with the rights of others or unless prior to admission the resident, guardian, or representative is informed of written admission policies which limit or ban smoking. (11)  Jails, prisons, municipal, county and state places of incarceration wherein persons who are charged with the commission of criminal offenses or have been convicted of criminal offenses are housed. (12)  Wholly or partially enclosed private boxes in indoor sports arenas and in such designated smoking areas of the sports arena. (13)  Limousines under private hire by an individual or corporation. (Code 1977, § 9-8003) 
Sec. 86-34. - Declaration of smoke-free environment.     Nothing in this article shall be deemed, interpreted or construed to restrict or prohibit any person in charge of any public place or place of employment form designating that place a smoke-free facility and prohibiting smoking in areas which otherwise would be permitted by this article. (Code 1977, § 9-8004) 
Sec. 86-35. - Posting of signs. (a)  Because ordinances regulating smoking are primarily self-enforcing, adequate signage is important. (b)  "Smoking," "No Smoking," or the international symbol for no smoking, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle, with a red bar across it, whichever are appropriate, shall be conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is regulated by this chapter by the person in charge of such facility. Such signs shall be configured with a minimum size requirement of four inches by four inches and containing letters not less than one inch in height. (c)  Every food service establishment shall have posted at each entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that a nonsmoking section is available, and that smoking is allowed only in the designated smoking area. (Code 1977, § 9-8005) 
Sec. 86-36. - Enforcement. (a)  Although smoking ordinances are primarily self-regulating, enforcement of this article shall be the ultimate responsibility of the department of police. (b)  The city solicitor may initiate any action seeking enforcement of this article on the solicitor's own motion or upon information provided by any citizen. Any officer of the city police department also may initiate an action for violation of this article if a violation occurs in such officer's presence. Any other police officer whose jurisdiction is located within the city may initiate an action for violation of this article if a violation occurs in such officer's presence provided that the violation occurs within that officer's jurisdiction. (c)  Any owner, operator or manager of any establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of this article's provisions. (d)  In any dispute arising under this article, the need to breathe smoke-free air shall be given precedence over the need to smoke. (Code 1977, § 9-8006) 
Sec. 86-37. - Other applicable laws.     This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted or prohibited by other applicable laws, regulations or policies. (Code 1977, § 9-8007) 
Sec. 86-38. - Violations and penalties.     Any person who smokes or any person who allows smoking violation of this article, or any person who violates any provision of this article, shall be guilty of an offense punishable pursuant to section 1-8. Each and every violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1977, § 9-8009) 
Chapter 94 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Authority to foster human relations, § 1-102(c)(12). Cross reference— Equal employment opportunity clause in municipal contracts, § 2-1200; assistance to small and disadvantaged businesses, equal employment opportunity and purchasing and contracting, §§ 2-1356 et seq., 2-1411 et seq.; equal business opportunity, § 2-1441 et seq.; community relations commission, § 2-2046 et seq.; equal employment opportunity for city personnel, § 114-51 et seq. Land development code reference— Barrier free dwelling for physically disabled persons, § 8-2182. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 94-1—94-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 3-401. Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. 
Sec. 94-10. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Aggrieved person or person aggrieved means any person alleging an act of discrimination or an unlawful practice under articles I, II, III, IV, V or VI of this chapter, or any person who believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory practice or act or unlawful practice that is about to occur.     Chair refers to that person elected by the majority of the members of the human relations commission to supervise the administration of the human relations commission. In the event of a vacancy or in the absence of the chair so elected, the vice chair shall serve as chair.     Commission refers to the human relations commission of the city established in article II of the human relations code.     Disability, which includes physical and mental impairments, shall be interpreted co-extensively with the meaning given to that term under the Americans With Disabilities Act, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., except that if a person would be considered to have a disability but for the use of a mitigating measure, that person shall nevertheless be considered to have a disability within the meaning of this chapter.     Discrimination or discriminatory practice or act means any action or failure to act, whether by a single act or part of a practice, the effect of which is to adversely affect or differentiate between or among individuals, because of an individual's, or the perception of an individual's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal.     Domestic relationship status means the presence or absence of a domestic partnership or marital relationship and includes the status of married, separated, divorced, engaged, widowed, single, cohabitating, or domestic partnership, without regard for whether such relationship is between persons of the same or opposite sex. Domestic partnership shall have the meaning designated in section 94-131 of this chapter.     Familial status means the state of being a person who is domiciled with one or more minor children, with the permission of the parent or person with legal custody of such minor child or children.     Family includes a single individual.     Gender identity a person's gender identity can be shown by providing evidence, including, but not limited to, medical history, care or treatment of the gender identity, consistent and uniform assertion of the gender identity, or other evidence that the gender identity is sincerely held, as part of a person's core identity, and not being asserted for an improper purpose regardless of the individual's assigned sex at birth.     National origin includes ancestry.     Owner includes any person who owns, leases, subleases, rents, operates, manages, has charge of, controls or has the right of ownership, possession, management, charge or control of real property on their own behalf or on behalf of another.     Parental status means being a parent, step-parent, adoptive parent, guardian, foster parent or custodian of a minor child or children.     Person means one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, political subdivisions, labor unions, organizations, cooperatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, unincorporated organizations, trusts, trustees, or receivers, legal representatives, for-profit and not-for-profit associations and corporations, and business associations of whatever kind including without limitation general partnerships, limited liability partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies, business trusts, and joint ventures.     Senior citizen means, for purpose of this chapter, individuals as old or older than an age set for a senior category. The minimum age for the senior category may be set at 55 years or higher.     Sex shall be interpreted to include pregnancy, childbirth or related medical conditions.     Sexual orientation means heterosexuality, bi-sexuality or homosexuality. (Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2004-72, § 1, 10-8-04; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , §§ 1, 2, 12-14-16) 
Sec. 94-11. - Policy.     In the city, with its great cosmopolitan population consisting of large numbers of people of every race, color, creed, religion, sex, marital status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, and age, many of them with physical and mental disabilities, there is no greater danger to the health, morals, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants than the existence of groups prejudiced against one another and antagonistic to each other because of differences of race, color, creed, religion, sex, marital status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, and disability. The council finds and declares that prejudice, intolerance, bigotry and discrimination and disorder occasioned thereby threaten the rights and proper privileges of its inhabitants and menace the very institutions, foundations and bedrock of a free democratic society. (Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-12. - Retaliatory conduct prohibited.     It is an unlawful practice under this chapter for any person, owner, employer, labor organization, employment agency, or joint labor-management committee to: (1)  Aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing of any act defined in articles III, IV and V of this chapter as an unlawful practice; or to intimidate, harass, retaliate, obstruct or discriminate against a person in any manner because such person has (i) complied with or proposes to comply with provisions of articles I through VI of this chapter or (ii) has filed a complaint with the human relations commission pursuant to this article or (iii) has taken other legal action provided for by this article or (iv) has testified or assisted in any proceeding under this article, or any order issued thereunder or (v) has opposed any practice made an unlawful practice under this chapter; or to attempt, either directly or indirectly, to commit any act defined in this chapter to be an unlawful practice; or to apply any economic sanctions or to deny accommodations or membership privileges because of a persons' compliance with the provisions of this chapter; or (2)  Coerce, intimidate, threaten, or otherwise interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected under this chapter. (Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-13. - Severability clause.     In the event that any provision, section, subsection, clause, or right set forth in articles I through VI of this chapter is found to be unenforceable by a court of law, such provision shall be severed from the remainder of this chapter and such action shall not affect the enforceability of the remaining provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Secs. 94-14—-94-35. - Reserved. 
Sec. 94-36. - Created.     There shall be a human relations commission which shall be the official protector of the human relations principle. (Code 1977, § 5-9004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-37. - Composition; appointment; terms.     The human relations commission shall consist of seven members, divided into three classes—Class A, Class B, and Class C. Class A shall contain three members, and Class B and Class C shall each contain two members. After the phase-in period, members shall hold office for a three-year term staggered so that the membership terms of only one class of members shall expire each year. The initial members shall he appointed and designated to a class by the president of the council no later than January 1, 2001. The term of office of the initial Class A members shall expire on January 1, 2002, the term of office of the initial Class B members shall expire on January 1, 2003; and the term of office of the initial Class C members shall expire on January 1, 2004. After January 1, 2002, at the expiration of the terms of the initial Class A members, one Class A member shall be appointed by the president of council, one shall be appointed by the Mayor and one shall be appointed by the at-large councilmember in Post 1 in coordination with the councilmembers for Districts 1 through 4. At the expiration of the terms of the initial two Class B members, one Class B member shall be appointed by the mayor and one shall be appointed by the at-large councilmember in Post 2 in coordination with the councilmembers for Districts 5 through 8. At the expiration of the terms of the initial two Class C members, one Class C member shall be appointed by the president of council and one shall be appointed by the at-large councilmember in Post 3 in coordination with the councilmembers for Districts 9 through 12. At least one of the commission members appointed by the president of the council shall possess, in addition to the general qualifications set out in the Charter regarding members of the commission, a license to practice law in the State of Georgia and shall be an active member of and in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia. No person shall be appointed for more than two consecutive three-year terms. The membership of the commission shall reflect as nearly as practicable, the diversity of individuals protected under this ordinance and shall be comprised without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, or gender identity. (Code 1977, § 5-9004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 1, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 2004-72, § 2, 10-8-04; Ord. No. 2005-59, § 1, 9-27-05) 
Sec. 94-38. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-72, § 2, approved Oct. 8, 2004, repealed § 94-38 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to qualifications of chair as enacted by Code 1977, § 5-9005; as amended. 
Sec. 94-39. - Compensation.     All members of the human relations commission shall be non-salaried. The human relations commission is authorized to seek and procure pro bono assistance for its investigations from appropriate community and business organizations. (Code 1977, § 5-9004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 2, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 94-40. - Meetings; conduct of business. (a)  The human relations commission shall hold meetings once every six months and as necessary to accomplish the timely resolution of pending complaints. (b)  The commission shall conduct business in the manner generally provided by the Charter, and shall have the power to enact its own regulations to the extent such regulations are not inconsistent with this term of the Charter and this chapter. (c)  The city's law department shall provide legal assistance at the request of the human relations commission. (d)  The presence in person, telephonically, or by proxy of a majority of active commission members shall constitute a quorum at commission meetings. (e)  The director of the mayor's office of constituent services shall assign a constituent services specialist to serve as an administrative assistant to the human relations commission in the conduct of its business. (Code 1977, § 5-9004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 3, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 94-41. - Functions.     The human relations commission shall perform the following functions: (1)  Receiving, investigating and making recommendations to the Mayor and to appropriate city agencies for the resolution of complaints alleging violations of article(s) III (public accommodation), IV (fair housing), and V (private employment) of this chapter and within 30 days to secure a response. The procedures for handling such complaints are set forth in article VI, section 94-121 of this chapter. (2)  Upon its own motion, testing, investigating, making and filing complaints alleging violations of the human relations code. (3)  Making studies, conducting research and preparing recommendations as to needed ordinances and resolutions. (4)  Developing human relations plans and policies for the city and assisting in their execution and making investigations and studies appropriate to effectuate this article and to issue such publications and such results of investigations and research as in its judgment will tend to inform persons of the rights assured and remedies provided under this article, to promote goodwill and minimize or eliminate discrimination because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. (5)  Inquiring into incidents of the conditions which may lead to tension and conflict among racial, religious and nationality groups and to take such action within the authority granted by law to this office, as may be designed to alleviate such conditions, tension and conflict. (6)  Calling conferences of persons in the industries of housing, public accommodations, and employment to acquaint them with the requirements of articles I through VI of this chapter, and to endeavor with their advice to develop programs of voluntary compliance and enforcement. (7)  Furnishing any person with such technical assistance as the commission deems appropriate, and requiring the production for examination of any documents or items relating to any matter under investigation or in question before the commission. (8)  Receiving, investigating and making recommendations to the Mayor and to the appropriate city agencies for the resolution of complaints alleging instances of racial profiling and within 30 days to secure a response. (Code 1977, § 5-9004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 4, 9-24-02) 
Secs. 94-42—94-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NON-DISCRIMINATION IN PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, amended the title of art. III to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. Cross reference— Discrimination in admission fees or membership fees by premises at which alcoholic beverages are served, § 10-224; discrimination by lessee of Atlanta Cyclorama prohibited, § 46-1; discrimination by lessees of Civic Center, § 46-37. 
Sec. 94-66. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Distinctly private does not include any club, institution or membership organization that has more than 50 members, provides regular meal service and regularly receives payment for dues, fees, use of space, facilities, services, meals or beverages directly or indirectly from or on behalf of nonmembers for the furtherance of trade or business.     Furtherance of trade or business means: (1)  Payment by or on behalf of a trade or business organization. (2)  Payment made by an individual from an account which the individual uses primarily for trade or business purposes. (3)  Payment made by an individual who is reimbursed for the payment by the individual's employer or by a trade or business organization or other payment made in connection with an individual's trade or business, including entertaining clients or business associates, holding meetings or other business-related events. (4)  Payment made by an individual which is deducted from the individual's federal or state tax returns as a business expense.     Public accommodation shall mean and include any place, legal entity, store or other establishment, either licensed or unlicensed, which supplies goods or services to the general public and shall include, but not be limited to, the following types of services or facilities: hotels, or other establishments which provide lodging to transient guests, restaurants, cafeterias, lunchrooms, lunch counters, soda fountains or other facilities principally engaged in selling or offering for sale food for consumption upon the premises, financial and brokerage institutions, insurance carriers, motion picture houses, theaters, concert halls, sport arenas, stadiums or other places of exhibition or entertainment, swimming pools, bowling alleys and amusement parks, all retail establishments, all transportation carriers and mobile home parks, barber shops, beauty shops, other personal care facilities, and bars or taverns or other facilities engaged in selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the premises, and shall include public burial facilities when such facilities are owned and operated by any cemetery corporation or burial association. The term shall also mean any club, institution or membership organization that has more than 50 members either locally or nationally, and provides regular meal service, or regularly receives payment for dues, fees, use of space, facilities or services, without regard for whether such club, institution or membership organization has a permanent physical location.     Regularly receives payment means accepting as many payments during the course of a year as the number of weeks, any part of which a club, institution or membership organization is available for use by members or nonmembers per year, such payment being for dues, fees, use of space, facilities, services, beverages or meals. (Code 1977, § 5-9002; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-67. - Policy. (a)  This article vesting authority in the human relations commission to investigate and make recommendations to the mayor and to the appropriate city agency is an exercise of the police power of the city for the protection of the public welfare, health, peace and safety of the residents of the city. The council hereby finds and declares that the practice of discrimination against any person on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal in places of public accommodation constitutes matters of local concern and are contrary to the public welfare, health, peace and safety of the residents of the city. The human relations commission established in article II of this chapter is vested with authority to investigate and make recommendations to the mayor and appropriate city agency and to secure a response within 30 days pursuant to the provisions of this article in furtherance of this policy and in accordance with the procedures set forth in article VI of this chapter. (b)  No institution, club, organization or place of accommodation which sponsors or conducts any amateur athletic contest or sparring exhibit and advertises or bills such contest or exhibition as a Georgia state championship contest or uses the words "Georgia state" in its announcements shall be deemed a private exhibition within the meaning of this section. (Code 1977, § 5-9001; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 5, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , § 2, 12-14-16) 
Sec. 94-68. - Unlawful discrimination. (a)  Except as is exempted in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person, whether acting for himself/herself or another, being the owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent or employee of a public accommodation, to engage in or cause another to engage in any of the following prohibited acts, or to allow a subordinate employee of the public accommodation to engage in any of the following prohibited acts, in any public accommodation in the legal limits of the City of Atlanta: (1)  Denial, refusal, rejection, or granting or any privilege, service, goods, merchandise, advantage, facility, membership, commodity or accommodation because of an individual's, or the perception of an individual's, race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. (2)  Segregation of an individual, or requiring the placement of an individual in any separate group or subgroup of a club, institution or organization, or any separate section or area or time of usage of the premises or facilities of the public accommodation because of the individual's, or the perception of an individual's, race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. (3)  Publication, circulation, issuance, display, posting, placing, mailing, and/or maintenance of any written or printed communication, notice or advertisement or sign to the effect that any of the privileges, services, goods, merchandise, advantages, facilities, membership, commodities or accommodations of any public accommodation shall or may be refused, withheld from or denied any individual because of that individual's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. (4)  Publication, circulation, issuance, display, posting, placing, mailing, and/or maintenance of any written or printed communication, notice or advertisement or sign to the effect that the patronage or membership by any individual belonging to or purporting to be of any particular race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability status is unwelcome, objectionable or not acceptable, desired or solicited. (5)  Engaging in a prohibited act as defined in subsections (a)(1)—(4) against an individual or entity on the basis of the race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability of an individual with whom the discriminated-against individual or entity has a known relationship. (b)  Exemptions: Nothing in this section shall: (1)  Require any club, institution or membership organization to take action in violation of the associational rights granted by the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Georgia. (2)  Be construed to prevent children's clubs, institutions or membership organizations from restricting non-commercial accommodations, advantages, facilities, membership, and privileges to persons of the same sex, if such sex restriction is fundamental to the nature or purpose of the club, institution, or membership organization. (3)  Be construed to prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting its non-commercial accommodations, advantages, facilities, membership, and privileges to persons of the same religion. (4)  Be construed to prohibit treating disabled persons more favorably than non-disabled persons or to prohibit treating senior citizens more favorably than non-senior citizens. (5)  Be construed to prohibit offering discounts, special prices, or other special arrangements to children or families. (6)  Be construed to prohibit imposing age limits up to 21. (Code 1977, § 5-9003; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , § 2, 12-14-16) 
Sec. 94-69. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, repealed § 94-69 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to complaint procedure as related to discrimination. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 94-70—94-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FAIR HOUSING[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Charter reference— Bureau of housing and redevelopment, app. IV, § 25. State Law reference— Fair housing, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-200 et seq. 
Sec. 94-91. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 94-94 through 94-97.     Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the conservation or location therein of any such building, structure or portion thereof.     To rent means to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. (Code 1977, § 8-7001; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-92. - Policy.     The council declares that it is the policy of the city, in the exercise of its police powers for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare, and for the maintenance of peace and good government, to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city, free from restrictions and prejudice based upon race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, and disability. The human relations commission established in article II of this chapter is vested with authority to investigate allegations of discrimination in housing and to make recommendations to the mayor and city's housing agencies and to secure a response within 30 days pursuant to the provisions of this article in furtherance of this policy and in accordance with the procedures set forth in article VI of this chapter. (Code 1977, § 8-7001; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 6, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 94-93. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, repealed § 94-93 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to the administration of fair housing regulations. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 94-94. - Unlawful practices in selling or renting dwellings. (a)  Except as exempted by subsection (b) or (d) of this section or section 94-97, it shall be unlawful: (1)  To refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of the person's, or a perception of the person's, race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. (2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provisions of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of the person's, or a perception of the person's, race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. (3)  To make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation, or differential treatment, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or differential treatment based on a person's, or the perception of a person's, race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. (4)  To represent to any person because of the person's, or a perception of the person's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; (5)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. (6)  To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of: a.  That buyer or renter; b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or c.  Any person associated with that buyer or renter; or (7)  a. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a disability of: 1.  That person; 2.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 3.  Any person associated with that person. b.  For purposes of this subsection, discrimination includes: 1.  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 2.  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 3.  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that: i.  The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons; ii.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by disabled persons in wheelchairs; and iii.  All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: A.  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; B.  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations; C.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and D.  Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. c.  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usableness for physically disabled people, commonly cited as ANSI A117.1, suffices to satisfy the requirements of subsection (a)(7)b.3.iii. of this section. d.  In regard to disabled persons, discrimination includes, in connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct dwellings in such a manner that the dwellings have at least one building entrance on an accessible route, unless it is impracticable to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. (b)  (1) Nothing in this section, other than section (a)(3) of this section, shall apply to: a.  Any single-family dwelling sold or rented by an owner, if: 1.  Such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family dwellings at any one time; and 2.  Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on such owner's behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family dwellings at any one time; and 3.  Such dwelling is sold or rented: i.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesperson or person; and ii.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection (c) of this section; but nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or b.  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as the owner's residence. (2)  For the sale of any such single-family dwelling by a private individual owner not residing in such dwelling at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such dwelling prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period. (c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if the person: (1)  Has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; (2)  Has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of such person's own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or (3)  Is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by five or more families. (d)  Nothing contained in this section shall require that a dwelling be made available for rental or lease to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. (Code 1977, § 8-7003; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , § 2, 12-14-16) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-202. 
Sec. 94-95. - Unlawful denial of or discrimination in membership or participation in service or organization relating to selling or renting dwellings.     It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of the person's, or a perception of the person's, race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. (Code 1977, § 8-7005; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , § 2, 12-14-16) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-203. 
Sec. 94-96. - Discrimination in residential real estate related transactions; appraisals. (a)  As used in this section, the term residential real estate related transaction means any of the following: (1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance: a.  For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or b.  Secured by residential real estate; or (2)  The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction because of a person's, or the perception of a person's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. (c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. (Code 1977, § 8-7004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , § 2, 12-14-16) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-204. 
Sec. 94-97. - Permissible limitations in sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings by religious organizations or private clubs; housing for older persons. (a)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, creed, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. (b)  (1) As used in this subsection, the term housing for older persons means housing: a.  Provided under any state or federal program that the commissioner determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons as defined in the state or federal program; b.  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or c.  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. In determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this subsection, the commissioner shall develop regulations which require at least the following: 1.  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or, if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; 2.  That at least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and 3.  The publication of and adherence to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. (2)  Nothing in this article limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. The provisions in this article regarding familial status shall not apply with respect to housing for older persons. (3)  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons because of: a.  Persons residing in such housing as of March 12, 1989, who do not meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(1)a. or (b)(1)b. of this section; provided, however, that new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(1)a. or (b)(1)b. of this section; or b.  Unoccupied units; provided, however, that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(1)a. or (b)(1)b. of this section. (4)  Nothing in this article prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. (c)  Nothing in this article prohibits age limits up to 21 years of age. (Code 1977, § 8-7006; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , § 2, 12-14-16) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-205. 
Sec. 94-98. - Educational, conciliatory activities.     The human relations commission shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as in the commission's judgment will further the purposes of this article. The human relations commission shall call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with this article and the human relations commission's suggested means of implementing this article, and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement. The human relations commission shall consult with state and local officials and other interested parties to learn the extent, if any, to which housing discrimination exists in this city and whether and how enforcement programs might be utilized to combat such discrimination. In connection therewith, the human relations commission shall issue reports on such conferences and consultations as the human relations commission deems appropriate. (Code 1977, § 8-7008; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 7, 9-24-02) 
Secs. 94-99—94-103. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, repealed §§ 94-99—94-103 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to filing of complaints; investigations; civil actions by aggrieved persons; civil actions and cooperation with other agencies, respectively, as related to fair housing regulations. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 94-104. - Coercion prohibited.     It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of or on account of such person's having exercised or enjoyed or on account of such person's having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by sections 94-94 through 94-97. (Code 1977, § 8-7015; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-105. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, repealed § 94-105 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to public hearing authorized as related to fair housing regulations. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 94-106—94-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FAIR PRIVATE EMPLOYMENT 
Sec. 94-110. - Policy.     The council declares that it is the policy of the city, in the exercise of its police powers for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare, and for the maintenance of peace and good government, to assure equal employment opportunity to all persons, free from restrictions and prejudice based upon race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, and disability. The human relations commission established in article II of this chapter is vested with authority to investigate alleged incidents of discrimination and make recommendations to the mayor and appropriate city agency and to secure a response within 30 days pursuant to the provisions of this article in furtherance of this policy and in accordance with the procedures set forth in article VI of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 8, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 94-111. - Definitions.     [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:]     Employer means any person who has ten or more employees, or the employer's designee or any person acting in the interest of such employer, but shall not include any municipal, county, state, or federal governmental entity.     Employee means many person employed by, or applying for employment with, an employer, and shall include traditional workers, temporary workers, and part-time workers.     Employment agency means any person regularly undertaking with or without compensation to procure employees for an employer or to procure for employees opportunities to work for an employer and includes an agent of such a person.     Labor organization means any organization of any kind, any agency, or employee representation committee, group, association, or plan so engaged in which employees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours, or other terms or conditions of employment, and any conference, general committee, joint or system board, or joint council so engaged which is subordinate to a national or international labor organization. (Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-112. - Unlawful employment practices. (a)  Employer practices. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer: (1)  To fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his or her compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability; or (2)  To limit, segregate, or classify his or her employees or applicants for employment in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his or her status as an employee, because of such individual's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. (b)  Employment agency practices. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer for employment, or otherwise to discriminate against, any individual because of his or her race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability, or to classify or refer for employment any individual on the basis of his or her race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. (c)  Labor organization practices. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for a labor organization: (1)  To exclude or to expel from its membership, or otherwise to discriminate against, any individual because of his or her race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability; (2)  To limit, segregate, or classify its membership or applicants for membership, or to classify or fail or refuse to refer for employment any individual, in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of employment opportunities, or would limit such employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his or her status as an employee or as an applicant for employment, because of such individual's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability; or (3)  To cause or attempt to cause an employer to discriminate against an individual in violation of this section. (d)  Training programs. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for any employer, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs to discriminate against any individual because of his or her race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability in admission to, or employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other training. (e)  Printing or publication of notices or advertisements indicating prohibited preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination; occupational qualification exception. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer, labor organization, employment agency, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to print or publish or cause to be printed or published any notice or advertisement relating to employment by such an employer or membership in or any classification or referral for employment by such a labor organization, or relating to any classification or referral for employment by such an employment agency, or relating to admission to, or employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other training by such a joint labor-management committee, indicating any preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination, based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability, except that such a notice or advertisement may indicate a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based on religion, sex, or disability when religion, sex, or disability is a bona fide occupational qualification for employment and, in the case of disability, the employer, labor organization, employment agency, or joint labor-management committee has made reasonable accommodation for the disability to the full extent required by the Americans With Disabilities Act, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 12101. (f)  Prohibition of discriminatory use of test scores. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for a respondent, in connection with the selection or referral of applicants or candidates for employment or promotion, to adjust the scores of, use different cutoff scores for, or otherwise alter the results of, employment related tests on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. (g)  Impermissible consideration of protected factors in employment practices. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, an unlawful employment practice is established when the complaining party demonstrates that race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability was a motivating factor for any employment practice, even though other factors also motivated the practice. (Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-113. - [Violation.]     A violation of this Code section shall not be deemed a crime. (Ord. No. 2001-20, § 3, 3-13-01) 
Sec. 94-114. - Exclusions from unlawful employment practices.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this article: (1)  It shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to hire and employ employees, for an employment agency to classify, or refer for employment any individual, for a labor organization to classify its membership or to classify or refer for employment any individual, or for an employer, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs to admit or employ any individual in any such program, on the basis of his or her religion, sex, or disability in those certain instances where religion, sex, or physical or mental ability is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that particular business or enterprise, provided that in the case of disability, the employer, labor organization, employment agency, or joint labor-management committee has made reasonable accommodation for the disability to the full extent required by the Americans With Disabilities Act, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 12101; and (2)  It shall not be an unlawful employment practice for a school, college, university, or other educational institution or institution of learning to hire and employ employees of a particular religion if such school, college, university, or other educational institution or institution of learning is, in whole or in substantial part, owned, supported, controlled, or managed by a particular religion or by a particular religious corporation, association, or society, or if the curriculum of such school, college, university, or other educational institution or institution of learning is directed toward the propagation of a particular religion. (Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2001-20, § 2, 3-13-01) Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-20, § 2, approved March 13, 2001, redesignated former section 94-113 as section 94-114. 
Secs. 94-115—94-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT 
Sec. 94-120. - Prosecution of ordinance violations in Atlanta Municipal Court. (a)  In addition to or in lieu of filing a complaint with the human relations commission, an aggrieved person may seek prosecution of alleged violations of the human relations ordinance in Atlanta Municipal Court as in other cases of alleged ordinance violations pursuant to section 62-26, et seq., of the Code of Ordinances. (b)  In the event that the human relations commission has obtained a settlement or conciliation agreement with the consent of the aggrieved party, the basis for an ordinance violation is limited to the enforcement of the terms of the agreement or settlement. (c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to invalidate or restrict or deny any right or remedy any person may have under state or federal law or preclude any cause of action in court otherwise provided for the violation of any person's civil rights. (Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2001-20, § 1, 3-13-01; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 9, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 94-121. - Filing of complaints with the human relations commission. (a)  Person aggrieved. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory practice may, by such person or such person's attorney at law, make, sign and file with the director of the mayor's office of constituent services a verified complaint in writing which shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have committed the unlawful discriminatory practice complained of and which shall set forth the particulars thereof and contain such other information as may be required by the commission. (b)  Who may file complaint. Any person or organization claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged unlawful discriminatory practice which allegedly occurred in the City of Atlanta may, or by an attorney, make, sign and file a complaint. If a complainant lacks mental capacity, the complaint may be filed on the complainant's behalf by a person with a substantial interest in the welfare of the complainant. (c)  Form of complaint. The complaint shall be in writing either on a form promulgated by the commission or on any paper suitable for a complaint. The original shall be signed and verified before a notary public or other person duly authorized by law to take acknowledgments. Nunc pro tunc verifications of a complaint or an answer thereto may be made at any time that the absence of a signed verification is noted. (d)  Contents. A complaint shall contain the following: (1)  The full name and address of the person making the complaint (referred to as the complainant). (2)  The full name and address of each respondent against whom the complaint is made. (3)  The alleged unlawful discriminatory practice and a statement of the particulars thereof. A respondent may reply in writing to the complainant, after the service of a notice of hearing, for a more definite or detailed statement, and such application shall state, with specificity, the instances in which the complaint is insufficiently definite and detailed. If the complainant or complainant's attorney believes that the complaint is not sufficiently definite or detailed, complainant or the complainant's attorney shall provide such a statement. Otherwise the application shall be referred to the chair after the hearing has commenced, who shall issue such directions, if any, as may be appropriate. (4)  The date of the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice and, if the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice is of a continuing nature, the dates between which the continuing acts of discrimination are alleged to have occurred. (5)  A statement as to any other action, civil or criminal, instituted in any other forum and as to any pending administrative proceeding based on the same grievance as is alleged in the complaint, together with a statement as to status or disposition of such other action. (e)  Time of filing. A complaint must be filed within 180 days from the date of the occurrence of the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice. If the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice is of a continuing nature, the date of its occurrence shall be deemed to be any date subsequent to its inception, up to and including the date of its cessation. (f)  Manner of filing. The complaint may be filed by personal delivery, ordinary mail, registered mail or certified mail, addressed to the office of the director of the mayor's office of constituent service. (g)  Service. A copy of the complaint shall be promptly served by the complainant on the respondents and all persons the commission deems to be necessary parties, on its own motion or on application of a respondent. A copy of all amendments to the complaint shall be served by the commission on all parties to the proceeding, except such amendments to the complaint as are made to more correctly identify a respondent or necessary party previously served. A copy of any complaint filed against any respondent who has previously entered into a conciliation agreement or as to whom findings of the commission have been rendered shall be delivered to the mayor, president and the head of the city department having jurisdiction over the subject matter of the controversy. (h)  Investigation and recommendation. (1)  Within 30 days after receiving a complaint, the director of the mayor's office of constituent services shall conduct an initial investigation and report the findings to the commission. Such investigation may be made by field visit, written or oral inquiry, conference, or any other method or combination thereof deemed suitable in the discretion of the director of the mayor's office of constituent services or other designee. The commission shall receive the report and attempt to eliminate any unlawful discriminatory practice complained of by further investigation, conference, conciliation and/or persuasion. In the event that the director of the mayor's office of constituent services finds no basis for continuing an investigation, he or she shall report this finding to the commission which may either dismiss or continue the investigation. (2)  In conducting an investigation the director of the mayor's office of constituent services or other designee as well as the commission shall have access at all reasonable times to records, documents, individuals and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation. (i)  Conciliation: The terms of a conciliation agreement may include provisions requiring the respondent to refrain from the commission of unlawful discriminatory practices in the future and may be agreed upon by the members of the commission and the respondent. (k)  Successful conciliation. (1)  If the respondent agrees to the terms of conciliation, the chair shall prepare a proposed conciliation agreement and serve it upon the complainant. (2)  If the complainant agrees to the terms of the agreement or fails to object to such terms within 15 days after its service, the commission may formally enter into the proposed conciliation agreement by issuing its findings embodying such conciliation agreement. The commission shall serve a copy of such findings order upon all parties to the proceeding. (l)  Consideration of complainant's objections. (1)  An objection by a complainant to a proposed conciliation agreement must be written and shall be delivered or mailed within 15 days of the service of the proposed agreement. If the agreement is served by mail, service shall be accomplished by registered mail or certified mail. The objections shall be specific and in detail. (2)  Unless such objections are met or withdrawn within ten days after service thereof, the commission shall notice the complaint for hearing. (3)  However, the commission, when it finds the terms of a conciliation agreement to be in the public interest, may execute such agreement if the respondent is still willing to execute it by issuing its findings. The commission may either dismiss the objections as being without substance or may hold a hearing limited to the objections of the complainant, unless the respondent demands a hearing on the merits of the charges of unlawful discriminatory practice by serving an answer including such a demand. (m)  Notice of hearing and answer. A notice of hearing with the complaint shall be served upon the respondent and the procedures for filing an answer shall be as follows: (1)  Time of filing answer. At least three business days prior to the hearing, the respondent may file a written answer to the complaint, sworn to and subject to the penalties of perjury. (2)  Place and manner of filing answer. The answer must be filed with the commission in the office of the director of the mayor's office of constituent services and a copy served upon each attorney of record and upon each party not represented by an attorney. (3)  Form of answer. The answer shall be in writing, the original being signed and sworn to subject to the penalties of perjury. The answer shall contain the party's address, telephone number and, if made by an attorney, the name, address and telephone number of the attorney. The answer shall contain a separate and specific response to each and every particular of the complaint or a denial of any knowledge or information thereof sufficient to form a belief. Any allegation in the complaint which is not denied shall be deemed admitted. (4)  Failure to answer. If the respondent fails to answer the complaint, the hearing shall proceed on the evidence in support of the complaint. (n)  Procedure of hearings. (1)  The chair shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity. All relevant evidence shall be admitted, unless privileged or excessively cumulative. (2)  The chair shall have full authority to control the procedure of the hearing, subject to this article, and to rule upon motions and objections. (i)  In conducting an investigation under this article, the chair shall have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation, provided that the chair first complies with the provisions of the fourth amendment to the Constitution of the United States relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The chair may request that the committee on council exercise its subpoena power on behalf of the commission to compel access to or the production of such materials or the appearance of such persons and may issue interrogatories to a respondent. The chair or the chair's designee may administer oaths. (ii)  Upon written application to the chair, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the chair to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the chair. Any subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on its face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that it was issued at the respondent's request. (iii)  Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the chair to revoke or modify the subpoena. The chair shall grant the petition if the chair finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous or for other good reason. (iv)  In the event that a person refuses to obey a subpoena, the chair or other person at whose request it was issued may request that the committee on council petition for its enforcement in the Atlanta Municipal Court. (3)  All oral testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation, and a record of the proceeding shall be made and kept. (4)  Attempts at conciliation shall not be received in evidence. (5)  Evidence shall not be received in camera. However, where desirable, the chair, in consultation with counsel, may provide for the use of devices such as deletion of names and coding in order to protect personal privacy or information, including trade secrets. (6)  No person shall communicate with the chair subsequent to the commencement of a hearing on any matter relating to the case, other than a status inquiry, unless a copy of such communication is sent to all parties to the proceeding. (o)  Findings after hearing. (1)  Form and content. Findings shall be issued after hearing and shall set forth the findings of fact of the commission, the determination and, in the discretion of the chair, an opinion containing the reasons for the decision. (2)  Service. Copies of findings signed by the chair shall be sent to the complainant, to the respondent by certified mail and all other parties, with copies also sent to the mayor, president and the head of the appropriate department of city government. (3)  The mayor and the appropriate department of city government shall have 30 days in which to respond to the commission's findings. The Mayor may respond to a finding of discrimination by taking any of the following actions or a combination thereof, or other actions as deemed appropriate: (a)  In the event of a finding of discrimination in either public accommodations, housing or employment. A letter may be sent asking the alleged offender desist from the actions complained of. (b)  In the event of a finding of discrimination in public accommodations where the alleged offender holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages, the mayor may ask the police licenses and permits unit to conduct an investigation to determine whether due cause exists to recommend revocation of such license pursuant to Code of Ordinances section 10-109. (c)  In the event of a finding of discrimination in either public accommodations, housing or employment where the alleged offender holds a professional or business license issued by the city or is doing business with the city pursuant to a contract, the mayor may inquire whether due cause exists to revoke such license or contract. (d)  In the event of a finding of discrimination in either public accommodations, housing or employment, the mayor may request that any city agency conduct an investigation into whether the alleged offender has complied with any other city ordinance which applies to the alleged discriminatory conduct. (e)  In the event of a finding of discrimination in either public accommodations, housing or employment, the mayor may request that any appropriate community agency conduct an investigation into whether the alleged offender has complied with any state or federal law which applies to the alleged discriminatory conduct. The director of the mayor's office of constituent services shall maintain current information pertaining to public accommodation, housing and employment resources in the metropolitan Atlanta area so that a timely response may be made by the mayor to the commission's finding, of discrimination. (p)  Compliance investigation. (1)  Investigation. Not later than one year from the date of a conciliation agreement, findings after hearing or after stipulation and at any other times in its discretion, the commission shall investigate whether the respondent is complying with the terms of such agreement or recommendations. (Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 10, 9-24-02) 
Secs. 94-122—94-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, renumbered former art. V as art. VII to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. Cross reference— Domestic partners eligible for certain employee benefits, § 2-858. 
Sec. 94-131. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Declaration of domestic partnership means a form provided by the city business license office in which two people agree to be jointly responsible for the necessities of life incurred during the domestic partnership and that all qualifications for domestic partnership are met when the declaration is signed. The form will require both partners to provide reasonable proof of their primary, regular and permanent residence address. The form must be signed under penalty of perjury and must be witnessed and notarized. The business license office shall, within 30 days of the effective date of this article (June 29, 1993), make such forms available. To help defray costs associated with the providing and filing of these forms, the business license office is authorized to charge a fee as set forth in section 94-134 for each completed form.     Domestic partnership means two people of the opposite or same gender who live together in the mutual interdependence of a single home and have signed a declaration of domestic partnership in which they attest that: (1)  They share the same primary, regular and permanent residence and have lived together for the previous six months (documentation must be submitted verifying joint residency); (2)  They have a committed personal relationship with each other that is mutually interdependent and intended to be lifelong; (3)  They agree to be jointly obligated and responsible for the necessities of life for each other; (4)  They are not married to anyone or legally separated from anyone; (5)  They are 18 years of age or older; (6)  They are competent to enter into a contract; (7)  They are not related by blood closer than would bar marriage in the state; (8)  They are each other's sole domestic partner; (9)  They agree to file a termination of domestic partnership within 30 days if any of the facts set out in this definition change; and (10)  Any prior domestic partnership in which their domestic partner participated with a third party was terminated not less than six months prior to the date of such affidavit, and, if such earlier domestic partnership had been acknowledged under provisions of this section, that notice of termination of such earlier domestic partnership was provided to the city in writing to the business license division of the department of finance not less than six months prior to the date of said affidavit. If the prior domestic partnership was terminated by the death of the partner, there shall be no waiting period.     Live together means that two people claiming domestic partnership status share the same primary, regular and permanent residence. It is not necessary that the legal right to possess the residence be in both names. Domestic partners do not cease to live together if one leaves the shared residence for a period not to exceed one year, but intends to return. Whether the relationship between these two people is or is not sexual is in no way relevant for the purposes of determining eligibility under this article.     Necessities of life means the cost of basic food, shelter, clothing and medical care. The individuals need not contribute equally or jointly to the cost of these expenses as long as they agree that both are responsible and obligated for the cost. (Code 1977, § 14-13001; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-132. - Legal effect of declaration of domestic partnership. (a)  Rights and duties created. Neither this article nor the filing of a declaration of domestic partnership shall create any legal rights or duties from one of the parties to the other, except those which specifically refer to domestic partnership. Nothing in this article shall be construed to explicitly or implicitly create a marital relationship. This chapter does not attempt to alter or affect the laws in the state that regulate any private or civil relationships. (b)  Duration of rights and duties. Once a domestic partnership ends, the partners will incur no further obligations to each other under this article. (Code 1977, § 14-13002; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-133. - Establishing existence of domestic partnership. (a)  Generally. Domestic partners who are residents of the city or who are employees of the city may establish the existence of their domestic partnership by presenting an original declaration of domestic partnership to the business license office of the city along with reasonable proof of residence such as, but not limited to, a driver's license, utility bill, or state I.D. card. The business license office will file the declaration and provide the partners with a certificate showing that the declaration was filed with the business license office. The standard declaration form will be available in the business license office during normal business hours. (b)  Limitations. The business office shall only accept for filing declarations of domestic partnership submitted by domestic partners who have residence in the city or who are employees of the city. (c)  Amendments to the declaration. A partner may amend a declaration of domestic partnership filed with the business license office at any time to show a change in such partner's primary residence address. (d)  New declarations of domestic partnership. No person who has created a domestic partnership may create another until six months after a notice of termination has been signed and filed with the business license office; provided, however, that if the domestic partnership ended because of the death of the other party, a new declaration may be filed any time after the notice of termination has been filed. (e)  Evidence of domestic partnership. Any person who requires a person to provide evidence of the existence of a domestic partnership must accept the declaration of domestic partnership, but may choose not to require the declaration, as complete proof of the existence of a domestic partnership. The declaration of domestic partnership may be considered reasonable proof for qualifying for any present or future domestic, partner benefits that private corporations or public institutions offer. (Code 1977, § 14-13003; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-134. - Records, copies, filing fees. (a)  Records of the city's business license office. The clerk at the city's business license office shall keep a record of all declarations of domestic partnerships, amendments to declarations of domestic partnership, and all notices of termination. The records shall be maintained so that amendments and notices of termination shall be filed with the declaration of domestic partnerships to which they pertain. (b)  Filing fees. The business license office shall charge a fee of $30.00 for the filing of a declaration of domestic partnership and shall charge a fee of $5.00 for providing certified copies of declarations, amendments or notices of termination. There will be no charge for the filing of amendments or notices of termination. (Code 1977, § 14-13004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-135. - Visitation in jail/prison/detention facilities.     Where visitation to persons held in detention, prison or jail facilities operated or controlled by the city is restricted, such detained person's domestic partner shall be allowed visitation privileges identical to a married person's spouse, and the children of the domestic partner or the parents of the domestic partner, and shall be afforded visitation on the same terms, hours and conditions as immediate family members. (Code 1977, § 14-13005; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) Cross reference— Correctional facility rules, § 98-176 et seq. 
Sec. 94-136. - Ending domestic partnerships. (a)  Termination. A domestic partnership ends when: (1)  One partner sends the other partner written notice that such partner has ended the domestic partnership; (2)  One of the partners dies; or (3)  The partners no longer meet one or more of the qualifications or conditions for domestic partnership. (b)  Notice of termination. (1)  To domestic partners. When a domestic partnership ends, the partners must execute a notice of termination naming the partners and stating that the partnership has ended. The notice of termination must be dated and signed under penalty of perjury by at least one of the partners. The notice of termination must be filed with the business license office. (2)  To third parties. A domestic partner who has given a copy of a declaration of domestic partnership to any third party in order to qualify for any benefit or right must, whenever the domestic partnership ends, give that third party a copy of the notice of termination. If a partner has died, the surviving partner must give notice of termination to those third parties such partner knows were given copies of the declaration by the deceased partner in order to qualify for a benefit or right. The notice of termination must be sent to the parties identified in this section within 60 days of the termination of the domestic partnership. (3)  Failure to give notice. Failure to give notice as required by this subsection will neither prevent nor delay termination of the domestic partnership. (4)  Termination by city. Notwithstanding any of the above, the city shall terminate a domestic partnership if the city finds that the partners no longer meet one or more of the qualifications or conditions for domestic partnership. The effective date of such termination will be retroactive to the date that such qualifications or conditions were no longer met. (Code 1977, § 14-13006; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-137. - Enforcement. (a)  Any person may apply to the state court of Fulton County or the superior court of Fulton County, or the appropriate courts in DeKalb County for residents of the city in DeKalb County, depending upon jurisdictional requirements for enforcement of the provisions of this article in law or equity. (b)  Any action to enforce this article must be commenced no later than two years after the claimed violation. (Code 1977, § 14-13007; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-138. - Limited effect.     Nothing in this article shall be deemed to alter, affect or conflict with the laws of the state or the United States. (Code 1977, § 14-13009; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Secs. 94-139, 94-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ATLANTA COMMISSION ON WOMEN[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, renumbered former art. VI as art. VIII to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 94-141. - Created.     There shall be a commission to focus on women issues in the city. (Ord. No. 2000-18, § 1, 3-28-00) 
Sec. 94-142. - Powers and duties. (a)  (1)  To determine the scope and nature of the studies and research to be undertaken by the commission, including, but not limited to: a.  Educational needs of and opportunities for women; b.  Social security and tax laws as they affect women; c.  Women's health issues; d.  Political, legal, civil, property, and social rights of women; e.  Employment policies in the public and private sector and their impact on the wage earning capacity of women; f.  Child care issues; g.  Domestic violence and public safety; h.  Employee and wage equity; i.  Traditional public housing; j.  Equity in recreation and sports services; and k.  Aging issues. (2)  To collect and disseminate information regarding the state of women in the city; (3)  To review and analyze the laws of the city and their impact on the lives of the women of the city; (4)  To consult with and advise the city council and any agency, board, commission or authority on matters pertaining to women; (5)  To promote, encourage, and provide advisory assistance to other state, local and community women's professional, business and civic organizations; (6)  To propose to the city through the appropriate city department the application for and acceptance of public or private grants, devices and bequests; and (7)  To hold public hearings, conduct studies or take any other action the commission deems necessary to fulfill its responsibilities. (b)  All executive departments, agencies, boards, commissions and authorities shall cooperate with the commission in the performance of its duties. (c)  The commission on women shall provide a preliminary report to the mayor, president of council and members of Atlanta City Council within 90 days outlining its mission statement and initial areas of focus which shall be related to those issues which are in the purview of the city government. (d)  The commission shall publish an annual report summarizing its activities, findings, and recommendations of the commission. The report shall be submitted to the president of council and the members of the city council. (Ord. No. 2000-18, § 1, 3-28-00) 
Sec. 94-143. - Composition; appointment; terms. (a)  The commission shall be composed of 19 members to be appointed and confirmed by the council as follows: (1)  Two members shall be appointed by the mayor; (2)  Two members shall be appointed by the president of council; (3)  One member by each council member (districts 1 through 12); (4)  One member by each council member (at large posts 1 through 3). (b)  In the event that appointments are not made within 45 days after the adoption of this legislation, the committee on council can proceed to make appointments to the commission. The lack of full appointment to the commission shall in no way affect the work of said commission provided that a majority of the commission has been appointed. A quorum shall still constitute a majority of the commission. (c)  The initial term of the commission members appointed by the mayor shall be for three years; the initial term of the commission members appointed by the president of council shall be for three years; all other appointments shall be for a two years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a two-year term. (d)  The commission shall elect a chairperson, vice chairperson and a secretary from among its members for terms of two years, and any member shall be eligible for successive election to such office by the commission. A quorum for transacting business shall be a majority of the members of the commission. (e)  Each person appointed to the commission shall be a resident of the City of Atlanta. Any member who ceases to be a resident of the city of Atlanta during the term of their membership shall be removed from the commission and the appointing officials shall appoint a new member to the commission. (f)  The commission shall be staffed by the council staff. (Ord. No. 2000-18, § 1, 3-28-00; Ord. No. 2008-32(08-O-0999), § 1, 5-27-08) 
Chapter 98 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Mayor's committee on drug control, § 2-1956 et seq.; criminal justice coordinating councils, § 2-2011; bonding agents, § 30-551 et seq.; private security services and private investigators, § 30-1231 et seq.; street patrols, § 30-1341 et seq.; courts, ch. 62; emergency services, ch. 70; burglar or robbery alarm systems, § 70-26 et seq. Land development code reference— Impact fees for emergency services, § 19-1001 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 98-1. - Code enforcement agents. (a)  The police chief or his or her designee shall have the authority to appoint code enforcement agents who shall not be regular police officers in the department of police but who shall have the power to serve subpoenas, citations and summonses for the violation of, or failure to comply with, any section of this Code or ordinance of the city, the requirements thereof or of any order or direction made pursuant to the provisions contained in any section of this Code or ordinance of the city which shall not have been complied with. (b)  All persons appointed or who shall desire appointment as code enforcement agents to operate within the city shall apply to the police chief or his or her designee for a permit. The police chief or designee may set an expiration date for the permit. (c)  The application for the permit required by subsection (b) shall show the name and address of the applicant, the applicant's job title, place of employment, and department head and shall have attached thereto a photograph of the applicant, together with sufficient fingerprints to definitely identify the applicant. The applicant and his or her department head must sign the application. The department head must attest to the applicant's training for the job and the physical and mental qualifications to be a code enforcement agent. The police chief or his or her designee is specifically authorized to require additional information from the applicant or department head. Upon receipt of the application, the police chief or designee shall cause a criminal history check to be made of the applicant and shall thereafter grant or deny the permit. (d)  Only city employees in job classifications that require enforcement of the City Code are eligible to become code enforcement agents. The chief of police and the commissioner of human resources or their designees will create and maintain a list of such job classifications. (e)  The city solicitor will train applicants in enforcement procedures prior to their being sworn in. (f)  On satisfactory completion of the enforcement training, the police chief or designee will issue badges and identification cards to the code enforcement agents and swear them in. The police chief or the chief's designee is authorized, in accordance with Georgia law, to administer the oath of office to all code enforcement agents employed by the City of Atlanta. When taken, the agent shall sign the official oath and copies thereof shall be filed with the Fulton county Probate court and in the personnel records of the agent so sworn. That oath shall take the following form: I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the City Code of Ordinances and the policies of my department of employment, to perform the duties imposed upon me as a Code Enforcement Agent of the City of Atlanta, Georgia, and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties thereof. I further swear that I will enforce the ordinances of the City of Atlanta that are particular to my job assignment, abide by the direction given me by the Office of the City Solicitor and the Atlanta Police Department, and uphold the Ethics Code of the City of Atlanta. In doing so, I will be mindful of the trust that has been placed in me to improve the quality of life and make every effort to live up to that trust. I will not persecute the innocent, nor help to shield the guilty, nor will I be influenced in the discharge of my duties by fear, favor, affection, or reward. (g)  Status as a code enforcement agent does not confer any additional benefits or authority other than specified in this section. A code enforcement agent does not have the power of physical arrest. (h)  The chief of police or designee will investigate allegations of abuse of authority by a code enforcement agent; the employing department head will cooperate with the investigation. The chief of police or designee may suspend or cancel a person's status as code enforcement agent if he or she fails to meet the requirements or abuses the authority. (i)  The department head of a code enforcement agent must return the badge and identification card to the police department if that agent's status is canceled under subsection (h) or if the individual is no longer employed by that department in a qualifying classification. (j)  It shall be unlawful for any person, not authorized as a code enforcement agent, to act as a code enforcement agent or to represent such person as a code enforcement agent or to wear the badge of a code enforcement agent. (Ord. No. 2004-66, § 1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2006-71, § 1, 10-11-06) 
Sec. 98-2. - Criminal justice coordinating council. (a)  There is hereby created a criminal justice coordinating council to study, monitor, assess, and make recommendations for improving all aspects of the city's criminal justice system. (b)  The criminal justice coordinating council shall consist of the following members: the mayor or his/her designee, the president of the city council or his/her designee, the chief of police or his/her designee, the chief of the department of corrections or his/her designee, the chief judge of the municipal court or his/her designee, the chair of the city council public safety and legal administration committee or his/her designee, the city solicitor or his/her designee, the public defender or his/her designee, the director of the office of code compliance or his/her designee, and two (2) members of the community appointed by a majority of the members of the criminal justice coordinating council. (c)  (1)  Each associate judge of the municipal court shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting member. (2)  Each member shall serve during the term of his/her service to the city, or at the pleasure of his/her appointing authority. (d)  The criminal justice coordinating council shall meet no less than four times annually. A majority of its members shall constitute a quorum for conducting business. The chairperson shall be elected from among the council's members. The members shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. (e)  The criminal justice coordinating council shall undertake and fulfill the following duties: (1)  To develop, encourage and coordinate communication and cooperation among all components of the city's criminal justice system, and all law enforcement agencies operating within the city; and between the criminal justice system and the citizens of this city; (2)  To study, research, investigate, monitor, evaluate, and report objectively all aspects of the criminal justice system; (3)  To take steps to ensure the maximum possible appearance rate for police officers for all hearings on all charges of violations of the city; (4)  To put in place an effective system for reporting to the police chief any absences from scheduled court appearances by police officers; (5)  To take steps to educate the court system and judges as to appropriate alcohol and substance abuse facilities for repeat offenders of the Atlanta City Code's public intoxication or substance abuse ordinances, including but not limited to sections 10-8 and 10-9 of the city Code, and to encourage the use of alcohol and substance abuse treatment facility rehabilitation as alternative sentencing measures for such repeat offenders; (6)  To study the effectiveness of the probation office in monitoring and supervising repeat offenders of violations of the Atlanta City Code; (7)  To create, when directed by council and the mayor, a public report which reflects the performance of the criminal justice system for the city, including convictions and dismissal rates, reasons for dismissals, if any, numbers of repeat offenders and sentencing for such repeat offenders, including the numbers of repeat offenders convicted of public intoxication or substance abuse ordinances referred to alcohol or substance abuse program, as well as having mentally impaired persons referred to the appropriate evaluation and diagnostic facility for care and treatment; (8)  To make findings and recommendations to the mayor, the city council, the police chief, department of corrections, the chief judge and administrator of the court, and the public, no less than annually as to needed changes in the criminal justice system, and legislation required to effectuate such changes; and (9)  To develop recommendations for innovative programs that may be undertaken to address identifiable problems with the objective of preventing and reducing crime and enforcing and properly prosecuting violations of the City Code. (Ord. No. 1996-86, § 1, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 1997-09, § 1, 2-25-97; Ord. No. 1998-20, §§ 1, 2, 3-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-1, §§ 1, 2, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 9, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2011-55(11-O-1766), § 1, 12-14-11; Ord. No. 2013-15(13-O-0640), §§ 1, 2, 5-15-13) 
Sec. 98-3. - Mattie's Call.     The chief of police and or his/her designee shall have the authority to establish the implementation of a "Mattie's Call" in the City of Atlanta. This authority shall include, but not be limited to: (1)  The chief of police and/or his/her designee to establish criteria to determine when a missing person case justifies the activation of a "Mattie's Call." (2)  Coordination and support by Metro Atlanta Law Enforcement, emergency management and broadcasters to issue an urgent bulletin in missing persons cases that involved persons with Alzheimer, Dementia, and other mental disabling conditions. (3)  Development of a contact list for the immediate dissemination of information regarding the missing person to agencies that shall include, but not be limited to: the Emergency Alert System (EAS), all broadcast media, Metro Atlanta Homeless Shelters and Facilities, hospitals, jails, area law enforcement agencies such as MARTA, state, college, university, downtown ambassadors, private security agencies, mayor's office of constituents services, mayor's office of communications, as well as, city field personnel through various departments (watershed, public works, planning, traffic and transportation, etc.). (Ord. No. 2004-39, § 1, 6-24-04) 
Secs. 98-4—98-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 98-10. - Atlanta Public Safety and Judicial Facilities Authority. (a)  [Created]. There is hereby created an authority to be known as the "Atlanta Public Safety and Judicial Facilities Authority", hereinafter called the authority. (b)  Directors. (1)  The authority shall consist of five voting directors who are residents of the City of Atlanta and two ex-officio non-voting members, who shall be the Chief Operating Officer of the City of Atlanta and Chief Financial Officer of the City of Atlanta. (2)  Four directors will be appointed by a majority of council members present and voting on these appointments. The appointments will be made in the following manner: Council Districts 1, 2, 3, 4 and Post 1; Council Districts 5, 6, 7, 8 and Post 2; Council Districts 9, 10, 11, 12 and Post 3; Council President. One director shall be appointed by the mayor. No appointment may be a current member of the city council. (3)  All appointments shall be for a term of four years with the option to be reappointed for another four year term. The directors shall receive no compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. (4)  The authority may make bylaws and regulations for the governing of the authority and may delegate to one or more officers, agents, and employees of the authority such powers and duties as may be deemed necessary and proper. (5)  A majority of the full board of voting directors shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business of the authority; further, any action with respect to any project of the authority must be approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the voting directors. (c)  Officers. The authority shall hold an organization meeting in January of every year to elect one of the directors as chairperson and one as vice chairperson. The authority shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer or a secretary-treasurer, either of who may be a director. (d)  Powers and duties. The authority shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: (1)  To bring and defend actions; (2)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; (3)  To acquire, construct, improve, or modify, to place into operation, and to operate or cause to be placed into operation, either as owner of all or of any part in common with others, a project or projects within the political subdivision in which the authority is activated and within other political subdivisions, and to pay all or part of the cost of any such project or projects from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations or any other contribution, all of which the authority is authorized to receive, accept, and use; (4)  To acquire, in its own name, by purchase on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper or by gift, grant, lease, or otherwise, real property or rights and easements therein and franchises and personal property necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, which purposes shall include, but shall not be limited to, the constructing or acquiring of a project, the improving, extending, adding to, reconstructing, renovating, or remodeling of any project or part thereof already constructed or acquired, or demolition to make room for such project or any part thereof, and to insure the same against any and all risks as such insurance may, from time to time, be available; the authority may also use such property, rent or lease the same to or from others, make contracts with respect to the use thereof, or sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or grant options for any such property in any manner which the authority deems to the best advantage of itself and its purposes; provided, however, that the powers to acquire, use, and dispose of property as set forth in this paragraph shall include the power to acquire, use, and dispose of any interest in such property, whether divided or undivided, which acquisition may result in the ownership of such property or any part thereof in common with any other party or parties, public or private; and title to any such property of the authority, however, shall be held by the authority exclusively for the benefit of the public; (5)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be acquired or constructed; provided that all private persons, firms, and corporations, this state, and all political subdivisions, departments, instrumentalities, or agencies of the state or of local government are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to counties and municipal corporations and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of project activities and facilities or either of them by the authority to such political subdivisions and by such political subdivisions to the authority for a term not exceeding 50 years; (6)  To exercise any one or more of the powers, rights, and privileges conferred by this Code section either alone or jointly or in common with one or more other public or private parties or public and private parties; in any such exercise of such powers, rights, and privileges jointly or in common with others with respect to the construction, operation, and maintenance of project facilities, the authority may own an undivided interest in such facilities with any other party with which it may jointly or in common exercise the rights and privileges conferred by this chapter; the authority may enter into an agreement or agreements with respect to any such project facility with the other party or parties participating therein; any such agreement may contain such terms, conditions, and provisions, consistent with this chapter, as the parties thereto shall deem to be in their best interests; any such agreement may include, but need not be limited to, provisions for the construction, operation, and maintenance of such project facility by any one or more party of the parties to such agreement, which party or parties shall be designated in or pursuant to such agreement as agent or agents on behalf of itself and one or more of the other parties thereto, or by such other means as may be determined by the parties thereto, and may include provisions for a method or methods of determining and allocating, among or between the parties, costs of construction, operation, maintenance, renewals, replacements, improvements, and disposals with respect to such facility; in carrying out its functions and activities as such agent with respect to construction, operation, and maintenance of such a facility, such agent shall be governed by the laws and regulations applicable to such agent as a separate legal entity and not by any laws or regulations which may be applicable to any of the other participating parties; provided, however, the agent shall act for the benefit of the public; notwithstanding anything contained in any other law to the contrary, pursuant to the terms of any such agreement, the authority may delegate its powers and duties with respect to the construction, operation, and maintenance of such facility to the party acting as agent; and all actions taken by such agent in accordance with the provisions of such agreement may be binding upon the authority without further action or approval of the authority; (7)  To extend credit or make loans to any person, firm, corporation, or other industrial entity for the planning, design, construction, acquisition, or carrying out of any project, which credit or loans shall be secured by loan agreements, mortgages, security agreements, contracts, and all other instruments or fees or charges, upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall determine reasonable in connection with such loans, including provision for the establishment and maintenance of reserves and insurance funds, and in the exercise of powers granted by this Code section in connection with a project for such person, firm, corporation, or other industrial entity, to require the inclusion in any contract, loan agreement, security agreement, or other instrument of such provisions for guaranty, insurance, construction, use, operation, maintenance, and financing of a project as the authority may deem necessary or desirable; (8)  To acquire, accept, or retain equitable interests, security interests, or other interest in any property, real or personal, by mortgage, assignment, security agreement, pledge, conveyance, contract, lien, loan agreement, or other consensual transfer in order to secure the repayment of any moneys loaned or credit extended by the authority; (9)  To accept, receive, and administer gifts, grants, appropriations, and donations of money, materials, and property of any kind, including loans and grants from the United States of America, this state, or a unit of local government or any of their agencies, departments, authorities, or instrumentalities upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America, this state, or a unit of local government or any of their agencies, departments, authorities, or instrumentalities shall impose; to administer trusts; and to sell, lease, transfer, convey, appropriate, and pledge any and all of its property and assets; (10)  To invest any accumulation of its funds in any fund or reserve in any manner that public funds of this state or its political subdivisions may be invested; (11)  To do any and all things necessary or proper for the accomplishment of the objectives of this chapter and to exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state, including the power to employ professional and administrative staff and personnel and to retain legal, engineering, fiscal, accounting, and other professional services; the power to purchase all kinds of insurance, including, without limitation, insurance against tort liability and against risks of damage to property; the power to borrow money for any of the corporate purposes of the authority; the power to indemnify and hold harmless any parties contracting with the authority or its agents from damage to persons or property; and the power to act as self-insurer with respect to any loss or liability; provided, however, that obligations of the authority other than revenue bonds, for which provision is made in this chapter, shall be payable from the general funds of the authority and shall not be a charge against any special fund allocated to the payment of revenue bonds; (12)  To mortgage, convey, pledge, or assign any properties, revenues, income, tolls, charges, or fees owned or received by the authority; (13)  To borrow money and issue its revenue bonds and bond anticipation notes from time to time and to use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, adding to, or improving such project, or for the purpose of refunding any such bonds of the authority theretofore issued; and to otherwise carry out the purposes of this chapter and to pay all other costs of the authority incident to, or necessary and appropriate to, such purposes, including the providing of funds to be paid into any fund or funds to secure such bonds and notes, provided that all such bonds and notes shall be issued in accordance with the procedures and subject to the limitations set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-63-9; provided, however, that the maximum aggregate amount of bonds issued shall be $50,000.000.00; and (14)  As security for repayment of authority obligations, to pledge, mortgage, convey, assign, hypothecate, or otherwise encumber any property, real or personal, of such authority and to execute any trust agreement, indenture, or security agreement containing any provisions not in conflict with law, which trust agreement, indenture, or security agreement may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such obligations either in payment of principal or interest or in the performance of any term or condition contained in such agreement or indenture; this state, on behalf of itself and each county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district therein waives any right which it or such county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district may have to prevent the forced sale or foreclosure of any property of the authority so mortgaged or encumbered, and any such mortgage or encumbrance may be foreclosed in accordance with law and the terms thereof. (e)  No bond or other obligations of and no indebtedness incurred by the authority shall constitute an indebtedness or obligation of the State of Georgia or of the City of Atlanta, nor shall any act of the authority in any manner constitute or result on the creation of an indebtedness of the State of Georgia or the City of Atlanta. (Ord. No. 2005-71, § 1, 11-14-05) 
Secs. 98-11—98-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF POLICE[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Charter reference— Department of police, app. IV, §§ 1(k), 43 et seq. Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq.; personnel, ch. 114. Related laws reference— Police pensions, § 6-221 et seq. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific constitutional grant of authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; police officer training, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 98-26. - Duties of police chief. (a)  It shall be the duty of the police chief to formulate and implement rules and regulations for the operations of the department of police. The police chief shall have the authority to promulgate departmental rules and regulations that are consistent with the terms or intent of the laws and ordinances relating to the department. Any changes in the rules and regulations for the operation of the department of police, including the employee work rules, shall be executed by the police chief in writing. The chief of police shall provide the municipal clerk with a copy of the Police Department Work Rules from time to time whenever the same are amended. (b)  It is also the duty of the police chief to: (1)  Administer corrective and disciplinary action for violation of rules and regulations of the department of police. Such action may include but is not limited to formal counseling, oral or written reprimands, retraining and suspension without pay or with or without a monetary fine not to exceed $500.00, which shall be deducted from the employee's salary, or termination. (2)  Suspend any employee with or without pay pending an investigation in which the employee is accused of misconduct if the police chief or the police chief's designee determines that the suspension is in the best interest of the department, the public welfare or accused employee. (3)  Cause an investigation into an employee's conduct when the employee's conduct indicates probable cause for disciplinary action. (4)  Develop other necessary procedures for the implementation of the rules and regulations. (Ord. No. 2002-80, §§ 1, 2, 11-8-02) 
Sec. 98-26.1. - Community policing training and preparedness program (CoPTAP).     Notwithstanding the foregoing section 98-26 and any and all contrary ordinances, rules, regulations, policies, practices, or procedures, all members of each class of graduates from the police academy, shall be assigned to foot patrol duty for a period of not less than eight weeks. In cases of public emergency which threatens life, health, property or public safety, said police officers may be temporarily reassigned in response to such extreme emergency in the discretion of the chief of police. (Ord. No. 2008-29(07-O-2137), § 1, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 98-27. - Functions and duties of department.     The functions and duties of the department of police are as follows: (1)  Preserve the public peace and good order of the city by the enforcement of applicable laws and ordinances. (2)  Conduct community relations programs. (3)  Conduct crime prevention programs. (4)  Protect the rights of persons and property. (5)  Administer licensing procedures for all licenses issued under the police powers of the city. (6)  Enforce all ordinances applicable to licenses and permits issued under the police powers of the city. Charter reference— Similar provisions, app. IV, § 45. 
Sec. 98-28. - Hiring and firing authority; qualifications of chief. (a)  The police chief is the hiring and firing authority for the department of police, subject to applicable ordinances, rules and regulations. (b)  In addition to the qualifications set out in Charter, appendix IV, section 3(a), the police chief shall possess experience at a senior supervisory level in the administration and management of police services. The experience must have been gained by virtue of previous government employment. Charter reference— Additional qualifications of police chief, app. IV, § 43. 
Sec. 98-29. - Bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire. (a)  The department of police shall contain the bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire. (b)  The functions and duties of the bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire shall include all matters related to inspecting, licensing and regulating taxicabs and vehicles for hire and enforcing provisions of law pertaining to such vehicles. Charter reference— Similar provisions, app. IV, §§ 44, 46. Cross reference— Vehicles for hire, ch. 162. 
Sec. 98-30. - Qualifications of director, bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire.     In addition to the general qualifications set out in Charter, appendix IV, section 3(a), the director, bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire shall have the following qualifications: (1)  Graduation from an accredited college or university with a baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in business administration, public administration or a related field and three years of supervisory or subsupervisory experience. Experience must have included fleet management, transportation maintenance, management or administration of a regulatory agency or a related area; (2)  Eight years of experience at a supervisory level which include five years in the areas specified in subsection (1) of this section; or (3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications stated in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
Sec. 98-31. - Police recruits. (a)  The police chief or a designee shall select police recruits from the eligible list, in the order of grade rating on this list, and these selections shall be made in accordance with applicable civil service laws, rules and regulations. (b)  Any person selected as a police recruit shall be duly notified and, upon accepting and reporting for duty, shall be appointed for a probationary period that shall commence upon appointment and continue until six months after the completion of the required training at the police academy. (c)  If the conduct and efficiency shall at any time during the probationary period be unsatisfactory to the police chief or the chief's designee, the person shall be notified in writing, relieved from duty and the person's name stricken from the list. If the person's services during this probationary period shall have been satisfactory to the chief, the person shall be so notified in writing, and the person's name shall be placed on the list of regular police officers. 
Sec. 98-32. - Assignments to certain positions without competitive examination.     The police chief or the chief's designee is authorized, in that official's discretion, to make assignments to the positions of investigator, senior police officer, major or deputy chief, without reference to competitive examination or eligible lists. Any investigator, senior police officer, major or deputy chief so designated may be removed or transferred at the pleasure of the police chief. Such person so removed or transferred shall thereupon resume the nondiscretionary rank or title in the department of police held immediately prior to such person's discretionary assignment as an investigator, senior police officer, major or deputy chief. Such person shall be notified in writing of the removal or transfer. 
Sec. 98-33. - Chaplains. (a)  The police chief or the chief's designees shall have the authority to allow chaplains in the department of police to utilize city-owned vehicles so long as the use is in the performance of the functions and duties of the department. (b)  Chaplains in the department of police who are authorized by the police chief to utilize city-owned vehicles shall be subject to chapter 2, article XII of this Code. (c)  For the purposes of this section, a chaplain in the department of police is a person who is appointed by the police chief to perform designated services in regard to the functions and duties of the department without remuneration. 
Sec. 98-34. - Police guards. (a)  Classification created. The classification of police guard is created in the department of police. (b)  Status, qualifications, compensation. A police guard shall be a temporary employee of the department of police of good character and good health, who shall serve at the pleasure of the police chief. (c)  Uniform, badge. A police guard shall be permitted to wear the regular uniform of the department of police together with a badge of the department of police and a shoulder patch marked "police guard" while engaged in the performance of duties. (d)  Control, supervision, function. When employed, a police guard shall be subject to control and direction by the superior officers of the department of police and shall at all times obey any lawful command or order issued by them. A guard may be assigned to guard duty anywhere in the city, to assist the regular police officers in the performance of regular duties. (e)  Employment by police chief. The police chief shall have the power and authority to employ as many police guards as there are regular position vacancies existing in the department of police from time to time, subject to any ordinance or civil service regulation governing temporary appointments. (f)  Ineligibility for benefits. A police guard shall be employed only on a part-time and a temporary basis and shall not be entitled to any of the benefits of civil service, group insurance, pension benefits or other benefits accorded regular police officers. 
Sec. 98-35. - Uniforms. (a)  Sworn employees. The city council shall provide a uniform or uniform allowance each year to the sworn uniformed employees of the department of police, the costs thereof, or the sum to be paid, not to exceed $800.00. In lieu of providing uniforms to sworn employees who do not wear uniforms as a result of their assignments, the city council shall pay the sum of $800.00 per year, half all sums payable pursuant to this section to be paid in April of each year and half in October. (b)  Civilian employees. The city council shall provide for a uniform or uniform allowance each year to non-sworn personnel of the police department who are required to wear uniforms the cost thereof not to exceed $300.00 per year, to be provided at the discretion of chief of police. (Ord. No. 1997-43, § 2, 8-11-97; Ord. No. 2015-52(15-O-1452), § 1, 10-28-15 ) 
Sec. 98-36. - Evaluation of employee's mental or physical fitness.     The police chief is authorized to order an employee of the department of police to submit to an evaluation of the employee's mental or physical fitness for duty, when there is an articulable basis to suspect that an employee may be physically or mentally impaired. If such an evaluation reveals possible impairment, the police chief may make whatever administrative reassignment deemed necessary by the police chief and seek approval from the commissioner of personnel and human resources to invoke the disability process set forth in chapter 114, article IV, division 12 of this Code. 
Sec. 98-37. - Employee grievances.     It is the policy of the department of police to process and, hopefully, resolve all employee grievances in a manner that is fair and equitable, within as short a timeframe as reasonably possible. To that end, grievances filed by employees of the police department will be addressed pursuant to the procedures and timeframes set out in chapter 114, article VI, division 2 of this Code. 
Sec. 98-38. - Arrest powers.     The police shall have arrest powers in accordance with local, state and federal law. 
Sec. 98-39. - Crimes manifesting evidence of prejudice. (a)  The police chief or the chief's designee shall acquire data on the incidence of criminal acts that manifest evidence of prejudice based on based upon the victim's, or the perception of the victim's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, HIV/AIDS infection, or disability. The crimes with respect to which such data shall be acquired are as follows: homicide, involuntary manslaughter, aggravated assault, simple assault, simple battery, robbery, armed robbery, aggravated battery, burglary, disorderly conduct, aggravated sodomy, rape, theft, arson, vandalism, trespass, criminal defamation, false imprisonment, terroristic threats, damage to or vandalism of property and such other crimes the police chief considers appropriate. (b)  The police chief or the chief's designee shall establish guidelines for the collection of such data, including the necessary evidence and criteria that must be present for finding of evidence of prejudice, and establish procedures for carrying out the purposes of this section. (c)  The police chief shall provide training for police officers in identifying, responding to and reporting all criminal offenses motivated by prejudice based on based upon the victim's, or the perception of the victim's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, HIV/AIDS infection, or disability. (d)  The police chief or the chief's designee shall quarterly publish a statistical summary of data acquired under this section. A copy of the data shall be made available for public review at the office of the municipal clerk of the city and at the central branch of the county public library. (Ord. No. 1997-17, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 2000-77, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 98-40. - Authority to claim compensation or property due because of information provided to federal or state agencies. (a)  The police chief shall be authorized to act on behalf of the city to claim compensation or property due to the city by virtue of information provided to the Internal Revenue Service, the state department of revenue or similar agencies, by agents of the department of police, pursuant to 26 USC 7623 or any similar provisions under state law or due to the city pursuant to state and federal forfeiture statutes or any similar state or federal statute. (b)  Any such information or evidence provided or secured through investigations conducted by agents or officers of the department of police shall remain the property of the state or city or the United States in accordance with state and United States law. (c)  Any such compensation paid to the city by virtue of information provided or secured through investigations conducted by agents of the department of police shall be paid directly into such account maintained for the benefit of law enforcement activities by the department of police, and all property so received shall be entrusted to disposal or utilization by the police chief or the chief's designee. 
Sec. 98-41. - Reward fund for drug convictions. (a)  The police chief is authorized to establish a reward fund for persons who provide the department of police with information which results in the arrest and conviction of persons for violation of the drug laws of the state, when such arrest and conviction is investigated and prosecuted by the department of police. The reward to any such person claiming such reward shall be in an amount not to exceed $500.00 for each case for which information is provided. (b)  The police chief is authorized to receive on behalf of the city donations from the public to establish this reward fund and to pay such rewards in accordance with the exhibit B attached to the ordinance from which this section derives. (c)  The identity of any person who provides information pursuant to this section shall be confidential. The chief financial officer, in conjunction with the police chief or the chief's designee, shall establish methods of payment of any such rewards so as to maintain the confidentiality of any such person; further, all donations received on behalf of the city for this reward fund shall be deposited in the city trust fund and held for disbursement in accordance with the methods of payment determined by the chief financial officer and the police chief or the designees of those officials. 
Sec. 98-42. - Physical fitness program. (a)  There is established a program of physical fitness for all officers and employees of the department of police. The police chief, after having consulted with professionals in the field of physical fitness, shall be responsible for the implementation and administration of the program. The program may include but not be limited to voluntary participation by officers and employees in organized sports activities such as basketball, football, baseball, softball and individual sports such as boxing, wrestling, golf, bowling and tennis. (b)  The police chief is authorized to establish and implement a program of organized calisthenics which shall be supplemental to any voluntary activities on the part of department of police employees, and these calisthenics shall be engaged in under the direction of the chief or the chief's designee during regular hours of duty and shall be carried on only at those locations designated by the chief. (c)  The departments and agencies of the city are authorized and directed to cooperate and assist, upon the request of the police chief, in the implementation and conduct of the physical fitness program. (d)  The police chief shall ascertain a valid test standard respecting individual physical fitness and shall, annually, examine all officers and employees of the department of police participating in the program and shall maintain records in a manner so as to reflect individual and departmental employee improvements in physical fitness. (e)  All donations and contributions received from participants in the program and from others shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. All funds to be used for implementing and conducting the program shall be appropriated in the same manner as other city funds, and the expenditures for the purposes of the program shall be first approved as provided by the Charter. (f)  The police chief or the chief's designee shall require of every person participating in the program with respect to team or individual sports, as provided for in this section, prior to such person so participating and in consideration of allowing such person to so participate, the execution by such participant of a written release, waiver and renouncement of any and all liability, claims and causes of action against the city, the officers and employees of the city, which such participant may have with respect to any injury or damage such participant might receive or incur while so participating, including but without limitation disability in line of duty or death in line of duty benefits under the pension laws governing the pension fund of which such participant may be a member. (g)  Should any temporary total disability result from such voluntary participation by an officer or employee of the city in the program of supervised activity, as provided for in this section, the police chief is authorized to provide for medical care and treatment the same as for on-duty injuries and shall further be authorized to designate, pursuant to written medical authorization, that the temporary absence from regular duty is physical fitness injury (P-F-I), and the employee shall be so designated upon the payroll records and entitled to salary benefits as provided employees injured while on duty. 
Sec. 98-43. - Police benevolent association. (a)  Authority to establish. The department of police is authorized to provide for the establishment and creation of an association for benevolent purposes among the employees of the department of police. Five trustees or directors of the association shall be elected from the employees of the department of police, and they shall serve as the governing body of the association. (b)  Source of funds. The police chief is authorized to direct all revenues from vending machines located in police facilities to the benevolent association and to provide that these funds will be used only for retirement gifts and other similar purposes. (c)  Use of funds. The governing body of the association shall be authorized to direct the use of the revenue for retirement gifts and other benevolent purposes that benefit all employees of the department of police. 
Sec. 98-44. - Fees for copying records. (a)  The charges for copying records of the department of police shall be as established in chapter 2, article XIV of this Code. (b)  Fees so collected shall be accounted for and paid into the city treasury. (c)  Persons designated as victims in the victim data section of the police report shall not be required to pay a fee for the first copy of the offense reports. Cross reference— Records management, § 2-1781 et seq. 
Sec. 98-45. - Fees for furnishing information about criminal history record. (a)  The police chief is authorized to make a charge as established in chapter 2, article XIV of this Code for furnishing information as to criminal history records created by or in the custody of the department of police. (b)  Fees so collected shall be accounted for by the department of police and shall be forwarded to the department of finance to be paid into the city's treasury through the medium of a miscellaneous receipt. (Code 1977, § 11-2017) Cross reference— Records management, § 2-1781 et seq. 
Sec. 98-46. - Fees for fingerprinting services. (a)  The department of police is authorized to charge a fee of $20.00 for each set of fingerprint cards produced and authenticated by the department. (b)  Fees so collected shall be accounted for by the department of police and shall be forwarded to the department of finance to be paid into the city's treasury though the medium of a miscellaneous receipt. (c)  Persons requiring fingerprinting services due to their status as applicants for employment with the City of Atlanta shall not be required to pay a fee for these fingerprinting services. (Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 2, 7-14-08) 
Sec. 98-47. - Candidates addressing employees at police facilities.     It shall be unlawful for candidates for any office, public or private, to address employees of the department of police at any police facility. The police chief, deputy chiefs, majors or other officers in charge of the facility are directed to prevent and prohibit any speaking by candidates advocating their election to office. It is not the intention of this section to prevent candidates for office from visiting any facility and speaking to individual employees of the department of police, but it shall be unlawful for them to make public speeches or to converse with the members to such an extent as to interfere with the discharge of their duties. It shall be the duty of the police chief, deputy chief or majors and other officers in charge of the facility to see that compliance with this section is enforced and that no one, by public speaking, personal consultation or otherwise, shall obstruct or interfere with any police officer in the discharge of the officer's duties. (Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 1, 7-14-08) Note— Formerly § 98-46. Cross reference— Elections, ch. 66. 
Sec. 98-48. - Issuance and revocation of press or media identification cards. (a)  Issuance. The police chief or the chief's designee is authorized to issue press or media identification cards entitling the holder thereof to pass police lines for the purpose of gathering and editing spot news or photographing news events in the city. Such press or media identification cards shall be issued to those engaged in gathering reports, editing or photographing current news events for newspapers, press associations, newsreels, television stations and radio stations. (b)  Revocation. (1)  The police chief or the chief's designee is vested with the authority to revoke any press or media identification card for improper use thereof by the holder, and upon notice thereof to the employer it shall be the duty of the holder and the employer to immediately surrender the press or media identification card so revoked. (2)  Any abuse or willful violation of these stipulations by the holder or the employer may result in revocation of the card. (3)  A revoked card may not be reinstated to a media representative without a letter from the representative's employer stating why the card should be reinstated. Reinstatement of a revoked media identification card will then be left to the discretion of the police chief or the chief's designee. (c)  Penalty. No person shall counterfeit or imitate or attempt to counterfeit or to imitate any such press or media identification card so issued by the police chief or the chief's designee nor shall any person use or exhibit or attempt to use or exhibit any such press or media identification card or any card similar in appearance thereto for the purpose of obtaining press privileges or of passing police lines without authority of the police chief or the chief's designee nor shall any person represent that such person is a holder of such press or media identification card, unless such person is the actual authorized holder. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be subject to a fine up to $1,000.00. (Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 1, 7-14-08) Note— Formerly § 98-47. 
Sec. 98-49. - Destruction of dangerous or deadly weapons used in commission of crimes. (a)  Any bludgeon, metal knuckles, firearm or knife, designed for the purpose of offense and defense, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like kind used in the commission of a crime is declared to be a nuisance per se. (b)  The police chief is authorized and directed to destroy all dangerous or deadly weapons used in the commission of a crime. The police chief or a designee shall wait one year from date of conviction or after the exhaustion of any appeals related to the case before destroying the weapon. (c)  Whenever the department of police or any of the officers thereof receive or take pistols, knives, metal knuckles and similar weapons as unclaimed property or from prisoners or others, these weapons shall not be sold by the department of police or any of the officers thereof, but they shall be destroyed. The police chief or the chief's designee shall be authorized to destroy these weapons. (Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 1, 7-14-08) Note— Formerly § 98-48. 
Sec. 98-50. - Disposal of stolen property.     Any property which may be obtained or received by the police from persons who have stolen it or otherwise shall be disposed of in the following manner: (1)  Sale authorized. The police chief or the chief's designee is authorized to sell unclaimed property at public auction pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section. All the property shall be taken to the property management section and safely kept for 60 days. If after that time it shall be unclaimed by persons making satisfactory proof of title, the police chief shall, for two days, put an advertisement in the newspaper in which the city's advertisements are published, describing the property to be sold in lots, and giving such information about the property as will put the owner or other persons having knowledge thereof on notice that, at the expiration of 20 days, the property will be subject to sale. The advertisement shall also state the time and place the property shall be sold and that the proceeds shall be turned in to the city treasury. The advertisement shall also state that, within 20 days of the last advertisement provided for in this subsection, any person making satisfactory proof of title or any person who shall claim title to the property advertised shall have the right to request a hearing before the police chief or a designee to establish, by evidence, proof of title to the property claimed. Upon request for a hearing, the police chief or a designee, shall, within ten days, set a time and place for the hearing and shall notify the person claiming title to the advertised property of the hearing. If there is no request for a hearing within the time specified in this subsection, or if at the time set for a hearing there is no satisfactory proof of ownership, the police chief is authorized to proceed with a sale of the property. (2)  Records required. The police chief shall keep a complete record showing when the property came into the possession of the department of police, where it was found or from whom it was taken, a description of the property, when it is claimed and by whom or when advertised and when and for what amount sold. (3)  Disposition of proceeds. All money arising from these sales shall be turned over to the chief financial officer. (4)  Police use of unclaimed property. The property which has been processed, for sale at public auction, as provided by this section, may in the discretion of the police chief be utilized by the department of police with records of the property's disposition maintained as provided by this section. (Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 1, 7-14-08) Note— Formerly § 98-49. 
Sec. 98-51. - Donations of horses and dogs for police purposes. (a)  The police chief is authorized to accept donations of horses and dogs from private donors on behalf of the city for legitimate police uses and purposes, after suitability has been established by the department of police, and to institute appropriate inventory controls which allow for practical and humane disposition of animals which are determined to be no longer suited to police uses and purposes. (b)  The police chief shall develop an appropriate standard operating procedure governing the acceptance of horses and dogs from private donors and the humane disposition of such horses and dogs. (Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 1, 7-14-08) Note— Formerly § 98-50. Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
Sec. 98-52. - Authorization for the chief of police to administer oath of office for sworn police officers.     The police chief or the chief's designee is authorized, in accordance with Georgia law, to administer the oath of office to all sworn police officers employed by the City of Atlanta. When taken, the officer shall sign the official oath and copies thereof shall be filed with the Fulton County Probate Court and in the personnel records of the officer so sworn. That oath shall take the following form: I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia, to perform the duties imposed upon me as a Police Officer of the City of Atlanta, Georgia, and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties thereof, and preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States of America and the Constitution of the State of Georgia. I swear that I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I am prohibited from holding by the laws of the State of Georgia, nor am I the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I further swear that I will enforce the criminal laws of the State of Georgia and the ordinances of the City of Atlanta, abide by the rules and standard operating procedures governing the Atlanta Police Department, adhere to the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics published by the International Association of Chiefs of Police, and uphold the Ethics Code of the City of Atlanta. In doing so, I will be mindful of the trust that has been placed in me to improve the quality of life and make every effort to live up to that trust. I will not persecute the innocent, nor help to shield the guilty, nor will I be influenced in the discharge of my duties by fear, favor, or affection, reward, or the hope thereof. So help me God. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 74, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 1, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 2006-70, § 1, 10-11-06; Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 1, 7-14-08) Note— Formerly § 98-51. 
Sec. 98-53. - Office of code enforcement. (a)  The department of police shall contain the office of code enforcement. (b)  The functions and duties of the office of code enforcement shall include: (1)  Administration and enforcement of The Atlanta Housing Code; (2)  Administration and enforcement of The Atlanta Commercial, Institutional, and Industrial Building Maintenance Code; (3)  Administration and enforcement of housing demolition and in rem activities. (Ord. No. 2011-57(11-O-1768), § 4, 12-14-11) 
Secs. 98-54—98-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROMOTION POLICY[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Supplemental provisions pertaining to police promotions, § 114-226 et seq. 
Sec. 98-61. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Appointing authority means the police chief.     Appointing rule means the process by which selections are to be made from among candidates on an eligible list.     Atlanta Police Leadership Institute means a program of the Atlanta Police Department focused on developing an Atlanta Police Department sworn employee's leadership skills through the provision of advanced law enforcement leadership training and employee development opportunities throughout a sworn employee's progression through the ranks of the Atlanta Police Department.     Discretionary ranks means ranks to which appointments are not controlled by this division and to which appointments can be made at the discretion of the police chief.     Eligible means a sworn employee who meets requirements for a rank and whose name is on an eligible list.     Eligible list means a list of the names of employees who have competed for a rank of employment and are qualified to be appointed, listed in rank order according to the results of the examination process.     Examinations means selection procedures used to determine the relative qualifications of applicants for promotion.     Minimum qualifications means the requirements established in the rank specification for experience and demonstration of the necessary proficiencies in a lower rank in order to compete for promotion.     Probationary employee means an employee who has been appointed to a rank from an eligible list but who has not successfully completed a 12-month probationary period in the rank.     Probationary period means a period of 12 months following a promotional appointment during which the police chief, in consultation with designated subordinate commanders, determines whether or not the probationary employee has the requisite knowledge, skills and abilities necessary to perform the work behaviors of the rank at an acceptable level. The probationary period is considered a noncompetitive part of the examination for the rank.     Rank means a group of positions which have similar duties and responsibilities, require similar qualifications, can be designated by a single title indicative of the level of responsibility of the positions and for which the same schedule of pay is applicable.     Rank specification means a written document based upon an applicable job analysis which shall include but not be limited to descriptions of the responsibilities and work of the rank; illustrative examples for each of the major functional responsibilities within the rank; a description of the critical work behaviors of the rank and the knowledge, skills and abilities necessary for the performance of such work behaviors; and the minimum qualifications necessary in order to compete for the rank.     Status means the condition of a sworn member who has acquired a rank in the manner established by this division and by the overall provisions of Chapter 114, which condition is retained by a probationary employee in the employee's lower rank unless the probationary period for the new rank is completed successfully and status in the new rank is gained. Sworn employees who fail their probationary period shall be returned to a position in their rank in which they have continued to have status during the probationary evaluation portion of the examination.     Sworn member means an employee in the department of police, as established by the definition of the unclassified service contained in section 114-76. ( Ord. No. 2015-19(15-O-1172), § 1, 5-27-15 ) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-62. - Scope.     This division sets forth the rules and procedures to be followed by the police chief in making promotional decisions within the department of police. The rules and procedures are designed to establish a promotional system that provides for the selection of superior officers based solely upon merit and fitness for promotion, as ascertained by job-related and valid selection procedures developed in accordance with the governing legal guidelines and appropriate professional standards. 
Sec. 98-63. - Applicability.     The rules and procedures in this division shall apply to promotions in the department of police to the ranks of police sergeant and lieutenant. (Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 1, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 98-64. - Ranking of members. (a)  Sworn members of the department of police in the nondiscretionary ranks of police officer, sergeant, lieutenant and captain on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be given status in the nondiscretionary ranks they hold as of that date. Sworn members of the department of police holding discretionary ranks on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be given status in the nondiscretionary ranks they held at the time they were appointed to the most recent discretionary ranks. (b)  Effective July 1, 2010, the rank of Police Captain was reclassified as a discretionary rank. (Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 2, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 98-65. - Amendments.     Amendments to this division may be recommended to the city council by the police chief or initiated by the city council. In determining such recommendations the police chief, at the chief's discretion, may hold hearings at which time both proponents and opponents of proposed amendments can be heard. Notice of any hearing shall be posted by the police chief at least two weeks in advance of such hearing at all permanent installations of the department of police, in such a manner as to ensure that notice is readily accessible to everyone in the department of police. 
Sec. 98-66. - Rank specification.     For each rank covered by this division there shall be created a document known as the rank specification, which shall be approved by the police chief. A rank specification shall not be inconsistent with the written job description developed by the commissioner of personnel and human resources in compliance with chapter 114, article IV, division 2, of the civil service rules and regulations; however, the rank specification shall go beyond the written job description in defining the work behaviors of the rank and the knowledge, skills and abilities required to perform those work behaviors as may be required in the development of content-valid examinations, in that the written job description is primarily a classification and pay document, while the rank specification is primarily an examination document. 
Sec. 98-67. - Review and amendment of rank specification.     Prior to the announcement of an examination process for a rank, the police chief shall thoroughly review the rank specification and make any amendments to the rank specification deemed appropriate. The rank specification in effect at the time an examination procedure is announced shall be provided to all eligible candidates, along with the examination announcement. 
Sec. 98-68. - Notice of examination.     The police chief, under this division, shall give notice of each examination, at least 120 days in advance of the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination, by posting a notice thereof in all permanent installations of the department of police. The announcement shall state the rank for which the examination is being held, the official announcement posting date, the last date and manner for making application for admission to the examination, the examination parts to be used in the competition and the weights for each part, the study lists and any other information which the police chief considers pertinent and useful. A copy of the current rank specification shall also be posted with the announcement in each permanent installation. 
Sec. 98-69. - Application for examination.     All sworn members of the department of police who wish to apply for a promotional examination must file a written application on the form prescribed by the police chief within 30 days of the date the announcement is officially posted. 
Sec. 98-70. - Qualifications for eligibility. (a)  The rank specification, defined in section 98-61, shall designate the lower ranks from which promotions can be made provided that: (1)  To be eligible to compete for the rank of police sergeant, an applicant must have had at least five years continuous service as a sworn member with the department of police immediately prior to the last date for filing an application; and (2)  To be eligible to compete for all nondiscretionary ranks above police sergeant, the sworn member must have had at least two years continuous service in the department of police immediately prior to date of administering the first competitive part of the examination, in a lower rank from which promotions can be made, as set forth in the rank specifications. (b)  The years of continuous service needed to be eligible to compete can be achieved by service either in a nondiscretionary rank, as set forth in the rank specification, or in a discretionary rank, as long as the total service equals or exceeds the requisite minimum number of years to compete and the time in the discretionary rank is being served immediately prior to date of administering the first competitive part of the examination. (c)  A sworn member holding a discretionary rank who wishes to compete in an examination shall be eligible to take an examination only for the next highest rank above the nondiscretionary rank in which such sworn member holds status. (d)  In addition to the requirements contained in this section, a sworn member holding either a discretionary or non-discretionary rank, who wishes to compete in an examination, must successfully complete the Atlanta Police Leadership Institute's leadership development program prior to the application period for an examination process. It shall be the duty of the police chief to issue administrative regulations governing the Atlanta Police Leadership Institute. (Ord. No. 2009-44(09-O-1177), s; 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 2011-23(11-O-0939), § 1, 6-29-11; Ord. No. 2011-36(11-O-1141), § 3, 8-24-11; Ord. No. 2015-19(15-O-1172), § 2, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 98-71. - Disqualification from examination process. (a)  The police chief shall disqualify a sworn member from an examination process under this division when the police chief has determined that: (1)  The application was not filed within the period specified by the examination announcement; (2)  The sworn member lacks the required length of continuous service at a lower rank necessary to be eligible to compete; (3)  The sworn member, after sufficient and proper notification, did not properly appear at the time and place designated for each part of the examination; or (4)  The sworn member has been suspended five or more days, whether consecutive or not, for violation of the rules and regulations of the department of police within 24 months of the last date for filing applications, and all administrative appeals relating to such suspension have been adjudicated. (b)  Should the police chief disqualify a sworn member, written notification of the reasons for that action shall be given to the sworn member by the police chief no later than 30 days before the first competitive part is scheduled or five days before the next competitive part is scheduled in the case of disqualification under subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
Sec. 98-72. - Merit and fitness of members.     All promotions to ranks covered by this division shall be made in accordance with the relative merit and fitness of the sworn members competing. Merit and fitness shall be ascertained by competitive examination. All examinations and examination parts shall be fair, impartial and developed in accordance with professional standards and legal guidelines and shall relate to those matters which will fairly test the relative capacities and fitness of the sworn members to discharge efficiently the duties of the rank to be filled. 
Sec. 98-73. - Concealing identity of member taking examination.     The identity of every sworn member taking a written test under this division shall be concealed by the use of a numbered identification system. The identity of any candidate shall not be revealed until all written test papers have been scored and the minimum passing score set in accordance with this division. Any sworn member whose written test paper bears the member's name or any other identifying mark or any sworn member who reveals an identification number to the police chief or to any employee of the department of police shall be disqualified from further competition and shall be so notified. 
Sec. 98-74. - Methods for rating results of examinations.     Appropriate scientific techniques, developed in accordance with professional testing standards, shall be used in rating the results of all examination parts and interpreting the relative ratings of the competitors under this division. 
Sec. 98-75. - Effect of failure to pass all parts of examination.     Under this division, in order for the name of a sworn member to appear on an eligible list, the sworn member must pass each part of the examination. Each sworn member who fails to attain the minimum passing score on any part of the examination shall be considered to have failed the examination and shall not be eligible to compete in any further part of the examination or to attain a rank on the eligible list. 
Sec. 98-76. - Establishment of minimum passing score on examination.     A professional in test development shall determine the minimum passing score on any written multiple-choice test used as part of an examination under this division. The determination will be based on appropriate scientific and professional procedures and will be reported to the police chief. The police chief shall approve the minimum passing score and shall do so before the identity of any competitor is known. The minimum passing score on formal, structured oral interviews or other separately scored assessment exercises shall be defined by the rating scale used. 
Sec. 98-77. - Weighting parts of examination.     If the examination process under this division has more than one competitive part, the official announcement shall state the weight to be assigned to each part. The weights shall be stated as percentages, and the total weight of all parts of an examination process shall equal 100 percent. Each candidate passing all parts of the examination process shall have the final score computed in accordance with these weights and in accordance with appropriate scientific procedures, so that the stated weights are accurately reflected. 
Sec. 98-78. - Order of names for eligible list.     Under this division, the order of names of passing candidates on the eligible list shall be determined by the final examination score computed as set forth in section 98-76. Final examination scores will be rounded off to three decimal places. If, thereafter, a tie still exists it will remain unbroken. 
Sec. 98-79. - Notice of results of examination.     A sworn member who competes in any part of an examination under this division shall be given written notice of the results of each part and of the entire examination. The notice shall include the sworn member's score for each part, and, if the member passes, the member's rank on the eligible list shall be given after the eligible list is established. A sworn member who fails an examination part shall be notified of that fact, along with the score, before the next examination part is administered. 
Sec. 98-80. - Maintenance and contents of active eligible list.     The police chief shall maintain an active eligible list for all ranks covered by this division. Each list shall contain the names of those candidates who passed the entire examination process and each such candidate's final examination score and rank on the eligible list. Eligible lists become effective on the date approved by the police chief. 
Sec. 98-81. - Expiration of eligible list.     Eligible lists under this division, unless earlier exhausted, shall be in effect for 24 months from the date the list was approved by the police chief in accordance with section 98-79. Eligible lists shall not be extended beyond their expiration date, and all vacancies existing on the expiration date shall be filled from the eligible list; however, section 98-83(b) shall still apply. A new examination announcement, as provided for in section 98-67, will be published within a reasonable time after a list is exhausted as determined by the commissioner of human resources 180 days before the expiration of a list or after a list is exhausted, which ever shall be earlier. When a new examination announcement has not been published following the expiration of a list, a written notice explaining the reasons for such failure to publish a new announcement shall be given to all members of the department of police, the mayor and the appropriate legislative oversight committee within 30 days after a list has expired. (Ord. No. 2011-36(11-O-1141), § 4, 8-24-11) 
Sec. 98-82. - Member's review of examination; appeal and correction of incorrect answers. (a)  A sworn member of the department of police who competes in a written multiple choice test, as provided by this division, shall have the right to review a photocopy of the member's answer sheet, along with a copy of the written test booklet and a copy of the correct answer to each written test question. The review shall be held under the direct supervision of a professional in test development used by the police chief to administer the written test, and it shall be held as soon as practicable after the written test administration date, but, in any case, it shall occur within no more than ten days after the written test has been administered. (b)  Sworn members will be allowed to appeal to the test developer, in writing, any answer to a written test question other than the one specified as being the correct answer. The professional developing the test shall consider all such appeals and, if it is deemed justified, make such necessary corrections to the scoring key before reporting the final written scores to the police chief. The testing professional shall be required to document the reasons for recommending any changes to the original scoring key, as well as the reasons for rejecting any appeal submitted by a sworn member. (c)  The police chief may approve or disapprove the recommendations of the testing professional. If the police chief's action requires that the answer sheets be rescored, such rescoring will be done for all candidates by the professional test developer and reported back to the police chief before the identity of any candidate is made known to anyone. The police chief shall notify all candidates of both the professional test developer's recommendations regarding all appeals and the police chief's determination. (d)  Because of the need to use written tests which have been professionally developed and validated in accordance with both professional standards and legal guidelines, all sworn members reviewing test papers are expressly forbidden from taking any test material, review material or any written notes from the review room. To the extent practicable, reference material used in developing the written test will be made available to members during the review period. 
Sec. 98-83. - Certification of top five eligible members. (a)  When a vacancy exists in a rank covered by this division, the police chief shall certify the names of the five members who stand highest on the eligible list. The names of all members who, after seniority is applied, still remain in an unbroken tie with the five highest members certified shall also be certified. If more than one vacancy exists, the police chief shall certify one additional sworn member for each additional vacancy, including all members in unbroken ties with the last additional member to be certified. The police chief may appoint any of the certified members as the police chief deems to be in the best interest of the department of police. (b)  When the number of names remaining on an eligible list is less than five, the police chief may decline to make an appointment and may request that a new examination procedure be administered. If this occurs, the eligible list shall be considered exhausted in accordance with section 98-80, notwithstanding the fact that there are still vacancies in existence. 
Sec. 98-84. - Removal from eligible list. (a)  The police chief shall remove the name of a sworn member from an eligible list under this division due to any of the following reasons: (1)  Receipt of a written request from the sworn member. (2)  Refusal to accept a promotional appointment. (3)  Termination of the sworn member's employment with the department of police. (4)  Suspension of five or more days, whether it is consecutive or not, for a violation of the rules and regulations of the department of police. (5)  The discovery, after the eligible list has been established, that the sworn member would have been rejected under other sections of this division had the information so discovered been known before the eligible list was promulgated. (6)  Failure to complete the probationary period as provided in section 98-85. (b)  Whenever a sworn member's name is removed from an eligible list, written notice of such action and the reason for that action shall be given to the sworn member by the police chief within five days of the date the action is taken. (c)  Removal from eligible lists established under this division is not appealable through the civil service board. 
Sec. 98-85. - Probationary period. (a)  Every promoted sworn member of the department of police shall serve a 12-month probationary period to be regarded as an integral noncompetitive part of the examination process. (b)  A sworn member filling a discretionary rank at the time of promotion to a nondiscretionary rank, in accordance with this division, shall have the time successfully served in the discretionary rank count toward the required 12-month probationary period, provided such service was immediately prior to promotion to the nondiscretionary rank. Time successfully served in the discretionary rank after the date of promotion to the nondiscretionary rank shall also be credited as part of the 12-month probationary period required to attain status in the nondiscretionary rank. (c)  The probationary period shall be utilized for closely observing how well a probationary employee performs the work and responsibility of the higher level rank and for securing the most accurate judgments as to whether or not the probationary employee's performance meets required work standards at the higher level rank. It shall be the duty of the police chief to issue administrative regulations governing the probationary evaluation process. (d)  At least 30 days prior to the completion of the 12-month probationary period, the police chief shall determine whether or not the probationary employee should receive status in the higher rank. If the probationary employee is deemed to have passed the probationary period and is to be given status in the rank, the employee shall be notified of such decision no later than 15 days before the expiration of the 12-month probationary period. (e)  At any time during the probationary period, the police chief may remove a promoted sworn member whose performance does not meet the required work standards and return that member to the rank in which the member has retained status. If such occurs, the police chief shall notify the member in writing that the probationary evaluation part of the examination has been failed and the reason for such failure. Such notification shall be given at least 15 days in advance of the date the action is to be official and in no case later than 15 days before the 12-month probationary period is to expire. Thereafter, the name of a sworn member who failed the probationary evaluation part of the examination shall be removed from the eligible list. 
Secs. 98-86—98-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUXILIARY POLICE UNIT[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq. 
Sec. 98-106. - Created; composition.     An auxiliary police unit is created and established as an organization which shall be composed of persons who shall be appointed and sworn in as members thereof. Members shall be volunteer workers only and shall not be deemed to be employees of the city or of the department of police for any purpose and shall serve gratuitously as such for no compensation and without any other benefits of employment as are afforded other city employees, except as specifically set forth in this article. 
Sec. 98-107. - Qualifications of members. (a)  The police chief shall establish the requirements to be met by persons to qualify to become members of the auxiliary police unit. Such requirements shall include but need not be limited to physical, mental, aptitude, personality inventory and character standards and the mandatory training of such persons, for a minimum of 80 hours, in the field of police work. It shall be the duty of the police chief to provide such training for such persons and also any further training for members which the police chief may deem to be necessary or desirable. (b)  Whenever all of the requirements to qualify to become a member shall have been met by any person, the person may be appointed and sworn in as a member by the police chief or by a person designated by the police chief for such purpose. However, the police chief or any such designated person, with or without cause therefor, need not appoint and swear in any particular person as a member. (c)  The police chief, with or without cause, may terminate any member at any time without a hearing, and any member may resign as such at any time by written notification thereof to the police chief. Any member who shall cease to be such shall immediately surrender all property of the city issued to the member pursuant to this article or otherwise. (Code 1977, § 11-2086) 
Sec. 98-108. - Training.     In order to provide special training, including but not limited to professional, technical, physical and academic training, for members of the auxiliary police unit and for the development of morale and esprit de corps, the police chief is authorized and directed to inaugurate and conduct such training and other activities within the department of police to the end that the members of the auxiliary police unit may most efficiently perform their duties as members of the auxiliary police unit. 
Sec. 98-109. - Equipment. (a)  Each member of the auxiliary police unit shall be issued, at city expense and at no expense to the member, items as follows: (1)  A uniform, which shall not be identical to that issued to a regular police officer; (2)  Equipment, which shall include but need not be limited to handcuffs, and a badge, except the badge shall not be identical to those issued to a regular police officer; and (3)  An identification card, which shall show the person as being a member. (b)  A member shall not be issued a police baton, a firearm or other instrument capable of inflicting deadly force. Further, such members shall not carry any firearm or instrument capable of inflicting deadly force. (c)  Each member, while serving as such, shall wear, display or carry, as the case may be, every item, except as provided in this section, which shall have been issued to the person as a member, whether or not mentioned in this section. No member while off duty shall wear, display or carry, as the case may be, any such item of the uniform or equipment, except going to and from duty. No member shall be authorized to wear or display any item of the uniform or equipment for any off-duty function, whether paid or unpaid. (d)  Each item which shall be issued to a member, whether or not mentioned in this section, shall remain and be the property of the city. 
Sec. 98-110. - False impersonation.     It shall be unlawful, punishable as provided in section 1-8, for any person, not a member of the auxiliary police unit to: (1)  Wear, display or carry, as the case may be, any item which shall have been issued to any member of the unit. (2)  Represent, identify or hold such person out, in any manner whatsoever, to be a member of the unit or to have any connection with the unit. 
Sec. 98-111. - Workers' compensation. (a)  For the purpose of this section only, each member of the auxiliary police unit shall be an employee of the city only while serving any assigned shift as a member of the auxiliary police unit or while receiving training as such. (b)  If any such member or any such person were to suffer or sustain any illness or injury approximately caused by arising out of and in the course of such member's service or training while an employee of the city, as limited in this section, the member shall be entitled to all of those workers' compensation benefits, no more or no less, as those provided to volunteer firefighters in the state. (c)  If any such member or any such person were to die as a result of any illness or injury approximately caused by, arising out of and in the course of such person's service or training while an employee of the city, as limited in this section, such person shall be entitled to all of those workers' compensation benefits, no more or no less, as those workers' compensation benefits provided to volunteer firefighters in the state. 
Sec. 98-112. - Arrests.     Members of the auxiliary police unit shall not have the general power of arrest accorded regular police officers. Members shall have the power to arrest accorded private persons generally in the state in that they may arrest an offender if the offense is committed in their presence or within their immediate knowledge, or if the offense is a felony and the offender is escaping or attempting to escape, members may arrest upon reasonable and probable grounds of suspicion. 
Sec. 98-113. - Powers to direct traffic.     Members of the auxiliary police unit shall have the authority to direct, control and regulate traffic as instructed by the police chief or the chief's designee. 
Secs. 98-114—98-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CORRECTIONAL SERVICES[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Cross reference— Authority of municipal judge to order persons convicted of offenses to perform work on public property, § 62-41; personnel, ch. 114. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 98-136. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Chief means the chief of corrections.     Department means the department of corrections.     Detention facilities means city facilities in which inmates are detained, including the pretrial detention center, corrections center, Grady Hospital and city courts.     Inmate means any person who is confined to a detention facility.     Jail means the city jail or pretrial detention center.     Prison means the city prison. (Ord. No. 1995-07, § 18, 3-8-95; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-137. - False representation of identity to corrections officer.     It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent or identify such person as another person to a sworn corrections officer upon a lawful detention or arrest of the person, with the intent to evade the process of the court or to evade the proper identification of the person by the corrections officer if: (1)  The false information is given while the corrections officer is engaged in the lawful discharge of the officer's official duties; and (2)  The person providing false information knows or should have known that the person receiving the information is a corrections officer. (Code 1977, § 17-12001) 
Sec. 98-138. - Fees for copying of records. (a)  The charges for copying records of the department of corrections shall be as established in Chapter 2, Article XIV of this Code. (b)  Fees so collected shall be accounted for and paid into the city treasury. (Ord. No. 2009-20(09-O-0804), § 1, 5-26-09) 
Secs. 98-139—98-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq. 
Sec. 98-151. - Functions and duties.     The functions and duties of the department of corrections shall include the administration of all city detention facilities as detention, correctional and treatment agencies. (Code 1977, § 11-5001(b); Ord. No. 1995-07, § 17, 3-8-95) 
Sec. 98-152. - Hiring and firing authority; qualifications of chief of corrections. (a)  The chief of corrections is the hiring and firing authority in the department of corrections, subject to applicable rules and regulations. (b)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in Charter, appendix IV, section 3(a), the chief of corrections shall have the following qualifications: (1)  Graduation from an accredited college or university with a baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in penology, criminal justice, public administration or in a closely related field and three years supervisory experience prison administration, correctional facilities maintenance and management, or in a related area; or (2)  Eight years of experience at a supervisory level which included five years in the areas specified above; or (3)  Any equivalent combination of the above. (Code 1977, § 11-5001(a); Ord. No. 1995-07, § 17, 3-8-95; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-153. - Duties of chief of corrections. (a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of corrections to formulate and implement rules and regulations for the operations of the department of corrections. The chief of corrections shall have the authority to promulgate departmental rules and regulations that are consistent with the terms or intent of the laws and ordinances relating to the department. Any changes in the rules and regulations for the operation of the department of corrections, including the employee work rules shall be executed by the chief of corrections in writing. The chief of corrections shall provide the municipal clerk with a copy of the Corrections Department Work Rules from time to time whenever the same are amended. (b)  It is also the duty of the chief of corrections to: (1)  Administer corrective and disciplinary action for violation of rules and regulations of the department of corrections. Such action may include but is not limited to formal counseling, oral or written reprimands, retraining and suspension without pay or with or without a monetary fine not to exceed $500.00, which shall be deducted from the employee's salary, or termination. (2)  Suspend any employee with or without pay pending an investigation in which the employee is accused of misconduct if the commissioner or the commissioner's designee determines that the suspension is in the best interest of the department of corrections, the public welfare or the accused employee. (3)  Cause an investigation into an employee's conduct when the employee's conduct indicates probable cause for disciplinary action. (4)  Develop other necessary procedures for the implementation of the rules and regulations. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2002-80, §§ 3, 4, 11-8-02) 
Sec. 98-154. - Additional powers and duties of the chief. (a)  Generally. The chief shall be responsible for all conditions at the city's correctional facilities, in the buildings connected with the facilities and upon the surrounding grounds. The chief shall have control of correctional officers and other employees of the department. The chief shall be responsible for discipline thereat, for all persons under his/her jurisdiction and for the sanitary condition of the facilities. (b)  Weekly report required. Detailed weekly reports shall be made to the chief by the deputy commissioners of all the conditions existing in the department with reference to detainees and prisoners and the buildings and grounds, showing briefly the events during the preceding week, including such things as the number of detainees and prisoners, complaints, care and changes of food, condition of clothing, bedding and buildings, as to cleanliness, sanitation and the like. (c)  Inspection of detainees and prisoners; facilities. The chief shall make inspections of the correctional facilities and grounds and also of detainees and prisoners. These inspections shall be made at least once every month and shall be as thorough, complete and exhaustive as practicable. (Code 1977, § 11-5002; Ord. No. 1995-07, § 19, 3-8-95; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-155. - Assignments to certain positions without competitive examination.     The chief of corrections or that official's designee is hereby authorized, in the chiefs discretion, to make assignments to the positions of (corrections assistant chief), corrections deputy chief, major and (captain), without reference to competitive examination or eligible lists. Any (corrections assistant chief), corrections deputy chief, major, or (captain) so designated may be removed or transferred at the pleasure of the chief of corrections. Such person so removed or transferred shall thereupon resume the nondiscretionary rank or title in the department of corrections held immediately prior to such person's discretionary assignment as a (corrections assistant chief), deputy chief, major or (captain). Such person shall be notified in writing of the removal or transfer. (Ord. No. 1996-69, § 1, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2011-09(11-O-0316), § 1, 3-30-11) 
Sec. 98-156. - Evaluation of employee's mental or physical fitness.     The chief of corrections is authorized to order an employee of the department of corrections to submit to an evaluation of the employee's mental or physical fitness for duty, when there is an articulable basis to suspect that an employee may be physically or mentally impaired. If such an evaluation reveals possible impairment, the chief may make whatever administrative reassignment deemed necessary by the chief and seek approval from the commissioner of personnel and human resources and the chief operating officer to invoke the disability process set forth in chapter 114, article IV, division 12 of this Code pertaining to the civil service rules and regulations. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-157. - Uniform allowance for employees.     The city council shall provide a uniform or uniform allowance each year to the uniformed employees of the department of corrections, the costs thereof not to exceed $600.00. In lieu of providing uniforms to employees who perform correctional duties but who do not wear uniforms, the city council shall pay the sum of $600.00 per year, half of this sum to be paid in March of each year and half in September. (Ord. No. 1997-43, § 3, 8-11-97) 
Sec. 98-158. - Physicians; examination of inmates. (a)  Physicians selected by the chief of corrections shall examine all inmates when they are received by the department of corrections through any detention facility and as frequently thereafter as may be necessary to ascertain whether they are suffering from any infectious or contagious disease. A physician shall see that no healthy inmate shall be furnished or shall occupy a bed previously occupied by a diseased inmate, until the bed is cleaned or sterilized, and that no healthy inmate is furnished with or shall use eating or drinking vessels previously used by a diseased inmate, unless such vessel has been thoroughly cleaned or sterilized. (b)  A physician shall assist in the planning and developing of such programs that are necessary and proper for the treatment of alcoholic and other inmates and shall participate in programs, conferences and other like meetings consistent with treatment programs, any and all expenses to be compensated by the city. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-159. - Food for inmates.     The chief of corrections shall prescribe the character and quality of food to be furnished to inmates at all detention facilities. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-160. - Custody of clothing and effects of inmates.     The chief of corrections shall provide for the custody of clothing and other effects of inmates. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-161. - Sanitation and health. (a)  The general sanitary conditions of detention facilities shall meet the minimum health requirements prescribed by law. (b)  The chief of corrections shall prescribe the quantity of bedding to be furnished city inmates and how it shall be kept clean and sanitary and in compliance with subsection (a) of this section, as well as how it shall be used by the inmates. (c)  The chief shall provide for the separation of healthy and unhealthy inmates when the health of other inmates may be threatened. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-162. - Records and reports of work details. (a)  The correctional officer in charge of the work detail shall keep a book showing the name of each inmate turned over to that officer from the municipal court, the time for which each inmate is sentenced, when the inmate was received, when the inmate was discharged and the number of days worked. (b)  The chief shall make a monthly report to the chief operating officer showing the facts required to be kept of record by subsection (a) of this section. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-163. - Inmates working for city or housing authority. (a)  The chief of corrections may deliver to the various departments of the city and the housing authority municipal inmates incarcerated in detention facilities for the purpose of work useful to the city or the housing authority, except those inmates needed for the maintenance, construction, improvement or operation of detention facilities. (b)  The authority to decide all questions as to the assignment of inmates is vested in the chief. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-164. - Release on recognizance.     The mayor or the mayor's designee shall be authorized to establish regulations under which the chief of corrections may release persons charged with violations of city ordinances on their own recognizance pending trial. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-165. - Records.     The department of corrections shall keep a book showing the name of each offender turned over to the department from the city's courts for work details, the time for which each offender is sentenced, dated received, date discharged from city custody, and number of days worked. The deputy commissioner shall make a monthly report to the commissioner showing the facts above required to be kept of record. (Code 1977, § 11-5011; Ord. No. 1995-07, § 23, 3-8-95; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 10, 1-10-05) 
Secs. 98-166—98-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CORRECTIONAL FACILITY RULES[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- Cross reference— Domestic partners allowed visitation privileges, § 94-135. 
Sec. 98-176. - Rules for discipline of inmates. (a)  The mayor or the mayor's designee shall prepare, promulgate, publish and enforce rules and regulations concerning the discipline of inmates in detention facilities. These rules shall enable the correctional officers to maintain order and to prevent activities detrimental to the treatment and safety of inmates and employees. These rules shall also govern, as far as possible, the method, time and infliction of punishment and shall require that records be kept thereof. (b)  The mayor may promulgate standards by which the mayor might reduce the term of an offender for good behavior and faithful performance of duties while confined. 
Sec. 98-177. - Punishment of inmates.     No inmate shall be punished, except upon order of the commissioner of corrections. This punishment shall be pursuant to the rules promulgated for the discipline of inmates pursuant to section 98-176, but no inmate shall be so disciplined until a hearing has been held for the purpose of determining whether that punishment is fairly warranted. The hearing shall be granted automatically for the inmate, except in cases of emergency. 
Sec. 98-178. - Inmate's refusal to carry out orders or instructions. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any inmate in a city detention facility or any person under arrest and in the custody of any duly authorized officer of the city to fail or refuse to promptly carry out the lawful orders or lawful instructions given by that officer or any sworn correctional officer. (b)  Violations of this section shall be tried in the municipal court. 
Sec. 98-179. - Clothing for inmates. (a)  The chief of corrections shall prescribe the character and quality of clothing to be furnished for inmates and the means to be used whereby this clothing shall be kept clean and how it shall be worn. (b)  The chief shall cause to be purchased a supply of clothing, of suitable texture and color, which shall be worn by male and female inmates during their confinement under sentence from the city's courts. At the end of the term of imprisonment of the inmate, the city clothes shall be removed, and the personal effects of the inmate shall be returned to the inmate. Thereafter, after the correctional officials shall thoroughly cleanse and fumigate the city clothing that was worn by the inmate. (c)  It shall be an offense for an inmate under the control of the chief to take, convert or otherwise permanently remove from city control city-issued clothing while in the process of escaping the lawful control of the department of corrections. (Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 11, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 98-180. - Inmate possession of contraband items.     It shall be unlawful for any inmate to knowingly possess any item, paraphernalia, instrument or drug in any detention or corrections facility which is not expressly authorized by the rules, regulations, policies or procedures of the detention or correctional facility, which are conspicuously posted at the facilities and available in written form to inmates and visitors. This section shall not apply to controlled substance violations governed exclusively by state law. (Code 1977, § 17-12004) 
Sec. 98-181. - False identification to secure admission to detention or corrections facility.     It shall be unlawful for any person to give false identification, either verbally or by presenting any fraudulent written instrument, to officers or employees of any detention or corrections facility for the purpose of securing admission to the facility, if such person would not otherwise qualify for admission. (Code 1977, § 17-12002) 
Sec. 98-182. - Bringing or sending contraband to detention or correctional facilities.     It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly assist, bring or send into any detention or correctional facility where prisoners are located under the custody of the city any items which are expressly prohibited and defined as contraband by the rules, regulations, policies or procedures of the detention or correctional facility, which are conspicuously posted at the facilities and available in written form to inmates and visitors. (Code 1977, § 17-12005) 
Sec. 98-183. - Furnishing alcohol to prisoners.     It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, barter or in any other way provide a prisoner of the city with any amount of either methyl alcohol, ethyl alcohol or isopropyl alcohol or any compound containing any of the alcoholic substances stated in this section in any amount. (Code 1977, § 14-7004) 
Sec. 98-184. - Tuberculosis testing required.     Employees of vendors providing services for the detainees at the Atlanta City Detention Center shall be required to obtain a and be cleared by a certified medical authority of tuberculosis at cost to said vendor. (Ord. No. 2009-49(09-O-1349), § 1, 9-11-09) 
Secs. 98-185—98-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVE POLICE PROGRAM 
Sec. 98-206. - Created; composition.     A reserve police program (hereinafter referred to as the "program") is hereby created and established as an organization which shall be composed of retired Atlanta police officers (hereinafter "officers") who shall be appointed and sworn in as members thereof. To be eligible for membership, a retired officer must be Georgia POST certified and must have been in good standing with the city and police department when he or she retired from full-time city employment. Members shall be volunteer workers only and as volunteers, the officers serve as a supplementary force, providing assistance to full-time police officers in a variety of activities in accordance with the procedures outlined herein. (Ord. No. 1994-71, § 2, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-207. - Authority of chief of police over program.     The chief of the Atlanta Police Department, subject to the restrictions and limitations contained in this article, shall have complete authority and control over the reserve police program members, and may delegate the exercise thereof, in whole or in part, to any of his or her subordinates. The chief of police shall establish by order the rules and regulations governing this program and all its members. The chief of police shall be responsible for all assignments to be carried out hereunder. (Ord. No. 1994-71, § 3, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-208. - Training. (a)  In order to provide training for the members of the reserve police program, the chief of police is hereby authorized to conduct training that will achieve and maintain the requirements of the Georgia Peace Officer's Standards and Training (P.O.S.T.) certification for the officers. (b)  The chief of police shall have authority to require each member of the reserve program to satisfactorily complete all requirements of the training. (c)  Each reserve officer must satisfactorily perform volunteer service to the city each year. The minimum number of hours is to be determined by the chief of police. (d)  Each reserve officer will be subject to all police department rules and regulations and will be expected to maintain the same code of personal and professional conduct as required from full-time city police officers. (e)  Failure of a reserve officer to satisfactorily complete all requirements of P.O.S.T. shall result in suspension from the program. (Ord. No. 1994-71, § 4, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-209. - Uniform and equipment regulations. (a)  Each officer, upon his or her retirement from full-time employment with the city police department, shall be permitted to retain city equipment, as determined by the chief. This equipment includes, but is not limited to, uniforms, firearms, badges and handcuffs. (b)  The clothing and equipment to be used by reserve police officers shall be determined by the chief of police and may include, but is not limited to, the following: (1)  A uniform which will be identical to that of the regular city police officer except for modifications, to be determined by the chief of police; (2)  A firearm; (3)  Handcuffs; and (4)  An identification card which identifies the officer as a member of the Atlanta Reserve Police Program. (c)  Each officer, while representing himself or herself as an Atlanta Reserve Police Officer shall comply with the dress code of the department and other regulations governing the uniform and equipment. (d)  Uniforms and equipment shall remain the property of the city and shall be subject to recall by the chief of police. (e)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to instruct employees benefits to withhold pension benefits of any retired officer who fails to return all city-owned equipment to the police department, after being ordered by the chief of police to do so. All pension benefits withheld will be forwarded to the retired officer when he or she has complied with the chief's order. (Ord. No. 1994-71, § 5, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-210. - Workers' compensation.     Each officer of the unit while working for the city shall be deemed a volunteer and shall not be afforded workers' compensation benefits. Reserve officers health, dental, and pension benefits will not be affected by participation in the program. (Ord. No. 1994-71, § 6, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-211. - Arrests.     A reserve officer shall have the general powers of arrest afforded regular officers provided that he or she satisfactorily completed the training required by P.O.S.T. and the Atlanta Police Department. (Ord. No. 1994-71, § 7, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-212. - Application for a work permit required. (a)  No officer of the reserve police program shall engage in any police work, whether as a volunteer or for pay, within the limits of the city, either in or out of uniform, until he or she has filed an application for a work permit with the chief of the Atlanta Police Department and said application has been approved. (b)  The application form for a permit to engage in any police work by the reserve program member shall be furnished by the department and shall include the following information: (1)  Name of location. (2)  Name of employer. (3)  Name of owner. (4)  Physical location of work. (5)  Nature of work. (6)  Amount of pay. (c)  Failure by a reserve police program member to first obtain an approved work permit before engaging in a police related job shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal from the reserve program. (Ord. No. 1994-71, § 8, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-213. - False impersonation.     It shall be a violation, punishable by law or by fine not to exceed $1,000.00, for any person not a member of the reserve police program: (1)  To wear, display or carry, as the case may be, any item issued the city to a reserve officer in order to perform law enforcement duties; or (2)  To represent, identify or hold himself or herself out, in any manner whatsoever, to be a member of the reserve police program. The chief may terminate any reserve officer, with or without cause, without a hearing. A reserve officer may resign at any time by notification to the chief. (Ord. No. 1994-71, § 9, 3-24-94) 