THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF GAINESVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted, May 21, 1991  Effective, July 1, 1991 
____________ 
Published in 1991 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS  of the  CITY OF GAINESVILLE 
____________ 
C. Danny Dunagan, Jr.  Mayor 
____________ 
W. Samuel Couvillon  George Wangemann  Ruth Bruner  Zack Thompson  Barbara B. Brooks  Council Members 
____________ 
Bryan Lackey  City Manager 
____________ 
Hulsey, Oliver & Mahar, LLP  City Attorney 
____________ 
Denise O. Jordan  City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
GAINESVILLE, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robert L. Hamrick 
Mayor 
____________ 
Emily D. Lawson 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
John W. Morrow, Jr. 
George Wangemann 
Jim West 
City Council 
____________ 
James A. Crace 
City Manager 
____________ 
William E. Lewis 
Assistant City Manager 
____________ 
James E. Palmour, III 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Clarence Q. Shore 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1958 Code, as supplemented through December 15, 1987, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1958 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The various sections within each chapter of the Code have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of three component parts separated by dashes, the first figure referring to the title number, the second figure referring to the chapter number and the third figure referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1-10 is numbered 1-10-1 and the third section of Chapter 2-2 is 2-2-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its title and chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole titles or chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 1-1-8 and 1-1-9 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 1-1-8.1, 1-1-8.2 and 1-1-8.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 3-3 and 3-4, it will be designated as Chapter 3-3.5. New titles, articles and divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Ronald McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. James E. Palmour, City Attorney, Mr. Clarence Q. Shore, City Clerk, Mr. Al Crace, City Manager, and Mr. William Lewis, Assistant City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 91-13 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF GAINESVILLE, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GAINESVILLE: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances, City of Gainesville, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 10, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 17, 1990, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after April 17, 1990, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective July 1, 1991. 
Passed and adopted by the City Council this 21st day of May, 1991. 

First reading 5/7/91  Published 5/9/91  Passed 5/21/91 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Gainesville, Georgia held on the 21st day of May, 1991. 

 
(seal) 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART 1 - CHARTER[1] 
GEORGIA LAWS 2012  No. 475 
AN ACT 
To provide a new charter for the City of Gainesville; to provide for reincorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for general powers and limitations on powers; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, method of filling vacancies, compensation, expenses, qualifications, prohibitions, conflicts of interest, suspension, and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for organization and procedures; to provide for ordinances; to provide for the office of mayor and mayor pro tempore and certain duties and powers relative thereto; to provide for administrative responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city manager and assistant city manager, a city attorney, a city clerk, a city auditor, and other personnel; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof; to provide for a solicitor and deputy solicitor; to provide for a clerk of municipal court; to provide for the court's jurisdiction, powers, practices, and procedures; to provide for ethics and disclosures; to provide for elections; to provide for taxation, licenses, and fees; to provide for franchises; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for accounting and budgeting; to provide for city contracts and purchasing; to provide for an independent school system; to provide for education wards; to provide for definitions and inclusions; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for prior ordinances and rules, pending matters, and existing personnel; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to provide for submission under the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended; to repeal a specific Act; to provide for an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL  ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— 2012 Ga. Laws p. 4870, repealed and reenacted the City Charter in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former City Charter consisted of Chapters 1—9. See the Charter Comparative Table for a complete derivation.  Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— General municipal powers, OCGA § 36-34-1 et seq.; home rule powers, OCGA § 36-35-1 et seq. 
State Constitution reference— Limitations on special legislation, Art. III, § VI, para. IV; home rule, Art. IX, § II. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.10. - City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof, are reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Gainesville, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official map (or description) of the corporate limits of the City of Gainesville, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The governing body may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designed to replace. 
Section 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Section 1.13. - Examples of powers. 
(a)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(b)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(c)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, fire safety, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing, and building trades; 
(d)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(e)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A.; 
(f)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(g)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(h)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(i)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(j)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(k)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(l)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(m)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(n)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, and other public property in the city, to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail, to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by law, or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(o)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(p)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(q)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(r)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(s)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(t)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, storm-water management, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; provided, however, no public utility owned or operated by the city shall be sold by the governing body unless the governing body, by a majority vote with all members participating, first resolves that such utility shall be sold, and, thereafter, the proposed sale is approved by a majority vote of the electors of the City of Gainesville voting in a special election called and held for that purpose; 
(u)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(v)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(w)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the governing body deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(x)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(y)  Public hazards: removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(z)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, mausoleums, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, and corrective agencies and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(aa)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, pandering, and public disturbances; 
(bb)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(cc)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(dd)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(ee)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan and other employee benefit plans and programs for officers and employees of the city; 
(ff)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; 
(gg)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee or charge as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee or charge for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(hh)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(ii)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; to license and tax professional fortunetelling, palmistry, and massage parlors; and to restrict adult bookstores and tattoo studios to certain areas; 
(jj)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(kk)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(ll)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(mm)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(nn)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 
A. - GOVERNING BODY 

Section 2.10. - Governing body creation; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a governing body to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. The governing body established shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this charter. 
(b)  The council shall be composed of five members elected by the voters of the city at large in accordance with provisions of Article V of this charter. Not more than one councilmember shall reside in each ward as provided in Section 5.14 of this charter. The mayor shall be elected as provided in Section 2.28 of this charter. 
Section 2.11. - Nonpartisan elections. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in nonpartisan elections as provided in Code Section 21-2-139 of the O.C.G.A. 
Section 2.12. - Governing body terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)  The mayor and members of the council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of election of mayor or members of the council; the mayor and each councilmember shall continue to reside therein during that member's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
(b)  In addition to the above requirements, no person shall be eligible to serve as a councilmember representing a council ward unless that person is at least 21 years of age and has been a resident of the ward such person seeks to represent for a continuous period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of the election for councilmember and continues to reside in such ward during that person's period of service. 
Section 2.13. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies - The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, Title 45 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies - A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment by the governing body or those members remaining if less than 12 months remains in the unexpired term. If such vacancy occurs 12 months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office, it shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election, as provided for in Section 5.13 of this charter and in accordance with Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 2.14. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. Such salary shall be paid from municipal funds in monthly installments. The governing body may provide by ordinance for the provision of insurance, retirement, workers' compensation, and other employee benefits to the mayor and councilmembers and may provide by ordinance for the reimbursement of expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the mayor and councilmembers in carrying out their official duties. 
Section 2.15. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Conflict of interest - No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction, or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which the official is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of the official or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to the official's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which the official is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which the official has a financial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure - Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the governing body. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the governing body shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the governing body, and that official shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Use of public property - No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit or profit but shall use such property only in his or her capacity as an officer or employee of the city. 
(e)  Contracts voidable and rescindable - Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the governing body. 
(f)  Ineligibility of elected official - Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which that official was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that official was elected. 
(g)  Political activities of certain officers and employees - No appointed officer of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office in this city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the governing body either immediately upon qualifying or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)  Conviction of a crime - Any elected official shall forfeit his office if he or she is in violation of any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted or is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(i)  Penalties for violation - 
(1)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city who shall forfeit an office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
(j)  Right to public hearing - Any elected official or appointed officer of the city who is accused of violating any of the requirements of this section shall be entitled to a public hearing as provided for in subsection (b) of Section 5.16 of this charter. Any employee who is accused of violating any of the requirements of this section shall be entitled to appeal as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.16. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the governing body may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the governing body shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.17. - General power and authority of the governing body. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the governing body shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the governing body shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter and the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Gainesville and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
Section 2.18. - Eminent domain. 
The governing body is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, mausoleums, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, airports, mass transit systems, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof, and, for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
B. - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES 

Section 2.19. - Organizational meetings. 
The governing body shall hold an organizational meeting at the first regular meeting in January following each regular election. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor, mayor-elect, or senior councilmember and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members by a judicial officer authorized to administer oaths or the city clerk and shall, to the extent that it comports with federal and state law, be as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully perform the duties of mayor/councilmember of the City of Gainesville and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America; that I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof; that I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I by the laws of the State of Georgia am prohibited from holding; that I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia; that I have been a resident of [my ward and] the City of Gainesville for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal charter; and that I will perform the duties of my office in the best interest of the City of Gainesville to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward, or expectation thereof" 
Section 2.20. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The governing body shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by resolution. 
(b)  Special meetings of the governing body may be held on the call of the mayor or four members of the council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the governing body shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 2.21. - Rules of procedure. 
The governing body shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings, which shall be the official record. Except for the minutes of meetings or portions of meetings that are closed to the public, said minutes shall be open for public inspection. 
Section 2.22. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Four members of the governing body shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city. Voting shall be by voice, hands, or electronic means as determined by the mayor and the vote shall be recorded in the minutes, but any member of the governing body shall have the right to request a roll-call vote in which each member shall cast his or her vote by voice when his or her name is called and such vote shall be recorded in the minutes. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of four members of the governing body shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion, except as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Any member abstaining from a vote shall be recorded as an abstention. 
(c)  If only four members of the governing body are in attendance at a meeting, the affirmative vote of the majority of the members present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
C. - ORDINANCES 

Section 2.23. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Gainesville" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the governing body and be read at a regular or special meeting. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the governing body in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember. 
(Ord. No. HR-2018-01, § 1, 2-20-2018) 
Section 2.24. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the governing body which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Section 2.25. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the governing body may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least the majority of the members of the governing body present at such meeting shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 2.26. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The governing body may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.23 of this charter for distribution of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.27 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available for inspection by the public. 
Section 2.27. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The governing body shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the governing body by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the governing body may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Gainesville, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be available to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the governing body and also available electronically. 
(c)  The governing body shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the governing body and available electronically. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein and available electronically. The governing body shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code and available electronically. 
D. - MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEMPORE 

Section 2.28. - Selection of mayor and mayor pro tempore. 
At a regular election the voters of the city shall elect a mayor at large for a term of four years. The governing body shall elect from among its members a mayor pro tempore who shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor, but who shall only vote once on matters before the governing body. The mayor pro tempore shall be elected at the organizational meeting of the governing body and shall serve for a term of two years. 
Section 2.29. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at meetings of the governing body where he or she shall have all the rights, powers, duties, and responsibilities of a councilmember except that the mayor shall not make a motion or second a motion and shall be entitled to vote on matters before the governing body only in the following situations: (a) when there is an equal division on the question; (b) when the mayor's vote will provide the fourth affirmative vote required for approval of a matter; or (c) when the mayor's vote will provide the majority vote required for approval of a matter. The mayor shall also be entitled to vote on the election and removal of the following officers and employees of the council: mayor pro tempore, city manager, city attorney, municipal court judge, solicitor, and city auditor; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; and 
(4)  Sign all ordinances and resolutions approved by a majority vote of the governing body and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be signed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. HR-2018-01, § 1, 2-20-2018) 
Section 2.30. - Position of mayor pro tempore. 
During the absence or physical or mental disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore, or in the mayor pro tempore's absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the governing body, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. The mayor pro tempore or selected councilmember shall sign all ordinances and resolutions in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in Section 2.15 of this charter. When acting as mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall continue to have only one vote as a member of the governing body. 
E. - CITY MANAGER 

Section 2.31. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The governing body shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the manager's compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. 
Section 2.32. - Removal of city manager. 
The city manager is employed at will and may be summarily removed from office at any time by a majority vote of the governing body subject to any contract provisions. 
Section 2.33. - Assistant city manager. 
The city manager shall have the right to appoint, suspend, and remove an assistant city manager, subject to any contract provisions, who shall, in the absence of the city manager, execute the powers and perform the duties of the city manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. 
Section 2.34. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The manager shall be responsible to the governing body for the administration of all city affairs placed in the manager's charge by or under this charter. As the chief executive and administrative officer, the manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint, suspend, reclassify, demote, or remove all city employees and administrative officers, except the municipal court judge, city attorney, solicitor, and city auditor. The manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Attend all city council meetings except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline, or removal of the city manager and have the right to take part in discussion but not vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the governing body, subject to enforcement by the manager or by officers subject to the manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the governing body; 
(6)  Submit to the governing body and make available to the public an annual report on the finances and administrative activities of the city; 
(7)  Make such other reports as the governing body may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the governing body fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the governing body concerning the affairs of the city as the manager deems desirable; 
(9)  Sign contracts, deeds, licenses, fiscal expenditures, and other public documents on behalf of the city after approval of the governing body; 
(10)  Administer oaths to employees under the control and supervision of the city manager; and 
(11)  Perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the governing body. 
Section 2.35. - Governing body interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.16 of this charter, the governing body or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the governing body nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 
A. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 

Section 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city manager shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate or leave vacant all nonelective offices, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city subject to consent by the governing body. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(d)  All appointive officers and directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the city manager unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
Section 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The governing body shall create by ordinance or resolution such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the governing body deems necessary and shall by ordinance or resolution establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the mayor subject to approval by the council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance or resolution, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. The mayor shall make reasonable efforts to distribute appointments among all wards, provided there are eligible and qualified candidates. 
(c)  The governing body, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that member's office. 
(g)  All board members serve at will and may be removed at any time by majority vote of the governing body unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter, ordinance, or law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice chair and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(i)  If it becomes necessary for a board, commission, or authority to dissolve, the official minute book for said board, commission, or authority shall be transferred to the city clerk for permanent retention. 
Section 3.12. - City attorney. 
(a)  The governing body shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; may draw proposed ordinances when requested to do so; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the governing body and city manager concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the person's position as city attorney. 
(b)  The city attorney is not a public official of the city and does not take an oath of office. The city attorney shall at all times be an independent contractor. A law firm, rather than an individual, may be designated as the city attorney. 
(c)  The city attorney shall be removed at any time upon majority vote of the governing body. 
Section 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city manager shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall serve as secretary to the governing body; attend all meetings of the governing body and prepare and maintain accurate minutes of all its proceedings; be a custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain governing body records required by this charter; administer oaths; and perform such other duties as may be required by the governing body. The city clerk shall supervise and keep a record of all municipal elections. 
Section 3.14. - City auditor. 
(a)  The governing body shall appoint a city auditor who shall be a certified public accountant. The city auditor shall be responsible for providing an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions in accordance with generally accepted auditing principles. The city auditor shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the governing body and city manager concerning financial aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the person's position as city auditor. 
(b)  The city auditor is not a public official of the city and does not take an oath of office. The city auditor shall at all times be an independent contractor. An accounting firm, rather than an individual, may be designated as the city auditor. 
(c)  The city auditor shall be removed at any time upon majority vote of the governing body. 
B. - PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 

Section 3.15. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the governing body for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the governing body shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Section 3.16. - Employee classifications established. 
The general employee classifications in the City of Gainesville shall be as follows: 
(1)  Council appointments: The appointed service which shall include the city manager, the city attorney, the municipal court judge, the solicitor, the city auditor, and all personnel appointed by the governing body pursuant to this charter except employees in the classified service appointed as provided in this charter; 
(2)  Appointed officials: Appointments by the city manager. These employees serve at will and may be removed at any time; 
(3)  Classified appointment: Regular full-time employees covered by the provisions of the merit system; and 
(4)  Nonclassified service: Includes all part-time or temporary employees as designated by the city manager. 
Section 3.17. - Employees status on effective date of charter. 
The rights, status, salaries, wages, rank, and conditions of employment of all employees of the City of Gainesville defined in Section 3.16 of this charter subject to this charter shall be and remain as they existed at the time this charter becomes effective and shall so remain until and unless changed or terminated under some provision of this charter. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Section 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Section 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge, who shall have the authority to try any case now or hereafter made triable in such court and shall have such other duties as provided by law, statute, or ordinance and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 25 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall possess all qualifications required by law. He or she shall hold no other municipal office in the city during his or her tenure as judge. All judges shall be appointed by the governing body and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by the governing body. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the governing body unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor that shall be entered upon the minutes of the governing body as required in Section 2.21 of this charter. The oath shall be as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will carry out the duties of judge of the Municipal Court of Gainesville, Georgia, in accordance with the law, that I will act without fear, favor, or partiality in deciding issues between the municipality and persons accused of violating ordinances of the municipality, and that I will conduct myself and the affairs of the municipal court in such a manner as will reflect credit upon the municipality in its administration of justice." 
Section 4.12. - Solicitor; deputy solicitor. 
(a)  The Municipal Court of Gainesville, Georgia, shall have a solicitor and deputy solicitor whose duties are to prosecute persons charged with violating ordinances of the city or of any other law over which the municipal court has jurisdiction; to assist the judge and other officers and personnel of the court in achieving justice in all cases; and to perform such other duties as are or may be required by law or by ordinance or which necessarily appertain to this office. 
(b)  The solicitor of the municipal court shall be appointed by the governing body of the City of Gainesville for a term of two years. The solicitor may be removed at any time by the governing body of the City of Gainesville at its sole discretion. 
(c)  The solicitor and deputy solicitor of the municipal court must be of good moral character and shall have attained the age of 25 years and shall have been admitted to the State Bar of Georgia and shall have practiced law for at least one year at the time of his or her appointment. 
(d)  The salary of the solicitor shall be fixed by the governing body. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each solicitor shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that shall be entered upon the minutes of the governing body as required in Section 2.21 of this charter. The oath shall be as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will conduct the office of the solicitor of the Municipal Court of Gainesville, Georgia, in accordance with the law, that I will prosecute all cases made in said court to the very best of my ability, and that I will so conduct myself in carrying out the duties of the office in such a manner as will reflect credit upon the municipality in its administration of justice." 
Section 4.13. - Clerk of court. 
(a)  There shall be a clerk of the Municipal Court of Gainesville, Georgia, who shall be appointed by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(b)  The clerk may designate an assistant clerk of the court to assist him or her in the performance of his or her duties. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the clerk of the municipal court to perform such duties relative to the operation of the municipal court as the judge shall direct and perform all such other duties as are required or permitted by law or ordinance. 
Section 4.14. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Section 4.15. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have jurisdiction and authority to try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi, at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Section 4.16. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Hall County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 4.17. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the governing body, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the governing body may adopt in part or in total the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
Section 4.18. - Court personnel administration. 
General administration and supervision of the municipal court shall fall under the supervision of the position classification plan. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Section 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.11. - Election of the governing body. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election in the odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  There shall be elected the mayor and two councilmembers at one election and at every other regular election thereafter. The remaining council seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created. Terms shall be for four years. 
(c)  At the regular election in 2013 a mayor shall be elected to take office on January 1, 2014. 
(d)  At the regular election in 2013, two councilmembers shall be elected to succeed the councilmembers from Wards One and Four whose terms expire December 31, 2013. Said councilmembers shall take office on January 1, 2014, for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(e)  At the regular election in 2015, three councilmembers shall be elected to succeed the councilmembers from Wards Two, Three, and Five whose terms expire December 31, 2015. Said councilmembers shall take office on January 1, 2016, for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(f)  Subsequent elections shall comply with subsection (b) of Section 5.11 of this charter. 
Section 5.12. - Election by majority. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected by a majority vote of the voters of the entire City of Gainesville voting at the election. The person receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Section 5.13. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant as provided in Section 2.13 of this charter, the governing body or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the governing body or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.14. - Wards. 
(a)  For the purposes of electing the five councilmembers, the territory of the City of Gainesville shall be divided into five wards to be designated respectively as Wards One through Five. One councilmember shall be a resident of each ward. The boundaries of the five wards shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of each ward at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the Election Wards of the City of Gainesville, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The governing body shall review the boundaries of the wards established by this section following each United States decennial census. Within a reasonable time after each such census, the governing body shall cause adjustments to be made to the boundary lines of such wards as may be necessary to maintain, as near as practicable, equal population for each of said wards, or reapportion the boundary lines of such wards, if necessary and as authorized by law. 
Section 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the governing body shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
Section 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor or councilmembers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other provisions within this charter or other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an elected official or appointed officer for violations pursuant to subsection (a) of this section or violations as otherwise provided for in this charter shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected official or appointed officer is sought to be removed by the action of the governing body, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The governing body shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the governing body to the Superior Court of Hall County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Hall County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Gainesville. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
A. - PROPERTY TAXES 

Section 6.10. - Property tax. 
The governing body may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the City of Gainesville that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, of providing public education, of providing parks and recreation, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the governing body in its discretion. The taxable property within the limits of said city shall be assessed at 100 percent of its fair market value as determined by general state law. 
Section 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The governing body, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The governing body, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by two installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
B. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES 

Section 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The governing body by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The governing body may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.13. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The governing body by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.14. - Excise taxes. 
The governing body shall have the authority to impose, assess, levy, and collect an excise tax upon the sale, transfer, or dispensing of wine, malt beverages, or distilled spirits by wholesale and retail dealers within the city. 
Section 6.15. - Franchises. 
(a)  The governing body shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The governing body shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The governing body shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk or designee in a recorded format kept by the clerk. The governing body may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the governing body has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Section 6.16. - Service charges. 
The governing body by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary, and health services or any other services provided or made available inside and outside the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.17. - Construction; other taxes and fees. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
C. - COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT TAXES 

Section 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The governing body, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fa.'s; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
D. - BORROWING 

Section 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The governing body shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the governing body as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 6.22. - Lease purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the O.C.G.A. or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
E. - ACCOUNTING AND BUDGETING 

Section 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of July of each year and shall end on the last day of June of the following year. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Section 6.24. - Preparation of budgets. 
The governing body shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. The governing body may also approve by resolution additional, supplemental budgetary policies and procedures that shall be consistent with this charter and city code. 
Section 6.25. - Submission of operating budget to governing body. 
The manner of submission of the budget to the council shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
Section 6.26. - Action by governing body on operating budget. 
(a)  The governing body may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager; except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The governing body by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than June 30 of each year. If the governing body fails to adopt the budget by this date, the budget as submitted by the city manager shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriation resolution setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.24 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Section 6.27. - Tax levies. 
The governing body shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinances shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Section 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The governing body by resolution may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices. 
Section 6.29. - Capital budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the governing body but no later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the governing body a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The governing body shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget. The governing body shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.25 of this charter. 
(b)  The governing body shall adopt by resolution the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than June 30 of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Section 6.30. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant or firm of such accountants selected by the governing body. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. The governing body may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary. 
F. - PROCUREMENT AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT 

Section 6.31. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  Has been reviewed as to form by the city attorney; 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the governing body and such approval is entered in the governing body minutes of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.21 of this charter or is authorized as part of the budget process; and 
(4)  It is executed by the mayor, mayor pro tempore, or city manager whose signature shall cause the city seal to be affixed. 
Section 6.32. - Centralized purchasing. 
The governing body shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 6.33. - Sale and lease of city property. 
(a)  The governing body may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law; provided, however no public utility owned or operated by the city shall be sold by the governing body unless the governing body, by a majority vote with all members participating, first resolve that such utility shall be sold, and, thereafter, the proposed sale is approved by a majority vote of the electors of the City of Gainesville voting in a special election called and held for that purpose. 
(b)  The governing body may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the governing body may authorize the city manager to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - [SCHOOL SYSTEM] 
A. - SCHOOL DISTRICT CREATED 

Section 7.10. - Public schools established. 
There shall be established, maintained, supported, and provided for by local taxation, and otherwise in the manner provided in this Act and authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, a system of public schools in and for the City of Gainesville, Hall County, Georgia. 
Section 7.11. - General powers, school district, board of education. 
(a)  School district. There is created a body corporate and politic to be known and designated as the "Gainesville City School District." 
(b)  Board of education. 
(1)  Management of school district. The school district shall be under the government, management, and control of a board of education, hereafter referred to as the "board." 
(2)  General powers. The board shall possess all powers as are granted to boards of education under the Constitution and general laws of the State of Georgia, together with those other specific additional powers set forth in this Act. 
(3)  Title, care, and custody of property. The board is vested with the title, care, and custody of all real or personal property used in the school district for educational purposes or for the administration of the school district, with the power to control such property in such manner as it thinks will best serve the interest of the public schools. Title to the properties known as Centennial Elementary School, Enota Elementary School, Fair Street Elementary School, Gainesville Elementary School, Gainesville Middle School, and Gainesville High School and all other property associated and under the control of the present Gainesville City School System shall be and is vested in the board, with title to all infrastructure supporting the provision of general governmental services to these tracts including utilities and public roads to remain vested in the city. 
(c)  Authority to levy ad valorem taxes. 
(1)  The board shall annually recommend to the mayor and council of the City of Gainesville the rate of the tax levy, not greater than the mills per dollar authorized and allowed under the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, necessary for the support, maintenance, and operation of the public schools of the City of Gainesville. The mayor and council shall levy the tax so certified by the board upon the assessed value of taxable property in the city for the purposes so specified by the board. 
(2)  The board shall pay all expenses incurred for the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes for the support and maintenance of education in the school district and may contract for such services as provided in this Act or under Georgia law. 
(3)  After complying with the procedure for authorization of bonded debt set forth in Georgia law and applicable to public school districts, the board shall have the power and authority to issue bonds or notes, or both, for capital outlay purposes, which may include buying and improving property for educational purposes and for the construction and maintenance of public schools, administrative offices, and storage, maintenance, transportation, and other facilities established and maintained under the direction of the board, provided that the debt that may be created under this paragraph shall never exceed any limitations established by the Constitution or laws of the State of Georgia. Any millage limitation referred to in this section shall not apply to the school tax levy necessary for the payment of the bonded indebtedness of the school district and shall apply only to the portion of the school tax levied for the support, maintenance, and operation of the school district. 
(4)  The board shall assume the contractual obligations of the city pursuant to the agreement entered into between the city and the Hall County Board of Education on October 20, 1992. 
B. - EDUCATION WARDS 

Section 7.20. - Education wards created. 
(a)  For purposes of electing the five board members, the Gainesville City School District shall be divided into five education wards, to be designated respectively as Education Wards 1 through 5. One member of the board shall be elected from each of the five education wards, with the member from each education ward elected by a plurality vote of the voters voting within that respective ward. The boundaries of the five education wards of the Gainesville City School District shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts shown on a map, described in written format, or any combination thereof, as retained in the office of the Board of Education. 
(b)  [Text omitted.] 
(c)  Education Wards 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 as they existed on January 1, 2012, shall continue to be designated as Education Wards 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and, on and after the effective date of this Act, such members of the board serving from those former education wards shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective wards as newly described under this section. 
Editor's note— The provisions of 2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 347), p. 4050, § 1 amended section 9.20 of the city charter, being 1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 122), p. 3302. As a new city charter (2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 475), p. 4870) was enacted at the same legislative session, the amendment has been treated as an amendment to section 7.20 of the new charter. In accordance with instructions of the city, the provisions of subsection (b) and the description of the education wards, all as found in 2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 347), p. 4050, have not been included herein. The boundaries of the five education wards of the Gainesville School district are shown on a map, described in written format, or any combination thereof, retained in the office of the Board of Education.   At the direction of the city, the last sentence in subsection (a) of this section has been changed from "The boundaries of the five education wards of the Gainesville City School District shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as 'Plan: gainesvilleccsb-2012 Plan Type: Local Administrator: Gainesville User: Gina'" to "The boundaries of the five education wards of the Gainesville City School District shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts shown on a map, described in written format, or any combination thereof, as retained in the office of the Board of Education." 
Section 7.21. - Nonpartisan elections. 
All members of the board shall be elected in nonpartisan elections as provided in Code Section 21-2-139 of the O.C.G.A. 
Section 7.22. - Qualifications and election. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the qualification and election of board members shall be in accordance with the requirements of Georgia law governing the nonpartisan election of local school boards. 
Section 7.23. - Dates of elections and terms of office. 
The present members of the board shall continue their present terms representing the education wards from which they were elected. Successor members of the board shall be elected at the City of Gainesville general municipal election and shall serve for four-year terms beginning the first day of January immediately following their election. 
Section 7.24. - Vacancies. 
In the event of a vacancy occurring in the membership of the board for any reason other than the expiration of a term, that vacancy shall be filled as provided in Code Section 20-2-54.1 of the O.C.G.A. 
C. - BOARD OF EDUCATION 

Section 7.30. - Powers and duties. 
The board shall be vested with all powers, duties, and responsibilities as are granted to boards of education under the Constitution and general laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 7.31. - Election and duties of board chairperson. 
The members of the board shall, at their first meeting in January of each year, elect from their own membership a chairperson to serve for a term of office of one year. The board shall elect such additional officers as it may deem appropriate to serve for the terms established by the board. A member of the board may be reelected as chairperson. The chairperson shall have all those powers and responsibilities as set forth under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia applicable to the office of chairperson of a board of education. The chairperson shall hold office at the will of the board and the board shall be authorized to fill vacancies occurring in that office. 
Section 7.32. - Compensation of board members. 
The board shall determine compensation of its members after holding two separate public hearings to be scheduled to begin between 7:00 P.M. and 8:00 P.M. Any increase in compensation for members of the board shall be implemented July 1 of the following year. Additionally, each member of the board shall be entitled to be reimbursed for actual expenses necessarily incurred in connection with service on the board, including but not limited to travel outside the district on official business or expenses incurred by a member or on behalf of a member to provide technology or equipment necessary for a member to carry out the business of the board. The board must approve any expenses paid to or on behalf of members of the board. 
D. - SUPERINTENDENT 

Section 7.40. - Appointment and duties. 
The board shall appoint a superintendent and provide the superintendent with an employment contract to establish the compensation and fix the term of employment consistent with the requirements of Georgia law. The superintendent shall have all duties and responsibilities of a superintendent of schools as set forth in the Constitution and general laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 8.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the governing body shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. Premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the city. 
Section 8.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the governing body. 
Section 8.12. - General laws may be used. 
The governing body, in its discretion, may elect to use the provision of any general laws of the state in addition to the provisions of this charter. 
Section 8.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the governing body. 
Section 8.14. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(d)  The term "governing body" shall mean the mayor and city council of the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Section 8.15. - Specific repealers. 
An Act incorporating the City of Gainesville, approved April 11, 1979 (Ga. L. 1979, p. 3302), as amended, is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
Section 8.16. - Preclearance. 
The Board of Education of the City of Gainesville shall through its legal counsel cause this Act to be submitted for preclearance under the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended; and such submission shall be made to the United States Department of Justice or filed with the appropriate court no later than 45 days after the date on which this Act is approved by the Governor or otherwise becomes law without such approval. 
Section 8.17. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Section 8.18. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Passed in House March 14, 2012. 
Passed in Senate March 26, 2012. 
Approved by Governor April 11, 2012. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table gives the location in the charter of home rule ordinances amendatory thereof. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location in the Charter of home rule ordinances amendatory thereof. 

 
PART 2 - RELATED LAWS[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part 2 of this Code is a compilation of the related state laws of local application involving the city adopted by the Georgia General Assembly along with state constitutional amendments of local application to the city. 
The material included in such part has been arranged by basic acts or according to subject matter. The enactment, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted and, where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been included. Any material in brackets [ ] has been added to clarify the meaning of the text. At the end of each section is a reference in parentheses to the basic act and amendatory acts, if any. The editor has added section numbers and catchlines, where necessary, to facilitate the use of this compilation and indexing; however, formal citations should be to the original act and not to this compilation. 
Provisions of the related laws that refer to the city commissioners have been changed to refer to the council and the members thereof. 

Title 1 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT 
CHAPTER 2. - CHICOPEE WOODS AREA PARK COMMISSION 

Sec. 1.2.1. - Short title. 
This may be cited as the "Chicopee Woods Area Park Commission Act." 
(1988 Ga. Laws, p. 3783, § 1) 
Sec. 1.2.2. - Commission named and renamed. 
(a)  There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Gainesville Area Park Commission (hereinafter "commission"), which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style and title and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the commission or a trustee acting under a trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents and employees thereof. The commission is hereby granted the same exemptions and exclusions from taxes as are now or hereafter may be granted to cities and counties for the construction, acquisition and operation of facilities similar to facilities to be operated by the commission as provided under the provisions of this Act. 
(b)  The body corporate and politic created by subsection (a) of this section and known as the "Gainesville Area Park Commission" is hereby renamed as the "Chicopee Woods Area Park Commission." The change of name or of composition of the commission shall in no way affect the vested rights of any person under this Act or impair the obligations of any contracts under this Act. 
(c)  The commission shall consist of 11 members, all of whom shall reside within the bounds of Hall County, Georgia. Four of such members shall be appointed by the council of the City of Gainesville (hereinafter the "city"), one of which shall be the mayor of the City of Gainesville, or his designee, who shall be a council member of the City of Gainesville, five members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of Hall County (hereinafter the "county"), one of which shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners of Hall County, or his designee, who shall be a member of the board of commissioners of Hall County, and two members shall be appointed by the commission. The following named persons shall initially serve as members of the commission for the period of time indicated for each person respectively, to wit: 
(1)  From the date of the approval of this Act until March 26, 1989, and until their successors are appointed and assume office, Ed Wayne, appointed by the city; Foster Watkins, appointed by the county; and Ray McRae, appointed by the commission; 
(2)  From the date of the approval of this Act until March 26, 1990, and until their successors are appointed and assume their duties, Pierce Hancock, appointed by the city; Roger Bower, appointed by the county; and Jack Burd, appointed by the commission; 
(3)  From the date of the approval of this Act until March 26, 1991, and until their successors are appointed and assume their duties, James E. Mathis, Sr., appointed by the county; Dr. John Davis, appointed by the city; and Eugene Mooney, appointed by the county; 
(4)  The current chairman of the board of commissioners of Hall County, Jerry Nix, and the current mayor of the City of Gainesville, Ernest Moore, or their respective designees shall be members of the commission until their successors as chairman and mayor, respectively, have been selected and have assumed the duties of such offices. 
Upon the expiration of the term of office of each of the above-named members, the vacancies created by the expiration of said terms, except for the position of chairman of the board of commissioners of Hall County and the mayor of the City of Gainesville, shall be filled by an appointment by the respective governing authority who appointed the member who last filled the office that is vacant. Each member so selected shall serve for a term of three years. Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of the term of office shall be filled in like manner for the balance of the term. The commission shall elect one of its members as chairman and another member as vice-chairman and it shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer. Neither the secretary nor the treasurer shall be required to be a member of the commission and, if not a member, he or she shall have no voting rights. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum necessary for the transaction of business and a majority vote of those present at any meeting at which there is a quorum shall be sufficient to do and perform any action authorized and permitted by law. No vacancy shall impair the right of the quorum to transact any and all business in accordance with the foregoing procedure. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation except that they shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in performance of their duties. The commission shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 2; 1988 Ga. Laws, p. 3783, § 2) 
Sec. 1.2.3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  The word "commission" shall mean the [Chicopee Woods] Area Park Commission created in Section 2 [1.2.2] of this Act. The commission shall have all powers of an authority and everywhere the word "commission" is used it shall include the word "authority," as said term is used in the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the statutes relating thereto. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance and operation of a recreation center and area or centers and areas, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, parks, hiking, camping and picnicking areas and facilities, swimming and wading pools, lakes, golf courses, tennis courts, stadiums, athletic fields and courts, clubhouses, gymnasiums, auditoriums, gymnatoriums and related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance and operation of such recreational facilities and areas, deemed by the commission to be necessary, convenient or desirable. 
(c)  The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired and the cost of all conveyances in fee simple of the commission's title thereto and leases thereof, the cost of preparing the land, including the installation of storm and sanitary sewers, the cost of all machinery, equipment and furnishings related to the operation of any project, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for six months after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, and the cost of placing any project in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the "cost of the project" and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of any funds of the commission, including the proceeds of any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for any such project or projects. 
(d)  The terms "revenue bonds," "bonds" and "obligations" as used in this Act, shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 36 et seq.), as amended, amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761 et seq.), as amended, and such type of obligations may be issued by the commission as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto and in addition, shall also mean obligations of the commission the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for in this Act. 
(e)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the commission, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the commission therefrom and all properties used, leased and sold in connection therewith, together with grants which may be received for the benefit of the project from the United States of America or the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality of either of them, will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 3) 
Sec. 1.2.4. - Powers. 
The commission shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(b)  To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)  To acquire in its own name by purchase or gift, or otherwise, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or disposition of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the commission; and if the commission shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any lands the title to which shall then be in the State of Georgia, the Governor is hereby authorized to convey for and in behalf of the state title to such lands to the commission upon payment to the director, Fiscal Division, Department of Administrative Services for the credit of the general fund of the state of the reasonable value of such lands, such value to be determined by three appraisers to be agreed upon by the Governor and the chairman of the commission; and if the commission shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any lands the title to which shall then be in Hall County or in any municipality incorporated in said county, the governing authority or body of said county or of any of said municipalities, is hereby authorized to convey title to such lands to the commission if said property is unserviceable or cannot be advantageously or beneficially used by said county or municipalities upon payment for the credit of the general funds of said county or municipalities the reasonable value of such lands, such value to be determined by three appraisers to be agreed upon by the governing authority or body of said county or municipality and the chairman of the commission; 
(d)  To appoint, select and employ, officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(e)  To make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and to dispose by conveyance of its title in fee simple of real and personal property of every kind and character, and any and all persons, firms and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the state are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the commission upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; 
(f)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the commission or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality of either of them; 
(g)  To accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality, may impose; 
(h)  To accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision, may impose; 
(i)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(j)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; 
(k)  The commission is specifically authorized from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real or personal, or interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the commission was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in Section 17 [1.2.17] hereof; 
(l)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act; 
(m)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, the commission shall exercise its powers only over lands which have heretofore been donated and conveyed by Johnson and Johnson to the City of Gainesville, Georgia, which land the commission is hereby specifically authorized to receive and over lands contiguous thereto, which are donated to the commission at any time in the future by any person, firm, corporation, or governmental entity. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 4) 
Sec. 1.2.5. - Revenue bonds. 
The commission, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the commission created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects and to establish a reasonable debt service reserve in connection with any bond issue. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each shall bear interest from the date of such bonds at such rate or rates as shall be determined by the commission without regard to any limit prescribed in the Revenue Bond Law or any amendment thereto, or any other law. Interest on any such bonds shall be payable semi-annually, principal shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the commission, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the commission, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the commission in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to and in conformity with the procedures set forth in the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1957, p. 36 et seq.), as amended, amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761 et seq.), as amended, and all procedures pertaining to such issuance, including the issuance of bonds in exchange for outstanding bonds, the validation certificate of the Clerk of the Superior Court, and the execution of the same, shall be the same as those contained in said Revenue Bond Law as now or hereafter amended. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 5) 
Sec. 1.2.6. - Same; form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
The commission shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the commission may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest, and the commission may make such provisions for exchangeability, transfer and the like as the commission may deem proper. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 6) 
Sec. 1.2.7. - Same; signatures; seal. 
All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the commission and attested by the secretary and treasurer of the commission and the official seal of the commission shall be affixed thereto and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and secretary and treasurer of the commission. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the commission by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of the bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 7) 
Sec. 1.2.8. - Same; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under laws of this state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 8) 
Sec. 1.2.9. - Same; sale; proceeds. 
The commission may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the commission and the proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose provided in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 9) 
Sec. 1.2.10. - Same; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the commission may, under like restrictions[,] issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 10) 
Sec. 1.2.11. - Same; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The commission may also provide for the replacement of any bond or any coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 11) 
Sec. 1.2.12. - Same; conditions precedent to issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this Act. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special meeting of the commission by a majority of its members. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 12) 
Sec. 1.2.13. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of [the] City of Gainesville, Hall County, or the State of Georgia, nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said city, county, or state but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the said city or said county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 13) 
Sec. 1.2.14. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the commission, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the commission and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, earnings or grants to be received by the commission, including the proceeds derived from the sale from time to time of any surplus property of the commission, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the commission in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of projects, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of projects, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the commission, both real and personal, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the commission and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the commission. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the commission may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 14) 
Sec. 1.2.15. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The commission shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who or any agency, bank or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 15) 
Sec. 1.2.16. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued and any monies derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal of the commission, and the proceeds of any grants, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the commission to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the commission as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) any premium upon bonds acquired by redemption, payment or otherwise, (4) the necessary charges of the paying agent or agents for paying principal and interest, and (5) any investment fees or charges. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture any surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not be reissued, printed and delivered. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 16) 
Sec. 1.2.17. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the commission, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 17) 
Sec. 1.2.18. - Refunding bonds. 
The commission is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the commission for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the commission in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 18) 
Sec. 1.2.19. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such commission shall be brought in the Superior Court of Hall County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 19) 
Sec. 1.2.20. - Validation. 
Bonds of the commission shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law, as now or hereafter amended. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States Government or any department, agency or instrumentality of the United States Government, if subject to being sued and if consenting to same, which has contracted with the commission for the services and facilities of or with respect to the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and the state or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, department, agency, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as a part of the security for the payment of any such bonds of the commission. The bonds when validated and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the commission issuing the same, the state and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, department, agency, or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the commission. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 20) 
Sec. 1.2.21. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the commission remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said commission or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or authority will be created which will compete with the commission to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the commission. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the commission and the holders of any such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 21) 
Sec. 1.2.22. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 22) 
Sec. 1.2.23. - Purpose of the commission. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this Act, the general purposes of the commission are declared to be: acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, and operating a recreational center and area or centers and areas, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, parks, hiking, camping, and picnicking areas and facilities, stadiums, athletic fields and courts, clubhouses, gymnasiums, auditoriums, gymnatoriums, and related buildings, golf courses, pavilions, farmers' markets, nature study centers, and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and the lease or sale of any part or all of such facilities, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance, and operation of such recreational facilities and areas; and doing any and all things deemed by the commission necessary, convenient, or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, p. 3783, § 3) 
Sec. 1.2.24. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The commission is hereby authorized to prescribe and revise from time to time rates, fees, tolls and charges, and to collect such rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or subleases of its lands or facilities, or contracts for the use of its land and facilities, and to determine the price and terms at and under which its lands or facilities may be sold and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipment, betterment or extension of its lands and facilities and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, including the revenues of improvements, betterments or extensions thereto thereafter made or the sale of any of its land and facilities. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 24) 
Sec. 1.2.25. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the commission to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act, including the basis on which recreational facilities shall be furnished. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 25) 
Sec. 1.2.26. - Properties exempt from taxation. 
The properties of the commission, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the State of Georgia, and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the commission shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any city, county, or the state or any political subdivision thereof; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit or inhibit the lease or use of commission properties for private purposes which in the sole judgment of the commission support the general purposes of the commission. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 26) 
Sec. 1.2.27. - [Annual audit.] 
(a)  At the conclusion of each fiscal year of the commission, the affairs of the commission shall be audited by a certified public accounting firm. A synopsis of the audit shall be published in the official organ of Hall County as soon as the report of the auditors is submitted to the commission. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 27) 
Editor's note— Subsection (a) is the only subsection in the above section. 
Sec. 1.2.28. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 28) 
Sec. 1.2.29. - Liberal construction of act. 
This Act being for the purpose of promoting the health, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the United States, of the State of Georgia, of Hall County, and of the City of Gainesville, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 29) 
Sec. 1.2.30. - Effect of partial invalidity of act. 
Should any sentence, clause, phrase, or part of this Act be declared for any reason to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect such remainder of this Act or any part hereof, other than the part so held to be invalid, but the remaining provisions of this Act shall remain in full force and effect, and it is the express intention of this Act to enact each provision of this Act independently of any other provision hereof. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 30) 
Sec. 1.2.31. - Repeal. 
This Act does not in any way take from the City of Gainesville, Hall County or any municipality located therein, the authority to own, develop, operate and maintain public parks and recreational facilities, or to issue revenue bonds as is provided by the Revenue Bond Law of Georgia. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 4054, § 31) 
CHAPTER 3. - DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1.3.1. - Land conveyance of property to City of Gainesville authorized. 
WHEREAS, the City of Gainesville made a gift of certain property to the State Department of Transportation for use as a right-of-way; and 
WHEREAS, a portion of the property is not required for such purposes and is, therefore, surplus property to the State of Georgia; and 
WHEREAS, the said portion of property is more particularly described as follows: 
"All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 9th Land District, Georgia Militia District 411 of Hall County, being more particularly described as follows: 
 BEGINNING at a point one hundred twenty-five (125) feet right of center line Station 64 + 50, Department of Transportation Project F-013-1 (19) Loop, Hall County (Queen City Parkway); thence along a bearing of North twenty (20) degrees twenty-one (21) minutes West for a distance of five hundred fourteen point seventy-two (514.72) feet more or less to a point; thence, along a bearing of South twenty-six (26) degrees and forty-eight (48) minutes East for a distance of two hundred fourteen point zero two (214.02) feet more or less to a point; thence, along a bearing of South fifteen (15) degrees and forty (40) minutes East for a distance of three hundred point fifty-five (300.55) feet more or less to the point of beginning. 
The above portion of land containing 6,434 Square Feet as shown on plat attached as Exhibit `A.' "; 
and 
WHEREAS, the City of Gainesville is desirous of obtaining said tract of property for the purpose of constructing a building. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA that the State Department of Transportation is hereby authorized and directed to convey to the City of Gainesville, Georgia, the hereinabove described tract of property for and in consideration of the sum of $10.00. 
(1979 Ga. Laws, p. 138) 
Editor's note— A photograph of the plat has been omitted. 
Secs. 1.3.2—1.3.15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - STATE OWNED REAL PROPERTIES IN CERTAIN CITIES 

Sec. 1.3.16. - Preamble. 
The State of Georgia is the owner of certain improved real properties located in the cities of Albany, Dougherty County, Georgia; Augusta, Richmond County, Georgia; Brunswick, Glynn County, Georgia; Carrollton, Carroll County, Georgia; Columbus, Muscogee County, Georgia; Dalton, Whitfield County, Georgia; Gainesville, Hall County, Georgia; Griffin, Spalding County, Georgia; Rome, Floyd County, Georgia; Savannah, Chatham County, Georgia; Statesboro, Bulloch County, Georgia; Valdosta, Lowndes County, Georgia; and Waycross, Ware County, Georgia; and 
Such improved real properties are under the custody of the Department of Labor and the physical facilities located thereon are either presently being, or were formerly, used as local offices of the Department of Labor; and 
The Department of Labor has determined that such improved real properties and the physical facilities located thereon cannot any longer fulfill its needs and that replacement physical facilities to be situated on real properties at other locations in the same cities or above-referenced counties are necessary. 
(1985 Ga. Laws, p. 571) 
Sec. 1.3.17. - Property described. 
That the above-referenced improved real properties are located in and are more specifically described and referred to as: 
(1)  929 West Broad Avenue, Albany, Dougherty County, Georgia; 
(2)  425 Ninth Street, Augusta, Richmond County, Georgia; 
(3)  1321 Union Street, Brunswick, Glynn County, Georgia; 
(4)  1327 Union Street, Brunswick, Glynn County, Georgia; 
(5)  705 Maple Street, Carrollton, Carroll County, Georgia; 
(6)  1328 Second Avenue, Columbus, Muscogee County, Georgia; 
(7)  1327 Third Avenue, Columbus, Muscogee County, Georgia; 
(8)  417 West Crawford Street, Dalton, Whitfield County, Georgia; 
(9)  410 Bradford Street, N.W., Gainesville, Hall County, Georgia; 
(10)  122 East Poplar Street, Griffin, Spalding County, Georgia; 
(11)  710 East First Street, Rome, Floyd County, Georgia; 
(12)  214 Drayton Street, Savannah, Chatham County, Georgia; 
(13)  117 Savannah Avenue, Statesboro, Bulloch County, Georgia; 
(14)  809 North Patterson Street, Valdosta, Lowndes County, Georgia; and 
(15)  809 Elizabeth Street, Waycross, Ware County, Georgia. 
(1985 Ga. Laws, p. 571, § 1) 
Sec. 1.3.18. - General authority of state. 
That the State of Georgia is the owner of the above-described improved real properties and that, in all matters relating to the disposition by sale, lease, or exchange of said improved real properties, the State of Georgia is acting by and through its State Properties Commission. In its handling of said dispositions by sale, lease, or exchange, the State Properties Commission shall act for the benefit of the Department of Labor in fulfilling the department's above-referenced improved real property replacement needs. Without limiting the foregoing, but by way of illustration, the State Properties Commission may sell, lease, or exchange the above-described real properties for considerations which enable the Department of Labor to acquire other real property, construct and equip replacement facilities, and undertake related activities necessary or convenient thereto. By way of further illustration and notwithstanding Code Section 45-12-92 or any other provision of law, the State Properties Commission may permit any cash consideration received from said dispositions to be retained by the Department of Labor and applied by it to the acquisition, construction, and equipping of such replacement facilities; and, similarly, any in-kind considerations, including, for example, exchanged real property or construction services, may be applied by the department to its replacement needs. 
(1985 Ga. Laws, p. 571, § 2) 
Sec. 1.3.19. - Disposal of property—Generally. 
That the State of Georgia, acting by and through its State Properties Commission, is authorized and empowered, for the benefit of the Department of Labor, to dispose of by sale, lease, or exchange, during the present and following years, the record title of the State of Georgia in and to any or all of the above-described improved real properties for a monetary or in-kind consideration of not less than the fair market value of each parcel of said improved real properties and upon such other terms and conditions as the State Properties Commission shall determine to be in the best interest of and most advantageous to the State of Georgia and to its Department of Labor. If any such disposition of said above-described improved real properties is by sale or exchange the conveyance by the State of Georgia shall be by quitclaim deed. 
(1985 Ga. Laws, p. 571, § 3) 
Sec. 1.3.20. - Same—Authority of State Properties Commission. 
That the State Properties Commission is authorized and empowered to do all acts and to impose all requirements it deems necessary and proper to effect a disposition by sale, lease, or exchange of each respective parcel of said above-described improved real properties. As an indispensable part of the grant of authority contained in this Act, it is further provided that before any transaction authorized hereby may be consummated or closed that 30 days in advance thereof the State Properties Commission shall report the full terms and conditions of such transaction to the chairmen of the House Committee on State Institutions and Property and the Senate Committee on Public Utilities. 
(1985 Ga. Laws, p. 571, § 4) 
Sec. 1.3.21. - Plat of survey. 
That, for purposes of compliance with the provisions of paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of Code Section 50-16-122, requiring that a conveyance of real property by the State of Georgia be filed with the Secretary of State and accompanied by a plat of survey of the property conveyed, the plat of survey of each of the parcels of the above-described improved real properties, the dispositions of which by sale, lease, or exchange are authorized by this resolution, approved by the State Properties Commission shall constitute an acceptable plat of survey of that particular parcel for filing with the Secretary of State. 
(1985 Ga. Laws, p. 571, § 5) 
Title 3 - SPECIAL AUTHORITIES AND COMMISSIONS 
CHAPTER 1. - GAINESVILLE AND HALL COUNTY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3.1.1. - Constitutional amendment—Generally. 
Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
 "A. Created. There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in Gainesville and Hall County to be known as the Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of Gainesville and Hall County and a public corporation and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the `authority'; 
 "B. Members, etc. The authority shall consist of nine members, four to be appointed by the Commissioners of Hall County, four to be appointed by the Council of the City of Gainesville, and one to be elected by the members of the authority for a full four-year term, who shall have control, duties, powers and authority as are hereby conferred and as may be prescribed or provided for by the General Assembly of Georgia, and such additional powers as may be delegated to the authority by the County of Hall and the City of Gainesville. Members of the authority shall be residents of Hall County, within or without the municipality located therein. The first appointments shall be for terms of one, two, three and four years. Thereafter all terms and appointments, except in case of a vacancy, shall be for four years. The General Assembly shall provide for appointment of the authority. The authority shall elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary-treasurer. The secretary-treasurer shall not be required to be a member of the authority. 
 "C. Bonds. All debentures, notes, bonds, and revenue bonds or obligations issued by the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the obligations and interest on the obligations of Gainesville and Hall County. 
 "D. Powers. The powers of the authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power: 
"(1)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts; 
"(2)  To borrow money, to issue notes, bonds and revenue obligations, to execute trust agreements or indentures, and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property, contract rights, and income as security therefor; 
"(3)  To contract with political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name; 
"(4)  To have and exercise usual powers of private corporations except such as are inconsistent with this amendment, including the power to appoint and hire officers, agents and employees and to provide their compensation and duties, which officers and agents may or may not be members of the authority, and the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and by laws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority; 
"(5)  To encourage and promote the expansion and development of industrial and commercial facilities in Gainesville and Hall County so as to relieve, insofar as possible, unemployment within its boundaries, and to that end to acquire by purchase or gift any building or structure within the limits of Gainesville and Hall County, suitable for and intended for use as a factory, mill, shop, processing plant, assembly plant or fabricating plant, including all necessary and appurtenant lands and appurtenances thereto, and all necessary or useful furnishings, machinery and equipment. Such acquisition may be through the acquisition of land and the construction thereon of a building, including the demolition of existing structures, or through the acquisition of an existing building and the remodeling, renovating, reconstructing, furnishing and equipping of such building; 
"(6)  No building acquired hereunder shall be operated by the authority but shall be leased or sold to one or more persons, firms, or corporations. If sold, the purchase price may be paid at one time or in installments falling due in not more than thirty (30) years from the date of transfer of possession. The lessee or purchaser shall be required to pay all costs of operating and maintaining the building or buildings and to pay rentals or installments sufficient, together with other revenues which may be pledged for the purpose, to retire all bonds, both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which the authority may have incurred in connection with the undertaking; 
"(7)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
"(8)  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter; 
"(9)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated. 
 "E. Debt. The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the State of Georgia or Hall County, or the City of Gainesville. 
 "F. Members. The members of the authority shall receive no compensation for their services to the authority. 
 "G. Bonds. In order to finance any undertaking within the scope of its power or to refund any bonds then outstanding, the authority is hereby authorized to issue bonds bearing rate or rates of interest and maturing at the years and amounts determined by the authority and the procedure of validation, issuance and delivery shall be in all respects in accordance with the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761), as amended, Ga. Code Ann. Supp. Chapter 87-8, as if said obligations had been originally authorized to be issued thereunder; provided, however, that any property, real or personal in existence or anticipated, of the authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered as security for any lawful debt of the authority. The authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture not in conflict with the provisions of this amendment to provide security for any bonds issued as provided herein, and such trust agreements or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or under any term or condition under which such bonds are issued. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to create a right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of the City of Gainesville or of Hall County to pay such bonds or the interest thereon nor to enforce payment thereof against any property of the City of Gainesville or Hall County. 
 "H. Same. The authority may authorize additional bonds, for extensions and permanent improvements to any industrial building acquired hereunder, to be placed in escrow and to be negotiated from time to time as proceeds for that purpose may become necessary. Bonds so placed in escrow shall, when sold and delivered, have such standing with the bonds of the same issue as may be provided in the authorizing proceedings. 
 "I. Gifts. No moneys derived by the authority from any source other than gifts and contributions from private individuals, firms or corporations shall at any time be used for entertainment, or other promotional expenses. 
 "J. Property. Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Gainesville and Hall County, subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
 "K. Purpose. This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare industry and trade within Gainesville or Hall County and reducing unemployment to the greatest extent possible, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. 
 "L. Effective date. This amendment shall be effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the Governor, and the first members of the authority shall be appointed within thirty (30) days after such proclamation. 
 "M. General assembly. The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the authority. The authority shall be an instrumentality of Gainesville and Hall County and the scope of its operations shall be limited to the territory embraced within said city or county. The General Assembly shall not extend the jurisdiction of the authority nor the scope of its operations beyond such limits. 
 " 1962 Amendment. The provisions of this amendment shall supersede an amendment creating the Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority ratified at the November 1962 general election and found in Georgia Laws 1961, p. 600. All actions and proceedings taken under the provisions of any law passed pursuant to the aforesaid amendment are hereby ratified and confirmed in the same manner as if the provisions contained herein had been in effect. The authority created hereunder shall be the successor to the authority created pursuant to the aforesaid amendment and shall succeed to all the powers of the authority created pursuant to the aforesaid amendment and the assets and obligations of such authority shall be the assets and obligations of the authority created herein." 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 866, § 1) 
Sec. 3.1.2. - Same—Continued. 
That constitutional amendment which was proposed by Resolution Act No. 121 of the 1964 General Assembly and which was duly ratified at the 1964 general election (Ga. L. 1964, p. 866) and which relates to creation of the Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority and the powers, duties, and members of the authority shall not be repealed or deleted on July 1, 1987, as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia but is specifically continued in force and effect on and after that date as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(1986 Ga. Laws, p. 4328, § 1) 
Sec. 3.1.3. - Same—Authority for continuation. 
This Act is passed pursuant to Article XI, Section I, Paragraph IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia which authorizes the continuation of certain amendments to the Constitution. 
(1986 Ga. Laws, p. 4328, § 2) 
Secs. 3.1.4—3.1.15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - ACT TO CREATE AUTHORITY, ETC. 

Sec. 3.1.16. - Short title. 
This Act may be cited as the Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 2282, § 1) 
Sec. 3.1.17. - Created, etc. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority" which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and by that name, style and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The authority shall consist of nine (9) members who shall be residents of Hall County within or without the corporate limits of the City of Gainesville, and not less than thirty (30) years of age at the time of appointment. In making the nominations and appointments of members of the authority, not more than one member should be selected from any one family, partnership, or other business organization. The members shall be selected in the following manner: Immediately after the approval of this Act the directors of the Gainesville-Hall County Chamber of Commerce shall select and nominate persons for appointment and submit eight or more names to the county and eight or more names to the city. From such lists of nominees the council of the City of Gainesville and the commissioners of Hall County each shall appoint four members of the authority. The eight appointed members shall select a ninth member to serve a full term. For the first appointments the county and the city shall each appoint one person for one year, one for two years, one for three years, and one for four years. Thereafter all terms and appointments, except in case of a vacancy, shall be for four years. In the event any vacancy occurs in the county group, the county shall fill by appointment such vacancy for the unexpired term. In the event a vacancy occurs in the city group, the city shall fill by appointment such vacancy for the unexpired term. In making any appointment for a vacancy or after the expiration of a term the city and county shall request two nominations for each member to be appointed from the directors of the Chamber of Commerce. The governing authorities of the County of Hall and/or the City of Gainesville may, in their discretion, request the directors of the Chamber of Commerce to submit additional names before making the first appointments or any subsequent appointment to the membership of the authority. If no nomination is made within ten days after such request, the appointment shall be made without any nomination. A member who has served a full four-year term shall not be eligible for reappointment until the lapse of one year after the expiration of his four-year term. The authority shall elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary-treasurer, or a secretary and a treasurer. Neither the secretary nor the treasurer shall be required to be a member of the authority. One city council member selected by the city council and one county commissioner selected by the county commissioners shall be the ex-officio members of the authority. The members of the authority shall be entitled to no compensation. However, all members shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 2282, § 2) 
Sec. 3.1.18. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(a)  —The word "authority" shall mean the "Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority" created by this Act and by and under Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
"(b)  [—]The word `project' shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition of lands, properties, and improvements for development, expansion and promotion of industry, commerce, agriculture, natural resources and vocational training; the construction of buildings and plants for the purpose of selling, leasing or renting such structures to private persons, firms or corporations. The word `project' shall also mean and include the acquisition, development and management of a site or sites deemed suitable for an industrial park or parks. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `development' shall include making provision for water, sewage, drainage, transportation, power, communication and/or similar facilities which are incidental to the use of a site as the industrial park." 
(c)  —The term "cost of project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, easements, rights and franchises acquired, the cost of machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural and legal expense, and plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and placing the same in operation. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 2282, § 3; 1978 Ga. Laws, p. 3579, § 1) 
Sec. 3.1.19. - Contracts. 
The County of Hall and the City of Gainesville are expressly authorized to enter into contracts with the authority as a public corporation. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 2282, § 4) 
Sec. 3.1.20. - Quorum, etc. 
Any five members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the ordinary business of the authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the authority must be approved by not less than five affirmative votes. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 2282, § 5) 
Sec. 3.1.21. - Powers. 
The authority shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
(b)  To acquire, hold and dispose of personal property, including the stock of other corporations, for its corporate purposes. 
(c)  To enter into contracts with the County of Hall and the City of Gainesville. 
(d)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions, and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or liens or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of same in any manner the authority deems to its best advantage. If the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall then be in the County of Hall or the City of Gainesville, the governing authorities of Hall County and the City of Gainesville are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, to the authority. 
(e)  To appoint and select officers, agents, and employees including engineers, architects, builders, and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
(f)  To make contracts, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases and rentals and sales of projects, or contracts with respect to the use of projects, which it erects or acquires. The County of Hall and the City of Gainesville are hereby expressly authorized and empowered to enter into agreements with the authority for use by the authority of funds collected by special tax levies by the county and city for development purposes. 
(g)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, self-liquidating or otherwise, located on property owned or leased by the authority, and to pay the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue anticipation certificates of the authority or from any grant from the County of Hall or City of Gainesville, or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(h)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds and such other instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing. 
(i)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public or private corporations, performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. 
(j)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this Act. 
(k)  To adopt, alter or repeal its own by-laws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(l)  To issue revenue anticipation certificates for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the authority. Such revenue anticipation certificates shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act of the General Assembly of 1937, (Ga. Laws 1937, pp. 761—774), and as subsequently amended, providing for the issuance of revenue anticipation certificates. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 2282, § 6) 
Sec. 3.1.22. - Bonds. 
All debentures, notes, bonds, and revenue anticipation certificates issued by the authority shall be exempt from state and local taxation. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 2282, § 7) 
Sec. 3.1.23. - Debts. 
The authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt as against the State of Georgia, the County of Hall or the City of Gainesville. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 2282, § 8) 
Sec. 3.1.24. - Audits. 
The books and records of the authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the authority, by a competent auditor. The authority shall furnish copies of said audit to the County of Hall and the City of Gainesville. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 2282, § 9) 
Sec. 3.1.25. - Intent. 
This Act being for the purpose of developing and promoting the public good and the welfare of the County of Hall and the City of Gainesville and their inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 2282, § 10) 
Sec. 3.1.26. - Severability. 
The provisions of this Act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 2282, § 11) 
Secs. 3.1.27—3.1.40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - ADDITIONAL POWERS 

Sec. 3.1.41. - Established. 
For purposes of this Act, The Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority is that authority established pursuant to a resolution amending Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1945, which resolution appears in (Ga. Laws 1964, p. 866 et seq.), which resolution was ratified at the General Election of November 3, 1964, and which resolution was continued as part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1976. This Act is based upon those powers granted by subsection M of Section 1 of said resolution. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, p. 4300, § 1) 
Sec. 3.1.42. - Powers. 
In addition to any other powers granted to The Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority and without limiting any such powers, said authority is hereby granted all powers granted to the authorities under the Development Authorities Law, approved March 28, 1969 (Ga. Laws 1969, p. 137 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, p. 4300, § 2) 
Sec. 3.1.43. - Projects which may be undertaken. 
In addition to any other projects regarding which The Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority may exercise its powers and duties and without limiting any such projects, such powers and duties may also be exercised regarding any "project" and "cost of project" as defined in the Development Authorities Law, approved March 28, 1969 (Ga. Laws 1969, p. 137 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, p. 4300, § 3) 
CHAPTER 2. - GAINESVILLE REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3.2.1. - Constitutional amendment—Generally. 
Article IX, Section VIII, Paragraph I of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph at the end thereof to read as follows: 
 "Subject to the conditions and limitations specified by local law, the General Assembly may create a Gainesville Redevelopment Authority to assist and promote the economic development and redevelopment of those areas of the City of Gainesville selected by the authority for development, redevelopment, or other improvement. In addition to such other powers as may be specified by law, the authority may: (1) issue revenue bonds, notes, bonds, or revenue certificates; (2) pledge for the retirement of the indebtedness revenues or taxes levied by the City of Gainesville for the purposes of the authority within one or more tax districts, provided each such tax district is located within the central business district of the City of Gainesville; (3) acquire, own, operate, and dispose of real and personal property and construct or remodel same; (4) finance commercial, office, retail, wholesale, restaurant, recreational, hotel, motel, parking, and transportation projects for private enterprise and finance utilities, streets, parks, and public improvements of all kinds for public or private use; and (5) contract with any municipality, county, political subdivision, authority, or other public or private corporation for periods of less than 50 years. The authority may not: (1) exercise the power of eminent domain; (2) engage in an undertaking or undertakings or in a project or projects requiring capital expenditures until a resolution approving same has been adopted by a majority vote of the members of the governing authority of the City of Gainesville attending a regular or special meeting of the governing authority at which a majority of the members of the governing authority is present; or (3) purchase or acquire land or facilities for lease, sale, other conveyance to an industry for any purpose, except that the authority may purchase, acquire, or develop property or facilities to be sold, leased, or conveyed for industrial use if: (a) the industrial use of the property or facility, or a portion thereof, is incidental to a project or undertaking of the authority that is principally devoted to the exercise of its powers used to serve its otherwise authorized purpose; or (b) the governing authority of the City of Gainesville passes a resolution at a regular or special session, with a quorum being present and a majority of those present voting in the affirmative, that such a facility or property is appropriate for development by the authority because the facility or property should be coordinated with, or developed in conjunction with, or as a part of, a project or undertaking which the authority is otherwise authorized to undertake. For the purposes of the preceding sentence, an industrial use is `incidental' to a project or undertaking if the total capital cost of the property or facility to be utilized for industrial purposes total capital cost does not exceed 25 percent of the total capital cost of the project or undertaking. Until amended or otherwise changed by the General Assembly, the provisions of an Act creating the Gainesville Redevelopment Authority, approved March 24, 1978 (Ga. Laws 1978, p. 4440), are hereby ratified and continued, except to the extent in conflict with the provisions of this paragraph and except that the General Assembly may not remove or reduce any power of the authority as specified in the Act." 
(1980 Ga. Laws, p. 2024, § 1) 
Sec. 3.2.2. - Same—Continued. 
That constitutional amendment authorizing the creation of a Gainesville Redevelopment Authority, providing for powers and limitations, and permitting the issuance of certain bonds (Resolution Act No. 155; Senate Resolution 248; Ga. L. 1980, p. 2024) shall not be repealed or deleted on July 1, 1987, as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia but is specifically continued in force and effect on and after that date as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, p. 3637, § 1) 
Sec. 3.2.3. - Same—Authority for continuation. 
This Act is passed pursuant to Article XI, Section I, Paragraph IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia which authorizes the continuation of certain amendments to the Constitution. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, p. 3637, § 2) 
Secs. 3.2.4—3.2.15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - ACT TO CREATE AUTHORITY, ETC. 

Sec. 3.2.16. - Creation of authority. 
There is hereby created a public body corporate and politic to be known as the Gainesville Redevelopment Authority which shall be an instrumentality and a public corporation of the State of Georgia. By that name, style, and title said authority may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 1) 
Sec. 3.2.17. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth hereinbelow: 
(a)  The term "authority" means the authority created by this Act. 
(b)  The term "member" means a member of the authority established by this Act. 
(c)  The term "project" means any undertaking of the authority in connection with the redevelopment, revitalization or development of urban, central city or other areas within the project areas. "Project" shall also include the acquisition, leasing, maintenance, construction, improvement or modification of any property, real or personal, which is suitable for, used for, or in connection with the redevelopment, development or revitalization of the central business district of Gainesville, Georgia. The term "project" shall not be limited to the foregoing, but shall include those undertakings or combination thereof which are permitted by its purposes and powers as hereinafter set forth. 
(d)  The term "undertaking" shall specifically include those revenue-producing undertakings or combination thereof contained in Georgia Code Annotated Section 87-802(a), as it now exists or is hereinafter amended; provided, however, at no time either by this Act or an amendment hereof shall the term "undertaking" include those undertakings or combinations thereof relating to the purchase or other acquisition of facilities for lease, sale or other conveyance to industries or as contained in subparagraph (11) of Georgia Code Annotated Section 87-802(a), which states: 
  "The purchase of land and the construction thereon of facilities for lease to industries so as to relieve abnormal unemployment conditions" 
because the acquisition of lands, properties and improvements for development, expansion and promotion of industry is encompassed within the term "project" as it relates to legislation pertaining to the Gainesville and Hall County Development Authority, as it now exists or is hereinafter amended. 
 Projects of the authority requiring capital expenditures must have prior approval of a majority of the Gainesville City Council Members meeting at a regular or special meeting thereof. 
(e)  The term "project areas" means those urban, central city, or other areas within the city limits of Gainesville, Georgia, selected by the authority for redevelopment, development or improvement pursuant to the authorization and provisions set forth in this Act. 
(f)  The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired and the cost of all conveyances in fee simple of the authority's title thereto and leases thereof, the cost of preparing the land, including the installation of storm and sanitary sewers and all utilities therefor, the cost of all machinery, equipment and furnishings related to the operation of any project or projects, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for six months after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses and other expenses necessary and incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized and the cost of placing any project in operation. Any expenses incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as part of the "cost of the project or projects" and may be paid or reimbursed out of funds of the authority, including the proceeds of any revenue bonds issued under provisions of this Act for such project or projects. 
(g)  The terms "revenue bonds" and "bonds" shall mean any bonds of the authority which are hereunder authorized to be issued, including refunding bonds, as though such revenue bonds had originally been authorized to be issued under the provisions of the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1937, pp. 761, et seq.), as amended, and in addition shall also mean any obligations of the authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for. 
(h)  Any project or combination of projects shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the authority the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom, including but not limited to, any revenues derived from Hall County, the United States of America, or the City of Gainesville, Georgia, under any contracts with the authority, will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating and maintaining the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project, projects, or combination thereof. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 2) 
Sec. 3.2.18. - Purposes of authority. 
(a)  It is hereby determined, declared and established that the creation of the authority and the implementation of the corporate purposes set forth in this Act is in all respects for the benefit of the people of this state and that the authority is an institution of purely public charity and it is further declared that the revitalization and redevelopment of the project areas is a proper public purpose and this Act is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare the public facilities of said areas and any and all other facilities useful or desirable in connection therewith, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, with the right to contract for the use of or to lease or sell any or all of such facilities, including real property, and to do any and all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development, revitalization, modernization, and operation therefor. 
(b)  It is further found, determined, and declared that all property of said authority is hereby declared and shall in all respects be considered to be public property and title to such property shall be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public, and the use of such property pursuant to the terms of this Act shall be and is hereby declared to be for public or governmental purposes, that is, for the promotion of the general public welfare in matters of cultural development, education, pleasure, convenience and recreation of the public at large, in an effort to better the general condition of society, or that considerable part of society residing in Gainesville, Georgia, which promotion is hereby declared to be a public benefit for the good of humanity and for the general improvement and happiness of society, and all the property, income, obligations, and interest on the obligations of the authority and the transfer thereof shall be and hereby are declared to be nontaxable for any and all purposes. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 3) 
Sec. 3.2.19. - Composition and organization of authority. 
(a)  The authority shall consist of nine (9) members who shall be either residents of the City of Gainesville, operate, manage, or work for a business within the City of Gainesville, or own real property within the City of Gainesville. In making the appointments of members of the authority, not more than one (1) member should be selected from any one (1) family, partnership, or other business organization. Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this Act, the city council of the City of Gainesville shall appoint eight (8) members. The eight (8) appointed members shall select a ninth member to serve a full term. For the initial appointments, the city shall appoint two (2) persons for one (1) year, two (2) for two (2) years, two (2) for (3) three years, and two (2) for four (4) years. The ninth member appointed by the initial eight (8) members shall serve for a term of four (4) years. Thereafter, all terms and appointments, except in case of a vacancy, shall be for four (4) years. In the event a vacancy occurs, the city shall fill by appointment such vacancy for the unexpired term. In making any appointment for a vacancy or after the expiration of a term, the city shall request two (2) nominations for each member to be appointed from the authority. The governing authority of the City of Gainesville may, in its discretion, request the authority to submit additional names before making any appointment to the membership of the Authority. If no nomination is made within fourteen (14) days after such request, the appointment shall be made without any nomination. A member who has served a full four-year term shall not be eligible for reappointment until the lapse of one (1) year after the expiration of his or her four-year term. 
(b)  In addition, the Authority shall have one (1) ex officio member. The ex officio member shall be the mayor of the City of Gainesville or another council member designated by the mayor. The ex officio member shall serve in an advisory capacity only and shall have no voting authority. 
(c)  The members of the Authority shall organize and enter upon the performance of their duties immediately after their appointment as provided in this section. 
(d)  The authority shall elect one (1) of its members as chairman and one (1) as vice-chairman and shall elect a secretary-treasurer or a secretary and a treasurer, who may but need not necessarily hold membership on the authority. 
(e)  Five (5) members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, and no vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the authority at every meeting, and in every instance a majority vote of a quorum shall authorize any legal act of the authority, including all things necessary to authorize and issue revenue bonds. 
(f)  The members of the authority shall not be entitled to compensation for their services, but may be reimbursed by the authority for their actual expenses properly incurred in the performance of their duties. Each member of the authority shall hold office until his or her successor shall have been appointed. The authority shall make rules, bylaws, and regulations for its own government and may retain, employ, and engage professional and technical supervisors, assistants, and experts and other agents and employees, temporary and permanent, as it may require. The members of the authority shall be accountable in all respects as trustees, and the authority shall keep suitable books and records of all its obligations, contracts, transactions, and undertakings and of all income and receipts of every nature and all expenditures of every kind. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 4; HB 801, § 4, 5-11-09) 
Sec. 3.2.20. - Powers of the authority. 
The authority shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions set forth in this Act including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(a)  To sue and be sued; 
(b)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal at pleasure; 
(c)  To make contracts and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and to contract with any departments, institutions, agencies, counties, municipalities or political subdivisions of the State of Georgia, public corporations and with private legal entities and others upon such terms and for such purposes as may be deemed advisable for a term not exceeding fifty years; any such municipalities or political subdivision shall have and hereby is given the right and power to make such contracts, and all payments contracted to be paid by the municipalities or political subdivision to the authority under such contract or contracts entered into pursuant to the provisions of this Act shall constitute general obligations of the municipality or political subdivision for the payment of which the full faith and credit of such municipality or political subdivision shall be and the same hereby is pledged to provide the funds required to fulfill all obligations arising under any such contract; and any such municipality or political subdivision which shall have entered into such a contract pursuant to the provisions of this Act shall annually in each and every fiscal year during the term of such contract include in a general revenue or appropriation measure, whether or not any other items are included, sums sufficient to satisfy the payments required to be made in each year by such contract until all payments required under such contract have been paid in full, and such revenues shall be and hereby are unconditionally obligated to the payment of such sums. In the event for any reason any such provision or appropriation is not made, then the fiscal officers of such municipality or political subdivision are hereby authorized and directed to set up as an appropriation on their accounts in each fiscal year the amounts required to pay the obligations called for under any such contract. The amount of the appropriation in each fiscal year to meet the obligations of such contract as authorized and required hereby shall be due and payable and shall be expended for the purpose of paying and meeting the obligations provided under the terms and conditions of such contract, and such appropriation shall have the same legal status as if the contracting municipality or political subdivision had included the amount of the appropriation in its general revenue or appropriation measure, and such fiscal officers shall make such payment to the authority if for any reason such appropriation is not otherwise made; and said political subdivision be and the same is hereby specifically authorized to levy taxes, without limitation as to rate or amount, and to expend tax monies of said municipality or political subdivision and any other available funds thereof, and to obligate said municipality or political subdivision to make payment thereof to the authority upon such terms as may be provided in any such contract entered into by and between the authority and said municipality or political subdivision, in order to enable the authority to pay the principal of and interest on any of its bonds as the same mature and to create and maintain a reserve for that purpose and also to enable the authority to pay the cost of maintaining, repairing and operating the property so furnished by said authority; 
(d)  To acquire, construct, own, repair, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, maintain and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid, in whole or in part, from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from such proceeds and any grant or contribution from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(e)  To accept loans and/or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America, the State of Georgia, or any agency, instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America, the State of Georgia, or such agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision may require; 
(f)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and devises of any property and to administer trusts; 
(g)  To acquire by purchase, gift or donation any real or personal property desired to be acquired as a part of any project or for the purpose of improving, extending, adding to, reconstructing, renovating or remodeling any project or part thereof already acquired, or for the purpose of demolition to make room for such project or any part thereof; 
(h)  To sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, mortgage or dispose of, or grant options for any such purposes, any real or personal property or interest therein; 
(i)  To mortgage, convey, pledge or assign any properties revenues, income, tolls, charges or fees owned or received by the authority; 
(j)  To issue revenue obligations for the purpose of providing funds for carrying out the purpose of the authority, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(k)  To appoint officers and retain agents, engineers, attorneys, fiscal agents, accountants and employees and to provide their compensation and duties; 
(l)  To acquire by purchase, gift or lease any property owned by a municipality or political subdivision which has been acquired or damaged through the exercise of the right of eminent domain by said municipality or political subdivision; 
(m)  To construct, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve and equip projects located on land owned or leased by the authority, and to pay all or part of the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms or corporations, or any other contribution, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use; 
(n)  To borrow money and to issue notes or revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, adding to or improving such project, or for the purpose of refunding any such bonds of the authority theretofore issued. Such revenue bonds shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1937, pp. 761, et seq.), as heretofore or hereafter amended. As security for the payment of any revenue bonds so authorized, any property, real or personal, of the authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered and said authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture containing any provisions not in conflict with law for the security of such bonds, which trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or upon default in the performance of any term or condition contained in such agreement or indenture. The State of Georgia on behalf of the state and each county, municipal corporation, political subdivision and taxing district therein hereby waives any right it or such county, municipal corporation, political subdivision or taxing district may have to prevent the forced sale or foreclosure of any property of the authority so mortgaged or encumbered and any such mortgage or encumbrance may be foreclosed in accordance with law and the terms thereof; 
(o)  To make or cause to be made studies and analyses of economic changes taking place in project areas and of the impact of metropolitan growth upon those areas; 
(p)  To prepare a plan or plans for the development and redevelopment of such project areas; such plan or plans shall be coordinated with governmental planning boards and agencies but the authority shall have the ultimate responsibility for preparation of such plan or plans; 
(q)  To implement any general plan of development in the project areas which have been approved by the political subdivision in which said development is located; 
(r)  To have and exercise any and all of the usual powers of private and public corporations which are not in conflict with the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, including the power to adopt and amend bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority; 
(s)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
(t)  To make loans of a temporary nature of surplus or accumulated funds; 
(u)  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or on any specific matter; 
(v)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish or to complement the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated; 
(w)  Such additional powers as are set forth at Ga. Code Ann. Section 87-803 as it now exists or is hereafter amended, said powers being incorporated herein by reference. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 5) 
Sec. 3.2.21. - Revenue bonds. 
(a)  The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the authority created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable and may be secured by a pledge of rents, fees, charges, and other revenues of, and by the mortgage of, all or any part of the project or projects financed in whole or in part with the proceeds of such bonds or with the proceeds of bonds called and refunded or to be called and refunded by such bond issue. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates per annum, payable at such time or times, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. 
(b)  The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of the principal thereof and the interest thereon, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both principal and interest. 
(c)  All such bonds shall be executed with the engraved, imprinted, stamped, or otherwise reproduced facsimile of the signature of the chairman of the authority and the corporate seal of the authority shall be thereunto impressed or a facsimile thereof imprinted or otherwise reproduced and attested by the manually executed signature of the secretary-treasurer of the authority and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signature of said secretary-treasurer. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on the bonds or coupons shall cease to be such officer before delivery of such bonds, such signature shall, nevertheless, be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until delivery, and such bonds may, nevertheless, be issued and delivered as though the person who signed or sealed such bonds had not ceased to be such officer, and any of such bonds may be executed and sealed on behalf of said authority by such officers who may, at the time of the execution of such bonds, hold the proper offices of said authority although on the date of such bonds or on the date of any lawful proceedings taken in connection therewith such persons may not have held such offices. 
(d)  All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are hereby declared to be negotiable under the laws of the State of Georgia, subject to provisions for registration. 
(e)  The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority and the proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose provided in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
(f)  Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipt, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(g)  The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bonds and coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(h)  Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required hereunder. Any resolution, providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions hereof shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the authority. 
(i)  Revenue bonds issued by the authority hereunder shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Gainesville, Georgia, Hall County, the State of Georgia or any political subdivision thereof which may contract with said authority. No contracts entered into by the authority with any such political subdivision shall create a debt of such political subdivision of the State of Georgia within the meaning of Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, but any such political subdivision may obligate itself to pay the payments required under such contracts, as herein set out, from monies received from taxes and from any other source without creating a debt within the meaning of Article VII, Section VI, Paragraph I, of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(j)  In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or without the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insuring of the project, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies; and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds; and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depositary of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other monies be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state or of the United States to act as such depositary and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 6) 
Sec. 3.2.22. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or persons who, or any agency, bank or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such bonds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to each regulations as such resolutions or trust indentures may provide. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 7) 
Sec. 3.2.23. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues are produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal of and interest on revenue bonds of the authority, as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds, so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund, which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest and other investment charges, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds, or in the trust indenture, any surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 8) 
Sec. 3.2.24. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 9) 
Sec. 3.2.25. - Funding and refunding bonds. 
The authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 10) 
Sec. 3.2.26. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Hall County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to the validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 11) 
Sec. 3.2.27. - Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law of the State of Georgia, as heretofore or hereafter amended. The petition for validation shall also make a party defendant to such action any municipality or political subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and any such municipality, political subdivision or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any exist, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the authority issuing the same, and any municipality, political subdivision or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said authority. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 12) 
Sec. 3.2.28. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
The authority shall have perpetual existence, and, while any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 13) 
Sec. 3.2.29. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix rates and to revise same from time to time and to collect rent, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities and commodities furnished; and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension of its undertakings or projects; and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds, and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 14) 
Sec. 3.2.30. - Legal investments. 
The bonds herein authorized are hereby made securities in which all public officers and bodies of this state and all political subdivisions, all insurance companies and associations, and other persons carrying on an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks, and savings associations, including savings and loan associations, building and loan associations, investment companies, and other persons carrying on a banking business, all administrators, guardians, executors, trustees, and other fiduciaries and all other persons whatsoever who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the state may properly and legally invest funds including capital in their control or belonging to them. The bonds are also hereby made securities which may be deposited with and shall be received by all public officers and bodies of this state and all political subdivisions for any purpose for which the deposit of the bonds or other obligations of this state is now or may hereafter be authorized. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 15) 
Sec. 3.2.31. - Property not subject to levy and sale. 
The property of the authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process except such property, revenue, income or funds as may be pledged, assigned, mortgaged or conveyed to secure an obligation of the authority, and any such property, revenue, funds or income may be sold under legal process or under any power granted by the authority to enforce payment of the obligation. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 16) 
Sec. 3.2.32. - Construction. 
This Act and all provisions, rights, powers and authority granted hereunder, being for the welfare of the state and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of its purposes. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 17) 
Sec. 3.2.33. - Powers declared supplementary. 
The provisions of this Act shall be regarded as supplementary and additional to powers conferred by other laws and shall not be regarded as being in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 18) 
Sec. 3.2.34. - Severability. 
The provisions of this Act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions; and notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provision of this Act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of the Act and the application of such provision to persons or circumstances other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby. Insofar as the provisions of this Act are inconsistent with the provisions of any other law, the provisions of this Act shall be controlling. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, p. 4440, § 19) 
CHAPTER 3. - NORTHEAST GEORGIA SURFACE AND AIR TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 3.3.1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Northeast Georgia Surface and Air Transportation Commission Act." 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 1) 
Sec. 3.3.2. - Creation of commission. 
(a)  There is created a body corporate and politic, to be known as the Northeast Georgia Surface and Air Transportation Commission, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, bring and defend actions, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts. The commission shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(b)  The commission shall be composed of 33 members who shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)  Two members shall be appointed by the governing authority of each member county. One of such members shall be appointed for an initial term of one year and one for an initial term of three years. Successors to such members shall serve for terms of three years; 
(2)  One member shall be appointed by the governing authority of each member municipality for an initial term of two years. Successors to such members shall serve for terms of three years; and 
(3)  One member shall be elected at large by a majority vote of the remaining members for an initial term of two years. Successors to such member shall serve for a term of three years. 
All initial members of the commission shall be appointed within 30 days of the effective date of this Act; provided, however that any members added by any amendatory Act shall be appointed within 30 days of the effective date of such amendatory Act. All members shall be eligible for reappointment. Twenty-one members shall constitute a quorum. Any vacancy on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the governing body responsible for originally appointing such member or in the case of the at-large member, by vote of the remaining members. No vacancy on the commission shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the commission. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman of the commission from among the members thereof and shall also elect a secretary-treasurer who need not be a member of the commission. The commission shall also elect an executive committee which shall be composed of the chairman and vice-chairman and three additional members elected by a majority of the members of the commission. The executive committee shall have such powers and authority as shall be provided by the bylaws of the commission. Persons elected to the executive committee shall serve on such committee for a term of one year. The members of the commission shall determine their compensation for serving in such capacities. 
(d)  Any member may be removed from office for good cause affecting his ability to perform his duties as a member, for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office or for violating the conflict of interest provisions of this Act by vote of 22 of the other members, but only after a public hearing at which such member is given the right to present evidence in his own behalf and only upon a finding by 22 of the other members that good cause for removal affecting the member's ability to perform his duties as a member exists, that he was guilty of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office, or that he violated the conflict of interest provisions of this Act. Any member who fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the commission shall automatically by reason of such fact cease to be a member of the commission. However, such person shall be eligible for reappointment to the commission upon a showing of good cause for failure to attend such meetings. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 2; 1990 Ga. Laws, p. 5151. § 1) 
Sec. 3.3.3. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  Airport means: 
a.  Any area of land or water or any structure which is or has been used, or which the commission may plan to use, for the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft, including helicopters; and all buildings, equipment, facilities, or other property and improvements of any kind or nature located within the bounds of any such land or water area or structure; 
b.  Facilities of any type for the accommodation of passengers, maintenance, servicing, and operation of aircraft, business offices and facilities of private businesses and governmental agencies, parking of automobiles, and all other activities which are or have been carried on or which may be necessary or convenient in conjunction with the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft; and 
c.  All buildings, equipment, facilities, and other property and improvements of any kind or nature located outside the bounds of any such land or water area or structure which is or has been used or which the commission plans to use for the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft which are necessary for the safe operation of aircraft, including without limitation, aviation easements and other real or personal property. 
(2)  Commission means the Northeast Georgia Surface and Air Transportation Commission created by Section 2 [3.3.2] of this Act. 
(3)  Cost of the project means the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment; financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction; cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal, and legal expenses, costs of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expense; and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this Act, the construction of any project, and the placing of the same in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(4)  Member county means Banks, Barrow, Clarke, Elbert, Greene, Hall, Jackson, Madison, Morgan, Oconee, Oglethorpe, Stephens and Walton counties unless the governing authority of any such county has adopted a resolution, at any time, declaring that such county shall not be a member county under this Act. 
(5)  Member municipality means the Cities of Athens, Commerce, Elberton, Gainesville, Jefferson, Madison, Monroe, and Winder unless the governing authority of such municipality has adopted a resolution, at any time, declaring that such municipality shall not be a member municipality under this Act. 
(6)  Project means and includes the leasing, acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, improving, and operation of public airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft and surface transportation facilities and systems, related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings, and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property, both real and personal, and the lease and sale of any part or all of such facilities, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance, and operation of such airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft and such surface transportation facilities and systems, deemed by the commission to be necessary, convenient, or desirable for the operation of such airports, landing fields, and surface transportation facilities and systems. 
(7)  Revenue bonds and bonds shall mean revenue bonds and certificates as defined and provided for in Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," and such type of obligations may be issued by the commission as authorized under said article. In addition, such terms shall also mean obligations of the commission the issuance of which are specifically provided for in this Act. 
(b)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the commission, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the commission therefrom will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued for the cost of such project or projects. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 3; 1990 Ga. Laws, p. 5151, § 2) 
Sec. 3.3.4. - Powers. 
(a)  The commission is authorized: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the seal at pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property, rights, or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or to dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the commission, the commission being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act; and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the commission and to the owners of the property to be condemned; and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money is deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(4)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys and fix their respective compensation; 
(5)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and any and all persons, firms, and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the commission upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; 
(6)  To plan, acquire, establish, develop, construct, enlarge, improve, maintain, equip, and lease all airports which shall come under its control under the provisions of this Act or which it may acquire or plan to acquire; to regulate, protect, and police such airports and all related activities and facilities; to enter into any contracts, leases, or other agreements, promulgate any orders, set any tolls, fees, or other charges for the use of its property or services and collect and use same as necessary to operate the airports under its control and to accomplish any purposes of this Act; and to make any purchases or sales necessary for such purposes; provided, however, that airports owned or operated by a member county or municipality or any authority of a member county or municipality may not be acquired except with the consent of such owner or operator; 
(7)  To contract with any persons, firms, or public or private corporations to supply goods, commodities, facilities, and services to the public, employees of the commission, and employees of air carriers and other commercial interests located at any airport under its control under such terms and conditions as it may prescribe including, if desirable, exclusive rights, franchises, or concessions; 
(8)  To adopt and enforce reasonable rules and regulations for the orderly, safe, efficient, and sanitary operation of airports and related facilities under its control; to provide for its own security force and peace officers with powers of arrest or to arrange for such security force or peace officers in connection with the county in which a facility is located; and to prescribe reasonable penalties for the breach of any rule or regulation. All such rules, regulations, or orders shall become effective upon approval by the commission and after publication of a notice containing a substantive statement of the rules and regulations and the penalties for violation thereof in a newspaper of general circulation of all counties in which such rules and regulations are to be applied. The notice shall state that the breach of any such rule or regulation will subject the violator to a penalty, shall state the penalty, and shall state that the full text of all rules and regulations shall be maintained in the principal office of the commission where same will be open to public inspection and perusal. All rules and regulations shall in fact be so maintained. Said rules and regulations, when promulgated as provided herein shall be judicially recognized by and enforceable in the court having jurisdiction over the offense and located in the county in which the violation occurs; 
(9)  To provide its own fire and emergency medical protection and crash and rescue services or to arrange for such services in connection with any federal, state, municipal, or county agency or any private firm in the business of providing such services; 
(10)  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in aid of airports under its control and to accept and use same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by the federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
(11)  To enter into agreements with the state, any subdivision thereof, or any county or municipality or the federal government or any agency thereof to use in the performance of its functions the facilities or the services of the state or such subdivision or such county or municipality or the federal government or any agency thereof in order to accomplish the purposes of this Act; 
(12)  To enter into contracts, leases, or other agreements with federally certificated air carriers, other commercial air carriers, and other commercial users of its airports for the use of such airports under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate and for such charges, rentals, and fees as it deems appropriate; 
(13)  To enter into such agreement with any municipality or any county presently operating airports of which the commission may subsequently assume control with respect to the manner of transfer of airport employees from any municipality or any county to the commission as the commission deems necessary and appropriate or to contract with such governmental agency for the continued services of such officers and employees on such terms as are deemed to be appropriate; 
(14)  To establish a plan of civil service for officers and employees of the commission or to provide by resolution that such officers and employees of the commission shall be covered under any state, county, or municipal civil service plan which is available to such employees under the laws of the state or any county or municipality; 
(15)  To establish a plan for retirement, disability, hospitalization, and death benefits for officers and employees of the commission or to provide by resolution that such officers and employees shall be covered under any state, county, or municipal plan available to them under the laws of the state or any county or municipality; 
(16)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects as defined in paragraph (5) of Section 3 [3.3.3] of this Act, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds and revenue bonds of the commission or from such proceeds and any grant from the United States of America, the State of Georgia, or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(17)  To accept loans and grants of money, materials, or property of any kind from the United States of America, the State of Georgia, or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America, the State of Georgia, or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(18)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes, to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(19)  To exercise any power which is usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions and which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; and 
(20)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act to the contrary, the commission shall not: 
(1)  Own or maintain aircraft or perform maintenance on aircraft owned by others; 
(2)  Engage in flight instruction, flight charter, or other aircraft for hire business; or 
(3)  Perform maintenance on radios, propellers, or other aircraft accessories. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 4) 
Sec. 3.3.5. - Members of the commission not to be interested in contracts. 
The commission is prohibited from entering into a contract for the purchase of goods, property, or service with any member of the commission or the employer, partner, principal, agent, servant, or employee of a commission member. The commission shall not enter into any contract in which any member of the commission is financially interested, directly or indirectly. Neither the chairman nor any member of the commission nor a partner, employer, principal, agent, servant, or employee of a commission member shall enter into any contract with the commission or sell to the commission any goods, property, or service; provided, however, this section shall not apply to goods or services purchased from any public utility. Any contract made in violation of this section shall be void. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 5) 
Sec. 3.3.6. - Revenue bonds. 
The commission, or any authority or body which had or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the commission created by this Act, is authorized at one time or from time to time to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds of the commission for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as defined in this Act of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided in this Act for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding the interest allowed by Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," shall be payable semiannually, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the commission, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the commission, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the commission in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 6) 
Sec. 3.3.7. - Same; form; denominations; registration; place of payment. 
The commission shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the commission may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone or also as to both the principal and interest. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 7) 
Sec. 3.3.8. - Same; signatures; seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the commission and the official seal of the commission shall be fixed thereto and attested by the secretary of the commission, and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the signature or facsimile signature of the chairman of the commission. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signature of such person and any bond may be signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the commission by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 8) 
Sec. 3.3.9. - Same; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under this Act shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instruments law of the state. Such bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 9) 
Sec. 3.3.10. - Same; sale; price. 
The commission may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the commission, but no such sale shall be made at a price so low as to require the payment of interest on the money received therefor at a greater rate than the interest allowed by Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," computed with relation to the absolute maturity of the bonds in accordance with standard tables of bond values, excluding, however, from such computation the amount of any premium to be paid on redemption of any bond prior to maturity. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 10) 
Sec. 3.3.11. - Same; proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects and, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may be issued in like manner to provide the amount of such deficit, which, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into the fund provided for in this Act for the payment of principal and interest of such bonds. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 11) 
Sec. 3.3.12. - Same; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the commission, under like restrictions, may issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 12) 
Sec. 3.3.13. - Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The commission may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 13) 
Sec. 3.3.14. - Conditions precedent to issuance; object of issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the commission, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the commission by a majority of its members. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 14) 
Sec. 3.3.15. - Bonds; trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the commission, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the commission and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company inside or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be received by the commission. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the commission in relation to the acquisition of property; the construction of the project; the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of the project; and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the commission, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the commission. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the commission may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 15) 
Sec. 3.3.16. - Same; to whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
In the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, the commission shall provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes for which such bonds were issued, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 16) 
Sec. 3.3.17. - Same; sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the commission to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the commission as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust instrument may provide; and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals, as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund, which sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as provided in this Act. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust indenture, surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds. Any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 17) 
Sec. 3.3.18. - Same; remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under this Act or any coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given in this Act may be restricted by the resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted under this Act or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the commission or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 18) 
Sec. 3.3.19. - Same; refunding bonds. 
The commission is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue refunding bonds of the commission for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities, all other details thereof, and the duties of the commission in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provision of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 19) 
Sec. 3.3.20. - Same; venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under this Act or any suit or action against the commission shall be brought in the Superior Court of Hall County, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under this Act shall likewise be brought in said court, which shall have exclusive jurisdiction of such actions. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 20) 
Sec. 3.3.21. - Same; validation. 
Bonds of the commission shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedures of Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law." The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the commission. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds against the commission issuing the same and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality contracting with the commission. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 21) 
Sec. 3.3.22. - Same; interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the commission remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of the commission or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the commission to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the commission. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the commission and the holders of any such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Act, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 22) 
Sec. 3.3.23. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of any member county or municipality or a pledge of the faith and credit of said county or municipality, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this Act; and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate any member county or municipality to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment of such bonds; and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 23) 
Sec. 3.3.24. - Bonds as legal investments for trustees and as lawful deposits of securities with public officers. 
Any bonds issued by the commission under the provisions of this Act are made securities in which public officers and bodies of this state; all municipalities; all municipal subdivisions; all insurance companies and associations and other persons carrying on an insurance business; all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks, savings associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking business; all administrators, guardians, executors, trustees, and other fiduciaries; and all other persons who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the state may properly and legally invest funds including capital in their control or belonging to them. The bonds are also made securities which may be deposited with and shall be received by all public officers and bodies of this state and all municipalities and municipal subdivisions for any purpose for which the deposit of the bonds or other obligations of this state is now or may hereafter be authorized. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 24) 
Sec. 3.3.25. - Property of commission deemed to be public property. 
It is declared that all property of the commission held, pursuant to the terms of this Act, whether real or personal, tangible or intangible, and of any kind or nature, and any income or revenue therefrom, is held for an essential public and governmental purpose, and all such property is deemed to be public property. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 25) 
Sec. 3.3.26. - Taxation of the commission. 
The property, obligations, and interest on the obligations of the commission shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations, and interest on the obligations of its member counties. The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not extend to tenants or lessees of the commission. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 26) 
Sec. 3.3.27. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 27) 
Sec. 3.3.28. - Determination of need for the commission. 
(a)  It is determined and declared that the present and projected rapid growth in commercial and private air traffic in the northeast Georgia area, the need for adequate airports to serve safely and efficiently the air transportation needs of the state and the metropolitan areas of northeast Georgia, the need to eliminate airport hazards, the need to raise large amounts of capital for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of present and future airports, and the need to coordinate the operation of various airports within certain metropolitan areas of the state necessitates the creation of an air and surface transportation commission for the present and future operation of air and surface transportation facilities. It is further determined and declared that the establishment of such commission is necessary and essential to ensure the welfare, safety, and convenience of citizens of the entire state and to ensure the proper economic development of the entire state. 
(b)  The purposes and objectives of this Act and the commission shall be to meet the needs and requirements recognized in subsection (a) of this section through the establishment, maintenance, and operation of unified and coordinated surface and air transportation systems in the northeast Georgia region; to ensure the orderly and proper use and growth of public airports; to ensure that the maximum public benefit is attained from any public airports in existence and from any future airports; to ensure proper planning and establishment of future airports; to ensure maximum participation in national and international air transportation programs; to promote public transportation and commerce; and to provide the effective and economical use of public airports for the public welfare, safety, and convenience. The primary purpose of this commission is to address the airline passenger service needs of the region and is not to supplant or replace the need for general aviation in the region. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 28) 
Sec. 3.3.29. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The commission is authorized to prescribe, fix, and collect rates, fees, tolls, or charges and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls, or charges for the services, facilities, or commodities furnished and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as provided in this Act to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of the public airport, landing fields, surface transportation systems, and related buildings and facilities and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues of such undertakings or projects, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 29) 
Sec. 3.3.30. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the commission to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act. After the commission has selected a potential site or sites for the regional airport, notice of the site or sites so selected shall be delivered to the board of commissioners of the county wherein the site or sites are located, and the board of commissioners shall have 60 days to notify the commission of its decision to accept the airport or, in the alternative, submit the question of acceptance or rejection of the regional airport to a public referendum which shall be held within 90 days of the call. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 30) 
Sec. 3.3.31. - Financial statements and audit reports. 
(a)  The commission shall establish a fiscal year for its operation and, as soon after the end of each fiscal year as is feasible, the commission shall cause to be prepared and printed a report and financial statement of the commission's operations for the fiscal year just ended and of its assets and liabilities. A copy of such report shall be sent to the governing commission of each member county, and additional copies shall be made available for distribution to the general public on written requests therefor. 
(b)  The commission shall appoint in due time each year a firm of independent certified public accountants as auditors who shall examine the books, records, and accounts of the commission for the purpose of auditing and reporting upon its financial statement for such year. The report of such auditors shall be appended to such financial statement. 
(c)  Whenever the commission deems it necessary or advisable, it shall be authorized to employ a firm of qualified independent engineers to survey the condition of the commission's facilities and operations from an engineering standpoint and to make a report thereof together with its recommendations for improvement in its physical facilities and operating procedures. A copy of such report shall be sent to the governing commission of each member county and additional copies shall be made available for distribution to the general public on written request therefor. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 31) 
Sec. 3.3.32. - Competitive bidding on contracts. 
(a)  Except in the purchase of unique articles or articles which for any reason are unobtainable in the open market and except as provided in this Act, competitive bids shall be secured before any purchase or sale, by contract or otherwise, is made by the commission or before any contract is awarded for construction, alterations, supplies, equipment, repairs, or maintenance or for rendering any services to the commission other than professional services. The purchase shall be made from or the contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder or the sale shall be made to the highest responsible bidder. If the amount involved is $10,000.00 or more, no purchase of any unique article or other articles unobtainable in the open market shall be made unless a report detailing why such unique article or other articles are unobtainable in the open market is submitted to the chairman of the commission. 
(b)  All purchases, contracts, and sales of $10,000.00 or more shall be awarded after advertising in the official organs of the member counties at least two weeks prior to the bid opening. Bids shall be publicly opened and read aloud at a date, time, and place designated in the invitation to bid. Invitations to bid shall be sent at least one week prior to the bid opening to at least three potential bidders who are qualified technically and financially to submit bids or, in lieu thereof, the commission shall keep on file a memorandum showing that less than three potential bidders so qualified exist in the market area within which it is practicable to obtain bids. 
(c)  Written price quotations from at least three qualified and responsible vendors shall be obtained for all purchases and sales under $2,000.00 but more than $1,000.00 or, in lieu thereof, the commission shall keep on file a memorandum showing that less than three vendors so qualified exist in the market area within which it is practicable to obtain quotations, except as provided in this Act. 
(d)  Purchases or sales under $1,000.00 may be negotiated with or without competitive bidding under sound procurement procedures as promulgated and established by the commission. 
(e)  Competitive bidding requirements may be waived if it is determined by the commission that an emergency directly and immediately affecting customer service or public health, safety, or welfare requires immediate delivery of supplies, materials, equipment, or services; provided, however, that a statement explaining the emergency shall be entered in the permanent records of the commission. 
(f)  The commission shall have the right to reject any or all bids or parts of any or all bids whenever in the opinion of the commission such rejection is necessary for the protection of the interests of the commission. In such cases, the commission shall readvertise for new bids on the same or different terms. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 32) 
Sec. 3.3.33. - Contractors to give bond. 
Contractors who are awarded contracts by the commission shall be required to give bond in an amount equal to the amount of the bid, with good security, for the faithful performance of the contract and to indemnify the commission for any damages occasioned by a failure to perform the same within the prescribed time. Such bond shall be approved by and filed with the commission or shall be approved by and filed with such other person as may be designated by the commission. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 33) 
Sec. 3.3.34. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for doing the things authorized thereby, shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as being in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 34) 
Sec. 3.3.35. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act, being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the state and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 35) 
Sec. 3.3.36. - Powers of counties and municipalities. 
This Act does not in any way take from member counties or any municipality located therein or any adjoining county the authority to own, operate, and maintain public airports or landing fields or to issue revenue certificates as is provided by Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law." 
(1989 Ga. Laws, p. 4596, § 36) 
Sec. 3.3.37. - [Severability.] 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of acts which were included in the related laws. 

 
PART 3 - THE CODE OF ORDINANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to Ord. No. 89-12, adopted on April 4, 1989, references in the Code to "commission" and "commissioner" have been changed to "council" and "council member" respectively. 
Cross reference— Fiscal affairs, Tit. 2; public safety, Tit. 3; municipal utilities, Tit. 5; planning, Tit. 8; schedule of fees, Tit. 10; emergency management office, § 3-1-48; emergency management organization, § 3-1-49; city public works director, § 3-4-6; public employees to obey traffic regulations, § 3-4-11; reserved parking spaces for city officials and employees, § 3-4-86; animal control unit, § 4-1-2 et seq.; authority of health officer as to rat control, § 4-1-145 et seq.; administration of flood protection and prevention ordinance, § 4-5-11; administration of insurance tax and license, § 6-6-6. 

Title 1 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Related law reference— General government, § 1.1.1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local government, OCGA Title 36; emergency interim successors to officials, OCGA § 38-3-50. 

CHAPTER 1-1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances generally, OCGA § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as The Code of Ordinances, City of Gainesville, Georgia, and may be so cited. It may also be cited as The Gainesville Municipal Code. 
(Code 1958, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Exemplification of municipal minutes and other records, OCGA § 24-7-21. 
Sec. 1-1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Chapter, article, division. References to a chapter, article or division of this Code also refer to any schedule of fees, rates, charges, etc., pertaining thereto. 
Charter. The word "charter" means the charter of the City of Gainesville, approved on April 11, 1979, as now or hereafter amended or superseded by various acts of the General Assembly or home rule amendments adopted by the city council. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" are construed as if the words "of Gainesville" followed it and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
City council. Whenever reference is made to the city council, it is construed to refer to the city council of the City of Gainesville. 
City manager. Whenever reference is made to the city manager, it shall be construed to refer to the city manager of the City of Gainesville. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceedings shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, is counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had is not to be counted. 
Corporations. This Code imposes liability on a corporation, and an agent of the corporation performs the conduct which is an element of the offense while acting within the scope of his office or employment and in behalf of the corporation; this section is clearly intended to impose liability on a corporation, and an agent of the corporation. A corporation may be prosecuted for an act or omission constituting an offense if the commission of the offense is authorized, requested, commanded, performed, or recklessly tolerated by the board of directors or by a managerial official who is acting within the scope of his employment in behalf of the corporation. For the purposes of this section: 
Agent means any director, officer, servant, employee, or other person who is authorized to act in behalf of the corporation; 
Managerial official means an officer of the corporation or any other agent who has a position of comparable authority for the formulation of corporate policy or the supervision of subordinate employees. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Hall. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Health officer means the health officer of the joint city-county board of health, or by any duly authorized person who may represent him. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Mayor. Whenever the word "mayor" is used, it shall be construed to mean the mayor of the City of Gainesville. 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" includes "affirmation." 
OCGA. The letters "OCGA" means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards and commissions by title only, i.e., "city clerk or secretary of the city council," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards and commissions of the City of Gainesville. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, co-partnerships of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, copartnerships, public and private institutions, bodies politic and corporate and other legal entities as well as to individuals, including the officers of such associations, corporations, etc. 
Personal property includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Signature, subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Street means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present or past. 
Time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. 
Writing. The word "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The word "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1958, §§ 1-2, 7-1, 10-21, 12-1, 23-104; Ord. No. 88-60, § I, 10-4-88) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, OCGA § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time under Civil Practice Act, OCGA § 9-11-6; "street" defined, OCGA § 40-1-1(58). 
Sec. 1-1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1958, § 1-3) 
Charter reference— Section captions in charter, § 8.14. 
Sec. 1-1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1958, § 1-4) 
Charter reference— Existing ordinances, etc., § 8.12; specific repealer for charter, § 8.17; general repealer for charter, § 8.18. 
Sec. 1-1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of the court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 1-5) 
Charter reference— Severability of charter provisions, § 8.15. 
Sec. 1-1-6. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented. 
(Code 1958, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations; adjudging fines and imprisonments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code and where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1958, § 1-8; Ord. No. 90-28, § 1, 6-19-90) 
State Law reference— Confinement of violators of ordinances, OCGA § 36-30-8; sentences and fines, OCGA § 36-32-5. 
Sec. 1-1-8. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance of the council to any person; 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(5)  The annual appropriation ordinance; 
(6)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(7)  Any ordinance providing for occupational licenses; 
(8)  Any zoning ordinance or zoning map of the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(10)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(11)  Any ordinance accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(12)  Any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city; 
(13)  Any ordinance providing for the acquisition of lands for use as public parks; 
(14)  Any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this Code; 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Ord. of 5-29-58, § 3) 
Sec. 1-1-9. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion hereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, so that a reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of The Code of Ordinances, City of Gainesville, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code, is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That The Code of Ordinances, City of Gainesville, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows: …." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1958, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance sections inserted in the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
CHAPTER 1-2. - ELECTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Municipal elections are governed by the Georgia Municipal Election Code (OCGA § 21-3-1 et seq.). It requires the city to make provision for the following matters: 
(1) Payment of expenses of elections, and other matters, §§ 21-3-8, 21-3-37, 21-3-99, 21-3-162. 
(2) Voter registration system, § 21-3-125. 
(3) Selecting polling places, § 21-3-163. 
(4) Remuneration for rent, heat, etc., for polling place, § 21-3-166. 
(5) Specifying dates of elections, § 21-3-51. 
Provisions pertaining to particular elections are included in ordinances enacted by the city council for those elections. Such ordinances are on file in the office of the clerk. 

Sec. 1-2-1. - Election districts, polling places designated. 
(a)  Three (3) election districts of the city are hereby established for municipal elections and referendums conducted by the city under the provisions of the charter of the city as follows: 
(1)  Election District No. One. This district is comprised of all voters in Wards One and Two of the city. 
(2)  Election District No. Two. This district is comprised of all voters registered in Ward Three of the city. 
(3)  Election District No. Three. This district is comprised of all voters registered in Wards Four and Five. 
(b)  The polling place for each district shall be established as provided in the Georgia Election Code, Section 21-2-266, as amended. 
(Code 1958, § 2-01; Ord. No. No. 2003-40, § 1, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 2015-27, § I, 9-1-15) 
Charter reference— Wards, § 6.13. 
State Law reference— Polling places, OCGA § 21-3-163 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2-2. - Absentee ballot clerk, deputies. 
The city council shall appoint an absentee ballot clerk and he shall have authority to appoint a deputy or deputies to assist and act for him. 
(Code 1958, § 2-01.1) 
State Law reference— Absentee voting, OCGA § 21-3-280 et seq.; applicability, OCGA § 21-3-281; appointment of absentee ballot clerk, OCGA § 21-3-282. 
Sec. 1-2-3. - Filing notice of candidacy by nomination petition. 
Each notice of candidacy by a candidate shall be as provided in the Georgia Election Code, Section 21-2-132, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 88-55, § I, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 2015-27, § II, 9-1-15) 
CHAPTER 1-3. - LEGISLATIVE[5] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— This chapter is reserved for future use. 
Cross reference— Contracts between city and relatives of city council members, etc., § 2-3-90; civil emergencies, § 3-1-21 et seq. 
State Law reference— General municipal legislative power, OCGA § 36-35-3. 

CHAPTER 1-4. - JUDICIAL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Constitution reference— General rights of defendants, Art. 1, § 1, para. 14; judicial power of the state, Art. 6, § 1, para. 1; effect of constitution on municipal courts, Art. 6, § 10, para. 1. 
State Law reference— City courts, OCGA § 15-8-1 et seq.; municipal courts, OCGA § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1-4-1. - Judgments and sentences to run consecutively. 
All judgments and sentences imposed and ordered by the municipal court shall run consecutively unless otherwise specifically provided by the judge in such judgments and sentences. 
(Code 1958, § 1-9) 
State Law reference— Concurrent sentences for felony and misdemeanor offenses, OCGA § 17-10-10. 
CHAPTER 1-5. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Other boards and commissions are in sections dealing with the substantive areas for which they are responsible. 
Cross reference— Contracts between city and relatives of board members, etc., § 2-3-90; planning commission, § 8-1-1 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, § 9-1-151 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-5-1. - Guidelines for appointment of individuals—Appointment process. 
(a)  Post numbers. All positions on any board, agency, commission or committee shall be designated by numbered posts. 
(b)  Nominations. Each city council member shall nominate an individual for each numbered post corresponding with that council member's respective ward number for each position on all boards, agencies, commissions and committees of the city. 
(c)  Confirmation. The confirmation of each individual appointment for each numbered post shall be by a majority vote of the city council members present in an open meeting of the council. 
(d)  Official appointment. An appointment of an individual to any board, agency, commission or committee of the city shall be considered complete only upon the successful completion of the nomination and confirmation process. 
(Ord. No. 89-45, § II(A), 8-1-89) 
Sec. 1-5-2. - Same—Terms of office, vacancies. 
(a)  The term of each member of a board, agency, commission or committee shall be for a period of three (3) years with the exception of the civil service board members as set out in section 3.50 of the charter and the Retirement System Board of Trustees as set out in section 6.3 of the charter. 
(b)  Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of a term in the same manner that the original appointment was made. 
(Ord. No. 89-45, § II(B), 8-1-89) 
Sec. 1-5-3. - Outstanding debt prohibited. 
No individual shall be appointed or serve on a board, agency, commission or committee of the city if the individual has any outstanding debt with the city. Outstanding debt shall include licensing fees, permitting fees, property taxes, utility fees and any other debt of an individual due and unpaid to the city. The department director overseeing the board, agency, commission or committee shall, prior to recommending appointment of an individual, be responsible for determination if any outstanding debt exist by the individual. The department director shall notify the council if he or she becomes aware of an outstanding debt of an individual payable to the City of Gainesville during that individual's term of office and said individual shall be subject to removal from the board/committee by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-42, § I, 10-19-10) 
Sec. 1-5-4. - Same—Appointment to successive terms. 
(a)  Any member of a board, agency, commission or committee shall be eligible for reappointment to a second term. 
(b)  Appointments to any unexpired term shall be considered as a full term if the balance of the unexpired term is over fifty (50) percent of the full term. 
(c)  After an individual has served on the same board, agency, commission or committee for two (2) successive terms or one (1) full term and a partial term, that an individual shall not be eligible for reappointment to a board for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 89-45, § II(C), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 2010-42, § I, 10-19-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-42, § I, adopted Oct. 19, 2010, renumbered § 1-5-3 as § 1-5-4. 
Sec. 1-5-5. - Same—Residence requirements. 
(a)  Each individual appointed to or serving on a board, agency, commission or committee shall be a resident of the city. 
(b)  Residency shall be evidenced by that individual's primary residence, receipt of mail, address listed on their driver's license, voter registration and other similar evidence. 
(c)  If the board, agency, commission or committee rules call for a business relationship, such business relationship shall be evidenced by a significant portion of business sales or service being performed within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 89-45, § II(D), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 2010-42, § I, 10-19-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-42, § II, adopted Oct. 19, 2010, renumbered § 1-5-4 as § 1-5-5. 
Sec. 1-5-6. - Same—Information required to be filed with city clerk. 
The secretary of the board, agency, commission or committee shall file in a timely fashion at least the following information and reports: 
(1)  Meeting agendas and minutes. 
(2)  Written rules and regulations. 
(3)  Budgets and financial reports. 
(4)  Attendance records of members. 
(Ord. No. 89-45, § II(E), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 2010-42, § I, 10-19-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-42, § III, adopted Oct. 19, 2010, renumbered § 1-5-5 as § 1-5-6. 
Secs. 1-5-7—1-5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 93-41, § I, adopted Aug. 3, 1993, repealed former art. 2, §§ 1-5-21—1-5-33, which pertained to the board of education. 

Secs. 1-5-21—1-5-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— The following note has been included as a footnote to Art. 3 of Chapter 1-5 of the Code at the request of the city: 
"The City of Gainesville Parks and Recreation Board was established as a legally separate entity through a special election in 1924, held pursuant to the Georgia Code of 1933, § 69-6 et seq., now codified as O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1. The Parks and Recreation Board operates pursuant to this Code. The Board consists of nine (9) members appointed by the City Council. The City Council, based on the levy authorized in the 1924 election, collects a recreation tax which can be not less than 0.75 mills and not greater than 1.0 mills. The Parks and Recreation Board provides leisure services to entirely to and on behalf of the City of Gainesville. The Board undertakes special projects and assignments for City management. In many respects it functions similar to a City department. 
The Parks and Recreation Director, employed by the Board, serves as Chief Executive Office and operates under full authority of the Parks and Recreation Board and is given the same status with the Parks and Recreation business transactions that is afford and assigned to the City Manager." 

Secs. 1-5-36—1-5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU AUTHORITY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Act No. 653, House Bill No. 1132, passed by the House March 11, 2014, passed by the Senate March 20, 2014 and approved by the Governor April 29, 2014, repealed and reenacted Art. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 4, §§ 1-5-51—1-5-57, pertained to tourism and convention bureau and derived from the Code of 1958, §§ 22-21—22-27.  Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Hotel-motel excise tax, § 2-1-21 et seq. 
State Law reference— Purposes of excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, OCGA § 48-13-50. 
State Constitution reference— Power of General Assembly to provide by law for state participation with municipal facilities for encouraging and promoting tourism, Art. 3, § 6, para. 2. 

Sec. 1-5-51. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Gainesville Convention and Visitors Bureau Authority Act." 
Sec. 1-5-52. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Area" means the corporate limits of the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
(2)  "Authority" means the Gainesville Convention and Visitors Bureau Authority. 
(3)  "Board" means the board of directors of the Gainesville Convention and Visitors Bureau Authority. 
(4)  "City" means the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
(5)  "Special events" means events which, in the judgment of the authority, will promote tourism in the area or privately contracted functions. 
Sec. 1-5-53. - Creation of authority, status, tax exemption, and sovereign immunity. 
(a)  There is created a public body corporate and politic to be known as the Gainesville Convention and Visitors Bureau Authority. The authority shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the state and a public corporation and, by that name, may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and bring and defend actions. The authority shall be a convention and visitors bureau authority created by Act of the General Assembly for a municipality for the purposes of Code Section 48-13-51 of the O.C.G.A. and is intended to be an agency and instrumentality of the municipality and a governmental unit for purposes of Sections 103, 141, and 150 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and, as to the municipality, the authority is intended to be a subordinated entity for the purposes of Section 265(b)(3)(E)(ii) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The authority shall not be a state institution nor a department or agency of the state but shall be a creation of the state, having a distinct corporate identity and being exempt from the provisions of Code Section 50-17-2 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia State Financing and Investment Commission Act." 
(b)  The authority shall have its principal office within the City of Gainesville and its legal situs or residence for the purposes of this Act shall be the City of Gainesville, Hall County, Georgia. 
(c)  The exercise of the powers conferred upon the authority in this Act shall constitute an essential governmental function for a public purpose. The properties of the authority, both real and personal, and the income of the authority are declared to be public properties, and income used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the city and not for the purpose of private or corporate benefit; and such properties, to the extent of the authority's ownership thereof or other interest therein, and all income and obligations of the authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of the state or any city, county, or other political subdivision thereof. The authority shall have all of the exemptions and exclusions from taxes as are now granted to cities and counties for the operation of properties or facilities similar to the properties and facilities to be owned or operated, or both, by the authority. 
(d)  The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the state, and the officers, agents, and employees of the authority, when in performance of work of the authority, shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as officers, agents, and employees of the State of Georgia. The authority may be sued the same as private corporations on any contractual obligation of the authority. Any action to protect or to enforce any rights pursuant to the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against the authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Hall County, Georgia. The property of the authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process. The records of the authority shall be public records which are subject to Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to abridge or change the powers and duties of other authorities, departments, boards, and like agencies of the city. 
Sec. 1-5-54. - Directors and meetings. 
(a)  The board shall consist of at least seven directors, who shall be natural persons at least 18 years of age. The members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the city and shall be eligible to succeed themselves for a maximum of three consecutive terms. The members of the board shall serve terms of two years, except for the initial establishment of the board when three of the seven members shall serve terms of three years. Appointments shall be made so that representation on the board shall always include at least the following: 
(1)  Hotels and motels, two members; 
(2)  Restaurants and food establishments, one member; 
(3)  Attractions, two members; 
(4)  The director of the Gainesville Parks and Recreation Agency, one member; and 
(5)  The city manager of the City of Gainesville, one member. 
Members shall receive no compensation for their services as members of the authority, but shall be reimbursed for their proper and reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties, subject to any limitations imposed by general law on the reimbursement of public officials and subject to any limitations which may be contained in the bylaws of the authority. 
(b)  The board shall meet at such times as may be necessary to transact the business coming before it, but not less often than twice yearly. Either the chairperson or any two other directors together may call a special meeting of the board. Meetings of the board shall be open to the public in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia. Written minutes of all meetings shall be kept; and, within 30 days following every meeting, a copy of the minutes shall be furnished to the mayor and council of the city. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the latest version of Robert's Rules of Order. 
(c)  At the first meeting of the board, and thereafter subsequently to yearly new appointments, the directors shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from their voting members. The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the board and shall vote on all matters coming before the board. The vice chairperson shall preside at meetings in the absence of the chairperson. In the absence of both the chairperson and vice chairperson, the directors present at a meeting shall elect a temporary chairperson to preside at that meeting, so long as the chairperson and vice chairperson both remain absent from the meeting. A quorum shall consist of at least four directors of the board. All directors present at a meeting, including the chairperson, vice chairperson, or any other director presiding at such meeting, shall be entitled to vote on all matters which shall come before the board. No vacancy on the board shall impair the right of a quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the authority. 
Sec. 1-5-55. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the authority is to promote special events as well as to promote tourism, conventions, and trade shows within the area in such manner or manners contemplated by paragraph (4) of subsection (a) of Code Section 48-13-51 of the O.C.G.A. or any other applicable paragraph of such Code section. 
Sec. 1-5-56. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to promote special events as well as to promote tourism, conventions, and trade shows within the area and to operate the authority and its facilities in a fiscally responsible manner. 
Sec. 1-5-57. - Powers. 
(a)  The authority shall have all powers allowed by law and consistent with the provisions of this Act as are necessary or convenient to carry out its corporate purpose, including, without limitation, the power to: 
(1)  Adopt and alter a corporate seal; 
(2)  Purchase advertising promoting special events and promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows; 
(3)  Encourage, solicit, promote, procure, sponsor, cosponsor, and service conventions, trade shows, and special events; 
(4)  Lend financial support through grants, contributions, or otherwise to other governmental entities in furtherance obits corporate purpose after approval by a majority vote of the city council; 
(5)  Lend financial support through grants, contributions, or otherwise to private sector, for profit, and nonprofit entities in furtherance of its corporate purpose after approval by a majority vote of the city council, provided that the authority determines that the residents of the area shall receive a substantial benefit therefrom; 
(6)  Conduct activities to foster a better public understanding on the part of individuals and businesses of the importance of tourism and the convention and visitors industry to the economy of the city and of the area; 
(7)  Conduct activities to encourage and to assist the cooperation between the businesses and industries servicing tourists, conventions, trade shows, and special events; 
(8)  Engage in fundraising activities in furtherance of its corporate purpose; 
(9)  Appoint an advisory committee and other committees of persons from the public and private sectors without regard to their places of residence; 
(10)  Make contracts of every kind and character with, and without limitation, any and all persons, firms, and corporations and the state and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and, without limiting the generality of the above, the authority and the city shall be permitted to enter into the following: 
(A)  Contracts under which hotel-motel taxes collected by the city are paid to and expended by the authority as contemplated by paragraph (4) of subsection (a) of Code Section 48-13-51 of the O.C.G.A. or any other applicable provision under such law; 
(B)  Contracts under which the authority purchases administrative and financial management services from the city to be performed by personnel at the city's cost, which shall include the costs of payroll, employee benefits, supplies, and overhead reasonably allocable to the performance of such services; and 
(C)  Lease contracts relating to leases of real property, personal property, or both real and personal property; 
(11)  Accept grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(12)  Accept grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political division thereof upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may impose; 
(13)  Sue and be sued in contract and in tort and complain and defend in all courts; 
(14)  Advise and recommend plans to other public and private sector entities for the promotion of tourism, conventions, trade shows, and special events; 
(15)  Conduct studies and develop plans for improving tourism in the area; 
(16)  Receive and disburse public funds appropriated by the city, including, but not limited to, revenues derived from hotel-motel taxes collected by the city; and receive and disburse funds from private sources and other revenues which may be received from time to time which would assist in the accomplishment of its corporate purpose; and 
(17)  Do all things necessary or convenient to accomplish its corporate purposes and to exercise any power permitted by the laws of this state to be exercised by private corporations which will further the authority's ability to accomplish such purpose, so long as the exercise of such power is not in conflict with the Constitution or laws of this state. 
(b)  The powers enumerated in each paragraph of subsection (a) of this section are cumulative of and in addition to those powers enumerated in other paragraphs of subsection (a) of this section and any other powers elsewhere in this Act or which may be reasonably inferred from the provisions of this Act. 
Sec. 1-5-58. - Bylaws. 
The authority may, by affirmative vote of a majority of all directors, adopt and amend bylaws to govern the authority, its employees, and operation. 
Sec. 1-5-59. - Budget. 
The authority shall prepare an annual budget to be submitted to the city and shall file all appropriate expenditure reports with the city and the state. 
Sec. 1-5-60. - Liability limited. 
Neither the directors of the authority nor any person executing notes, leases, or other agreements or obligations on behalf of the authority shall be personally liable thereon by reason of such execution. 
Sec. 1-5-61. - City not bound. 
The authority shall have no power or authority to bind the city by any contract, agreement, financial obligation, indebtedness, or otherwise; and no contract, agreement, financial obligation, or indebtedness incurred by the authority shall ever be a claim or charge against the city; provided, however, that both the authority and the city shall be bound to each other by contracts, agreements, financial obligations, or indebtedness between themselves. 
Sec. 1-5-62. - Oversight. 
The city council shall be authorized to inspect at its pleasure the state and condition of the authority, its properties, and all books and records pertaining to the authority and its affairs, and the authority shall give it such books and records and furnish it with assistance in making such inspections. 
Sec. 1-5-63. - Dissolution. 
Should the authority, for any reason, be dissolved after full payment of all indebtedness previously incurred, both as to principal and interest, title to all property of any kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall be conveyed to the city; or title to any such property may be conveyed prior to such dissolution in accordance with provisions which may be made therefor in any resolution or trust instrument relating to such property, subject to any liens, leases, or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to such property at the time of such conveyance. 
Sec. 1-5-64. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 1-5-65. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Secs. 1-5-66—1-5-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - GAINESVILLE-HALL COUNTY LAND BANK 

Sec. 1-5-71. - Definitions 
As used in this ordinance, the term: 
Board of directors or board means the Board of Directors of the Gainesville-Hall County Land Bank. 
Effective date means the latter of the dates upon which the Ordinance is approved by the governing body of the City of Gainesville and the governing body of Hall County. 
Fiscal year means the fiscal year of the Land Bank, which shall begin on July 1st of each year and end on the following June 30th. 
Georgia Land Bank Act means OCGA § 48-4-100 et seq. as it exists on the effective date, and as it may be hereafter amended or replaced. 
Land Bank means the public body corporate and politic established pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Land Bank Act this ordinance and known as the Gainesville-Hall County Land Bank. 
Party or parties means either individually or collectively, as applicable, Hall County or the City of Gainesville, and any other city, county or consolidated government that joins the Land Bank after the effective date. 
Person means an individual, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, organization, association, joint venture, trust, government, any governmental entity, authority or agency, or any other legal entity. 
Quorum means a simple majority of the board members then in office. 
Real property means all lands and the buildings thereon, all things permanently attached to land or to the buildings thereon, and any interest existing in, issuing out of, or dependent upon land or the buildings thereon. 
Ordinance means this ordinance creating the Gainesville-Hall County Land Bank. 
School district advisor means any non-voting representative to the board appointed by the board of education of a school district for purposes of deliberation. 
State means the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § I, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 1-5-72. - Purpose 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to create and empower the Land Bank to exercise the powers, duties, functions and responsibilities of a land bank under the Georgia Land Bank Act, this ordinance and the intergovernmental contract entered into between the parties; 
(2)  Programs and functions. The Land Bank shall endeavor to carry out the powers, duties, functions and responsibilities of a land bank under the Georgia Land Bank Act consistent with this ordinance, including, but not limited to, the power, privilege and authority to acquire, manage and dispose of interests in real property, and to do all other things necessary or convenient to implement the purposes, objectives and provisions of the Georgia Land Bank Act and the powers, duties, functions and responsibilities delegated to the Land Bank under other laws or executive orders, and the Intergovernmental Contract between the parties as authorized by the Georgia Land Bank Act. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § I, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 1-5-73. - Creation of Land Bank. 
(1)  Creation and legal status of Land Bank. The Land Bank is established as a separate legal entity and public body corporate, to be known as the "Gainesville-Hall County Land Bank," for the purposes of acting as a land bank under the Georgia Land Bank Act and implementing and administering this ordinance. 
(2)  By-laws, and policies and procedures. The board shall adopt by-laws consistent with the provisions of this ordinance and the Land Bank Act within thirty (30) days after the board is appointed. The board shall adopt policies and procedures consistent with the provisions of this ordinance and the Georgia Land Bank Act within ninety (90) days after the board is appointed and prior to acquiring any real property or other assets. 
(3)  Principal office. The principal office and regular meeting location of the Land Bank shall be at a location within the geographical boundaries of Hall County, as determined by the board. Special called meetings may be held outside the geographical boundaries of Hall County, as determined by the board. 
(4)  Title to Land Bank assets. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, the Land Bank shall have title to all of its real property, and no party shall have an ownership interest in real property owned by the Land Bank. 
(5)  Tax-exempt status. The Parties intend the activities of the Land Bank to be governmental functions carried out by an instrumentality or political subdivision of the state as described in Section 115 of Title 26 of the United States Internal Revenue Code, or any corresponding provisions of any future tax code. The Parties also intend the activities of the Land Bank to be governmental functions carried out by a political subdivision of this state, exempt to the extent provided under Georgia law from taxation by this state, including, but not limited to, ad valorem property tax exemption pursuant to OCGA § 48-5-41 or corresponding provisions of future State tax laws. 
(6)  Waiver of special assessments. Upon the request of the Land Bank and for the purposes of fostering the goals and objectives of the Land Bank, any party, at its option and in its discretion, may extinguish special assessments levied by the party prior to the date of acquisition by the Land Bank against real property owned by the Land Bank, or may exempt real property owned by the Land Bank from the imposition of special assessments. 
(7)  Compliance with law. The Land Bank shall comply with all federal and state laws, rules, regulations and orders applicable to this ordinance. 
(8)  Obligations of the Land Bank. The Land Bank shall not obligate any party nor shall any obligation of the Land Bank constitute an obligation of any party. 
(9)  No third-party beneficiaries. Except as otherwise specifically provided, this ordinance does not create in any person, other than a party, and is not intended to create by implication or otherwise, any direct or indirect benefit, obligation, duty, promise, right to be indemnified (such as contractually, legally, equitably or by implication), right to be subrogated to any party's rights under this ordinance, or any other right or benefit. 
(10)  Additional parties to Land Bank. At any time subsequent to the effective date, in accordance with the Georgia Land Bank Act, an additional city located in whole or in part within Hall County, or a consolidated government, or an additional county and at least one (1) participating city located in that county may join the Land Bank created by this ordinance upon completion of the following requirements: 
(a)  Unanimous approval of the board as it exists before the addition of the applicable city within Hall County, additional county and one (1) or more city located in that additional county, or consolidated government; and 
(b)  Amendment of this ordinance and the execution of an amendment to any existing intergovernmental contract between the parties and the applicable city within Hall County, additional county and one (1) or more cities located in that additional county, or consolidated government. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § I, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 1-5-74. - Board, executive director and staff. 
(1)  Board composition. The Land Bank shall be governed by a board of directors that shall be appointed within ninety (90) calendar days of the effective date. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of his/her appointing party and shall serve without compensation. The members shall be residents of their respective appointing party and may be employees of the parties. 
The board shall consist of the following members: 
(a)  Two (2) members appointed by the Hall County Board of Commissioners, one (1) of which will serve for an initial term of two (2) years, and one (1) of which will serve for an initial term of four (4) years. The two (2) board members shall be as follows: 
(i)  ___________  (Four (4) year term) 
(ii)  ___________  (Two (2) year term) 
(b)  Three (3) members appointed by the City of Gainesville Mayor and confirmed by the city council, one (1) of which will serve for an initial term of two (2) years, and two (2) of which will serve for an initial term of four (4) years. The three (3) board members shall be as follows: 
(i)  ___________  (Four (4) year term) 
(ii)  ___________  (Four (4) year term) 
(iii)  ___________  (Two (2) year term) 
(c)  One (1) member appointed by the board and confirmed by both the Hall County Board of Commissioners and the governing body of the City of Gainesville for an initial term of two (2) years. 
If other municipalities located wholly or partially within Hall County or an additional county and city located in that additional county join the Land Bank after the effective date, Hall County and the City of Gainesville shall then amend this Ordinance, including section 1-5-74(a) regarding the composition of the Land Bank Board as necessary to accommodate the additional municipal partner but in keeping with the Georgia Land Bank Act. Any adjustments to the board composition shall result in an odd number ranging between five (5) and eleven (11) members. 
(2)  Term of office. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the members of the board appointed under section 1-5-74(a) shall be appointed for staggered terms as indicated above. After the initial terms set forth in section 1-5-74(a)(i)—(iii) above, all subsequent board appointments and re-appointments shall be for terms of four (4) years. The first term of the initial board members shall commence on the date of the first board meeting. Each board member at the election of his or her appointing entity may serve an unlimited number of terms. In the event state law is amended to provide for different terms or composition of the board, then the board as it exists at the time of such amendment shall be authorized to take any action required such that the board complies with any requirements of state law. Board members serve at the pleasure of their appointing party and may be removed by the appointing party at any time with or without cause or may be removed pursuant to any other provision of Georgia law. 
(3)  Vacancies. A vacancy among the members of the board appointed under section 1-5-74(a), whether caused by the death, resignation, or removal of a board member, shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the balance of the unexpired term. Such vacancy shall be filled as soon as practicable. 
(4)  Participation by school districts. Each school district containing within its geographical boundaries real property owned by the Land Bank shall be given advance notice of each board meeting and may designate a school district advisor to the board, who shall be a non-voting member. 
(5)  Meetings. The board shall conduct its first meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the board is appointed. The board shall meet at least annually and hold such other meetings at the place, date and time as the board shall determine. All meetings of the board shall comply with the provisions of OCGA § 50-14-1 et seq., including, but not limited to, the provisions requiring public notice of the time, place and date of the meetings. 
(6)  Records of meetings. The board shall maintain a written record of each meeting. Meeting summaries and minutes shall be kept in accordance with OCGA §§ 50-14-1 et seq. and 50-18-70 et seq. 
(7)  Quorum and voting. Presence for both quorum and voting at a board meeting may include electronic communication by which such member of the board is both seen and heard by the members of the board and any members of the public at the meeting. All actions of the board shall be approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the board present and voting; provided, however, that no action of the board shall be authorized on the following matters unless approved by a majority of the entire board membership: 
(a)  Adoption of by-laws and other rules and regulations for conduct of the Land Bank's business; 
(b)  Hiring or firing of any employee or contractor of the Land Bank. This function may, by a majority vote of the total board membership, be delegated to a specific officer or committee of the Land Bank, under such terms and conditions and to the extent that the board may specify; 
(c)  The incurring of debt; 
(d)  Adoption or amendment of the annual budget; 
(e)  Sale, lease, encumbrance, or alienation of real property, improvements or personal property with a value of more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00); and 
(f)  Discharge and extinguishment of liens or claims for real property taxes owed to one (1) or more of the parties on real property acquired by the Land Bank. 
(8)  Board responsibilities. The board shall have all powers necessary to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this ordinance and the Georgia Land Bank Act, including, but not limited to, the powers set forth in Sections 48-4-106 and 48-4-112 of the Georgia Land Bank Act. 
(9)  Fiduciary duty. The members of the board are under a fiduciary duty to conduct the activities and affairs of the Land Bank in the best interests of the Land Bank, including the safekeeping and use of all Land Bank monies and assets. The members of the board shall discharge their duties in good faith, with the care an ordinarily prudent person in a like position would exercise under similar circumstances. 
(10)  Compensation. The members of the board shall receive no compensation for the performance of their duties. A board member may engage in private or public employment, or in a profession or business, including employment by a party to this agreement, except to the extent prohibited by Georgia law. The Land Bank may reimburse members of the board for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the discharge of their official duties on behalf of the Land Bank. 
(11)  Employees. The board may employ an executive director, its own counsel and legal staff, and such technical experts, other agents, and employees, permanent or temporary, as it may require and may determine the qualifications and fix the compensation and benefits of those persons. The services of such staff may also be retained pursuant to contracts or agreements with any or all parties. 
(a)  An executive director selected and retained by the Land Bank Board shall administer the Land Bank in accordance with the operating budget adopted by the board, general policy guidelines established by the board, other applicable governmental procedures and policies, and this ordinance. The executive director shall be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the Land Bank, the control, management, and oversight of the Land Bank's functions, and supervision of all Land Bank employees. All terms and conditions of the executive director's length of service shall be specified in a written contract between the executive director and the board, provided that the executive director shall serve at the pleasure of the board. The board may delegate to the executive director any powers or duties it considers proper, under such terms, conditions and to the extent that the board may specify. 
(b)  The staff of the Land Bank, whether employed by the Land Bank or retained through contracts with the parties, should be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in urban planning, community development, real estate, law, finance or related areas. 
(12)  Ethics. The board shall adopt ethics policies governing the conduct of board members, officers, appointees, employees and independent contractors. The policies shall be no less stringent than those provided for public officers and employees under OCGA § 45-10-1 et seq., or corresponding provisions of future state code of ethics. 
(13)  Conflicts of interest. Members of the board and officers, appointees, employees and independent contractors of the Land Bank shall be deemed to be public officials for the purposes of OCGA § 45-10-20 et seq., or corresponding provisions of future state conflicts of interest law and are subject to any other applicable law with respect to conflicts of interest. In addition, members of the board, and all officers, agents, appointees, employees and independent contractors shall comply with Section 48-4-111 (b) of the Georgia Land Bank Act, as it may be amended from time to time. The Land Bank shall establish policies and procedures requiring the disclosure of relationships that may give rise to a conflict of interest. The board shall require that any member of the board with a direct or indirect interest in any matter before the board disclose the member's interest to the board before the board takes any action on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § I, 8-7-18; Ord. No. 2018-19, § 10-2-18) 
Sec. 1-5-75. - General powers of Land Bank. 
(1)  General powers under Land Bank Act. The Land Bank may exercise all of the powers, duties, functions and responsibilities of a land bank under the Georgia Land Bank Act to the extent authorized by the Georgia Land Bank Act and any other Georgia law; including but not limited to: 
(a)  To adopt, amend, and repeal bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business; 
(b)  To sue and be sued in its own name and plead and be impleaded in all civil actions, including, but not limited to, actions to clear title to property of the Land Bank; 
(c)  To adopt a seal and to alter the same at pleasure; 
(d)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real or personal property of every kind and character, or any interest therein, in furtherance of the public purposes of the Land Bank; 
(e)  To acquire, accept, or retain equitable interests, security interests, or other interests in any real property, personal property, or fixtures by loan agreement, note, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, assignment, pledge, conveyance, contract, lien, loan agreement, or other consensual transfer in order to secure credit extended by the Land Bank; 
(f)  To borrow from private lenders, from municipal corporations, counties, or consolidated governments, from the state, or from federal government funds, as may be necessary, for the operation and work of the Land Bank; 
(g)  To borrow money to further or carry out its public purpose and to execute notes, other obligations, leases, trust indentures, trust agreements, agreements for the sale of its notes or other obligations, loan agreements, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds, security agreements, assignments, and such other agreements or instruments as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the Land Bank, to evidence and to provide security for such borrowing; 
(h)  To issue notes or other obligations of the Land Bank and use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any Land Bank projects and otherwise to further or carry out the public purpose of the Land Bank and to pay all costs of the Land Bank incidental to, or necessary and appropriate to, furthering or carrying out such purpose; 
(i)  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, whether public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in furtherance of the Land Bank's public purpose and to accept and use the same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by such federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
(j)  To enter into agreements with the federal government or any agency thereof to use the facilities or services of the federal government or any agency thereof in order to further or carry out the public purposes of the Land Bank; 
(k)  The Land Bank shall have no authority to lend money to a nongovernmental entity; provided, however, that the Land Bank may administer funds in the form of a loan to a nongovernmental entity when such funds are received from federal, state, and local government entities for the purpose of making such loans; provided, further, that only such transactions which are fully consistent with the purpose of the Land Bank shall be permitted. 
In those transactions, a Land Bank may extend credit to any person, corporation, partnership, whether limited or general, or other entity for the costs of any Land Bank projects which credit may be evidenced or secured by loan agreements, notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds, security agreements, assignments, or such other instruments, or by rentals, revenues, fees, or charges, upon such terms and conditions as the Land Bank shall determine to be reasonable in connection with such extension of credit, including provision for the establishment and maintenance of reserve funds, and, in the exercise of powers granted by this article in connection with any Land Bank projects the Land Bank shall have the right and power to require the inclusion in any such loan agreement, note, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, assignment, or other instrument of such provisions or requirements for guaranty of any obligations, insurance, construction, use, operation, maintenance, and financing of a project, and such other terms and conditions, as the Land Bank may deem necessary or desirable; 
(l)  As security for repayment of any notes or other obligations of the Land Bank, to pledge, mortgage, convey, assign, hypothecate, or otherwise encumber any property of the Land Bank, including, but not limited to, real property, fixtures, personal property, and revenues or other funds, and to execute any lease, trust indenture, trust agreement, agreement for the sale of the Land Bank's notes or other obligations, loan agreement, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, assignment, or other agreement or instrument as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the Land Bank, to secure any such notes or other obligations, which instruments or agreements may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the Land Bank upon default in any obligation of the Land Bank, either in payment of principal, premium, if any, or interest or in the performance of any term or condition contained in any such agreement or instrument. The state, on behalf of itself and each county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district therein, waives any right it or such county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district may have to prevent the forced sale or foreclosure of any property of the Land Bank upon such default and agrees that any agreement or instrument encumbering such property may be foreclosed in accordance with law and the terms thereof; 
(m)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and devises of money and property of any kind and to administer trusts; 
(n)  To use any real property, personal property, or fixtures or any interest therein or to rent or lease such property to or from others or make contracts with respect to the use thereof, or to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or grant options for any such property in any manner as it deems to be in the best interests of the Land Bank and the public purpose thereof; 
(o)  To procure insurance or guarantees from the General Assembly or federal government of the payments of any debts or parts thereof incurred by the Land Bank and to pay premiums in connection therewith; 
(p)  To enter into contracts and other instruments necessary, incidental, or convenient to the performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers, including, but not limited to, intergovernmental contracts for the joint exercise of powers under this article. Intergovernmental contracts with municipal corporations, counties, or consolidated governments may include contracts for the performance of services by municipal corporations, counties, or consolidated governments on behalf of the Land Bank or by the Land Bank on behalf of municipal corporations, counties, or consolidated governments, whether or not such counties, consolidated governments, or municipal corporations are located inside or outside the geographical boundaries of the Land Bank members; 
(q)  To procure insurance against losses in connection with the real property, assets, or activities of the Land Bank; 
(r)  To accept and issue deeds in its name, including without limitation the acceptance of real property in accordance with the provisions of OCGA § 9-6-19(f); 
(s)  To finance by loan, grant, lease, or otherwise, refinance, construct, erect, assemble, purchase, acquire, own, repair, remodel, rehabilitate, modify, maintain, extend, improve, install, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate, or manage real property or rights or interests in property, and to pay the costs of any such project from the proceeds of loans by persons, corporations, partnerships, whether limited or general, or other entities, all of which the Land Bank is authorized to receive, accept, and use; 
(t)  To fix, charge, and collect rents, fees, and charges for the use of real property of the Land Bank and for services provided by the Land Bank; 
(u)  To grant or acquire a license, easement, lease, as lessor or lessee, or option with respect to real property of the Land Bank; 
(v)  To enter into partnerships, joint ventures, and other collaborative relationships with municipalities and other public and private entities for the ownership, management, development, and disposition of real property; 
(w)  To hold title to real property for purposes of establishing contracts with nonprofit community land trusts, including, but not limited to, long-term lease contracts; 
(x)  To organize and reorganize the executive, administrative, clerical, and other departments of the Land Bank and to fix the duties, powers, and compensation of all employees, agents, and consultants of the Land Bank; and 
(y)  To do all other things necessary or convenient to achieve the objectives and purposes of the Land Bank or other laws that relate to the purposes and responsibilities of the Land Bank. 
The exercise of a specific power by a Land Bank may be limited or withdrawn by a Land Bank member when the Land Bank is acting with respect to real property within the jurisdiction of such member. Procedures for the exercise of such limitation or withdrawal of power shall be provided in the intergovernmental contract. 
(2)  Tax limitation. The Land Bank shall not levy any type of tax or special assessment. 
(3)  Eminent domain prohibited. The Land Bank shall neither possess nor exercise the power of eminent domain. 
(4)  Limitation on political activities. The Land Bank shall not spend any public funds on political activities. Subject to the foregoing, this section is not intended to prohibit the Land Bank from engaging in activities authorized by applicable law. 
(5)  No waiver of governmental immunity. The parties agree that no provision of the ordinance is intended, nor shall it be construed, as a waiver by any party of any governmental immunity provided under any applicable law. 
(6)  Non-discrimination. The Land Bank shall comply with all applicable law prohibiting discrimination. 
(a)  The Land Bank shall not provide services in a manner that discriminates against an individual because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, sexual orientation, height, weight, marital status, partisan considerations, disability or genetic information. 
(b)  The Land Bank shall not fail or refuse to hire, recruit, promote, demote, discharge or otherwise discriminate against an individual with respect to employment, compensation, or a term, condition or privilege of employment because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, sexual orientation, height, weight, marital status, partisan considerations, disability or genetic information. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § I, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 1-5-76. - Specific powers of the Land Bank. 
(1)  Acquisition of real property. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance or under the Georgia Land Bank Act, the Land Bank shall have the following powers with respect to acquisition or transfer of property: The Land Bank shall hold in its own name all real property acquired by the Land Bank without regard to the identity of the transferor of the property. 
(a)  The Land Bank shall maintain and make available for public review and inspection an inventory of all real property held by the Land Bank. 
(b)  The Land Bank may convey, exchange, sell, transfer, lease as lessor, grant, and mortgage as mortgagor any and all interests in, upon, or to real property of the Land Bank in some form and by such method as determined by the board to be in the best interest of the Land Bank. 
(c)  The Land Bank shall determine the terms, conditions, form, and substance of consideration necessary to convey, exchange, sell, transfer, lease as lessor, grant, and mortgage as mortgagor any interests in, upon, or to real property. 
(d)  Consideration may take the form of monetary payments and secured financial obligations, covenants, and conditions related to the present and future use of the property, contractual commitments of the transferee, and such other forms of consideration as determined by the board to be in the best interest of the Land Bank. 
(e)  The board shall determine and state in the Land Bank policies and procedures the general terms and conditions for consideration to be received by the Land Bank for the transfer of real property and interests in real property. 
(f)  The disposition of property by the Land Bank shall not be governed or controlled by any regulations or laws of the parties unless specifically provided in the applicable intergovernmental contract. 
(g)  Land Bank real property shall be conveyed in accordance with the Georgia Land Bank Act and according to criteria determined in the discretion of the board and contained in the policies and procedures adopted by the board. The following constitutes the hierarchical ranking of priorities for the use of real property conveyed by the Land Bank, including but not limited to: 
(i)  Elimination of slum and blight, particularly within residential neighborhoods; 
(ii)  Use for quality, affordable housing for the community workforce; 
(iii)  Use for purely public spaces and places; 
(iv)  Use as conservation areas; 
(v)  Use for retail, commercial, and industrial activities; and 
(vi)  Such other uses and in such hierarchical order as determined by the board, with the consent of the parties. 
(2)  Tax delinquent real property. Subject to the notice provided to school districts pursuant to Section 48-4-112(a) of the Georgia Land Bank Act, and by resolution of the board subject to the requirements of section 1-5-74(h) of this ordinance, the Land Bank may discharge and extinguish real property tax liens and claims owed to one (1) or more of the parties that encumber real property owned by the Land Bank. The Land Bank may bid on and acquire title to real property in judicial and non-judicial tax enforcement proceedings in accordance with Section 48-4-112 of the Georgia Land Bank Act or such other general, special or local laws as may be applicable to the property tax enforcement procedures of the parties. The Land Bank may negotiate the acquisition of tax executions in accordance with Section 48-4-112 of the Georgia Land Bank Act or such other general, special or local laws as may be applicable to the property tax enforcement procedures of the parties. 
(3)  Civil action to protect land bank real property. The Land Bank may institute a civil action to prevent, restrain or enjoin the waste of or unlawful removal of any real property held by the Land Bank. 
(4)  Environmental contamination. If the Land Bank has reason to believe that real property held by the Land Bank may be the site of environmental contamination, the Land Bank shall provide the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources with any information in the possession of the Land Bank that suggests that the real property may be the site of environmental contamination. The Land Bank shall cooperate with the Georgia Department of Natural Resources with regard to any request made or action taken by the department of natural resources, including remediation to the extent financially feasible. 
(5)  Structure of conveyances. Transactions shall be structured in a manner that permits the Land Bank to enforce contractual agreements, covenants and the provisions of any subordinate financing held by the Land Bank pertaining to development and use of the real property. 
(6)  Disposition of proceeds. Any proceeds from the sale or transfer of real property by the Land Bank shall be retained, expended, or transferred by the Land Bank as determined by the board in the best interests of the Land Bank and in accordance with the Georgia Land Bank Act. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § I, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 1-5-77. - Books, records, and finances. 
(1)  Land Bank records. The Land Bank shall keep and maintain at the principal office of the Land Bank all documents and records of the Land Bank. The records of the Land Bank, which shall be available to the parties and the public, shall include, but not be limited to, a copy of this ordinance along with any amendments to the ordinance, and any intergovernmental contract regarding the Land Bank between Hall County and any city that enters into the contract, along with any amendments to the contract, the real property inventory required by Section 48-4-109 (b) of the Georgia Land Bank Act, all minutes of meetings of the board and any committee of the board, annual budget with any amendments thereto, and policies and procedures containing the general terms and conditions for consideration to be received by the Land Bank for transfer of real property and any interest therein. The records and documents shall be maintained until the termination of this ordinance and/or intergovernmental contract regarding the Land Bank and shall be delivered to any successor entity. 
(2)  Financial statements and reports. The Land Bank shall cause to be prepared, at the Land Bank's expense, audited financial statements (balance sheet, statement of revenue and expense, statement of cash flows and changes in fund balance) on an annual basis. Such financial statements shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and accompanied by a written opinion of an independent certified public accounting firm. 
(3)  Annual budget. The Board, or its designee upon the Board's discretion, shall prepare annually a budget for the Land Bank. The board shall review and approve a budget for the Land Bank immediately preceding each fiscal year. 
(4)  Deposits and investments. The Land Bank shall deposit and invest funds of the Land Bank, not otherwise employed in carrying out the purposes of the Land Bank, in accordance with an investment policy established by the board consistent with laws and regulations regarding investment of public funds. 
(5)  Disbursements. Disbursements of funds shall be in accordance with guidelines established by the board. 
(6)  Performance objectives. Each fiscal year, the board or other individual designated by the board shall prepare objectives for the Land Bank's performance that shall be approved by the board. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § I, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 1-5-78. - Funding and expenditures. 
(1)  Budget contributions. The parties may contribute to the annual Land Bank budget in such manner as approved by the parties. 
(2)  Tax allocation. In accordance with OCGA § 48-4-110(c) of the Georgia Land Bank Act, seventy-five (75) percent of the real property taxes collected on real property, exclusive of any state or school district ad valorem tax, conveyed by the Land Bank after the effective date shall be remitted to the Land Bank commencing with the first taxable year following the date of conveyance and shall continue for a period of five (5) years. 
(3)  Management of funds. The Land Bank Board, or its designee, shall be designated the fiscal agent of the Land Bank's account established for the management of sales proceeds, monetary contributions made by the parties, and other Land Bank funds. Standard accounting procedures shall be used in the management of the accounts. 
(4)  Authorized expenditures. The Land Bank shall in its sole discretion and within its budget expend such funds as necessary to carry out the powers, duties, functions and responsibilities of a land bank under the Georgia Land Bank Act consistent with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § I, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 1-5-79. - Duration of ordinance. 
(1)  Duration. This ordinance shall commence on the effective date and shall remain in full force and effect until such time as the Land Bank has been terminated by the parties. 
(2)  Termination. The Land Bank shall be terminated by (i) agreement by all parties, or (ii) by affirmative resolution approved by two-thirds (⅔) of the membership of the Board and in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-4-111 of the Georgia Land Bank Act, or (iii) by withdrawal of one (1) or more parties such that only one (1) party remains. 
(3)  Disposition upon termination. As soon as possible after termination, the Land Bank shall finish its affairs as follows: 
(a)  All of the Land Bank's debts, liabilities, and obligations to its creditors and all expenses incurred in connection with the termination of the Land Bank and distribution of its assets shall be paid first; 
(b)  The remaining real property and personal property owned by the Land Bank, if any, shall be distributed to any successor entity, subject to approval by the parties. In the event that no successor entity exists, the remaining real property and personal property, and other assets of the Land Bank, shall become assets of the municipality or county in which the real property is located, unless provided otherwise in any applicable intergovernmental contracts. To the extent the Land Bank owns cash or other account assets, said cash and other assets shall be distributed equitably, as approved by a majority of the board of directors; and 
(c)  Responsibility for any outstanding liability not capable of being paid as provided in Section 1-5-79(c)(1) shall be assigned to one (1) or more of the parties or third party transferees as agreed upon by the Board of the Land Bank. In the absence of agreement by the board, liability associated the responsibility of each property shall be with the party in which the property is located. 
(d)  Any general liabilities not associated with a particular property and not capable of being paid as provided in section 1-5-79(c)(1) shall be shared equally between the parties upon dissolution of the Land Bank. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § I, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 1-5-80. - Miscellaneous. 
(1)  Notices. Any and all correspondence or notices required, permitted or provided for under this ordinance to be delivered to any party shall be sent that party by first-class mail. All such written notices, including any notice of withdrawal, shall be sent to each other party's signatory, or that signatory's successor. All correspondence shall be considered delivered to a party as of the date such notice is deposited with sufficient postage with the United States Postal Service. Any notice of withdrawal shall be sent via certified mail, return receipt requested. Notices to Hall County shall be sent to: Hall County Board of Commissioners, P. O. Drawer 1435, Gainesville, Georgia, 30503-1435. Notices to the City of Gainesville shall be sent to: City of Gainesville, P. O. Box 2496, Gainesville, Georgia, 30503-2496. Notices to any additional city parties shall be sent in accordance with the terms of the ordinances or resolutions as adopted by the additional city parties. Notices to the Land Bank shall be sent to the Land Bank principal office. All notices sent to the parties to the Land Bank shall be binding unless said address is changed in writing. 
(2)  Interpretation of ordinance. The parties intend that this ordinance shall be construed liberally to effectuate the intent and purposes of this ordinance and the legislative intent and purposes of the Georgia Land Bank Act. The statement of legislative intent and purpose shall be complete and independent authorization for the performance of each and every act and thing necessary or useful to the consummation of said purposes authorized by this ordinance and the Georgia Land Bank Act. All powers granted to the Land Bank under this ordinance and the Georgia Land Bank Act shall be broadly interpreted to effectuate the intent and purposes and not as a limitation of powers. 
(3)  Severability of provisions. If any provision of this ordinance, or its application to any person, party or circumstance, is invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this ordinance and the application of that provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected but will be enforced to the extent permitted by law. 
(4)  Governing law. This ordinance is made and entered into in the State of Georgia and shall in all respects be interpreted, enforced and governed under the laws of the State of Georgia without regard to the doctrines of conflict of laws. The language of all parts of this ordinance shall in all cases be construed as a whole according to its plain and fair meaning. 
(5)  Captions and headings. The captions, headings, and titles in this ordinance are intended for the convenience of the reader and are not intended to have any substantive meaning or to be interpreted as part of this ordinance. 
(6)  Terminology. All terms and words used in this ordinance, regardless of the number or gender in which they are used, are deemed to include any other number and any other gender as the context may require. 
(7)  Cross-references. References in this ordinance to any article include all sections, subsections, and paragraphs in the article, unless specifically noted otherwise. References in this ordinance to any section include all subsections and paragraphs in the section. 
(8)  Jurisdiction and venue. In the event of any dispute between the parties over the meaning, interpretation or implementation of the terms of this ordinance, the matter under dispute, unless resolved between the parties, shall be submitted to the Superior Courts of Hall County. 
(9)  Amendments to Georgia Land Bank Act. The Land Bank and board shall have any powers authorized pursuant to any amendments, replacements or substitutions to the Land Bank Act, unless the ordinance is amended to provide otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § I, 8-7-18) 
CHAPTER 1-6. - PERSONNEL[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Business license fees, Tit. 10; contracts between city and relatives of employees, etc., § 2-3-90. 
State Law reference— Municipal retirement systems, OCGA §§ 36-34-2(4), 36-35-4(a); joint municipal employees benefit system, OCGA § 47-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-6-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-35, § I, adopted Nov. 17, 2015, repealed § 1-6-1 in its entirety. Former § 1-6-1 pertained to employment of relatives of council member, public official, employee and derived from Ord. No. 88-61, § I, adopted Oct. 4, 1988; and Ord. No. 90-59, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 1990. 
Sec. 1-6-2. - Civil actions, claims or judgments against city employees. 
(a)  Defense of civil, etc., actions. As part of the terms of employment of the council members and of supervisors, administrators, employees, and other elected or appointed officials, the city will undertake to defend against the following actions that arise out of the performance of their duties or are in any way connected therewith: negligence, violation of contract rights, and violation of civil, constitutional, common law, or statutory rights. This section shall in no way authorize the city to furnish a defense to any person charged with a criminal offense involving theft, embezzlement, or other like crime with respect to the property or money of the city or in which the city has an interest. The city may expend state, federal, or local funds for such purposes, including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs, deposition costs, witness fees and compensation, and all other like costs, expenses, and fees. 
(b)  Payment of claims or judgments. The city may pay part or all of any claim or civil judgment rendered against any person whose defense the city is authorized to undertake under subsection (a) above. Any such disbursement shall be deemed to be for public purposes and may be paid from state, federal, or local funds. No attempt shall be made at the trial of any action brought against a person covered under this section to suggest the fact that the city will be responsible for any judgment therein. 
(Code 1958, § 2-06) 
Sec. 1-6-3. - Continuance of certain benefits for certain officials. 
(a)  In the event a council member, whose term begins prior to December 31, 2015, resigns from employment or fails to be reelected or appointed or does not seek reelection or appointment to office, and who at the time that person leaves office or employment has completed six (6) or more years of elected official service with the city, shall be entitled to continue full coverage and participation, including coverage for his spouse and dependent children, in the city health benefit plan upon the payment of the monthly cost of such coverage as may be provided by the trustees. 
(b)  In the event a council member, whose term begins January 1, 2016 or later, resigns from employment or fails to be reelected or appointed or does not seek reelection or appointment to office, and who at the time that person leaves office or employment has completed sixteen (16) or more years of service with the city, shall be eligible to retain insurance coverage and participation in accordance with city retiree insurance guidelines for retirees as offered by the city at such time. 
(c)  Any city attorney whose appointment ends on or prior to December 31, 2015, and who at the time of leaving employment has completed six (6) or more years of service with the city, shall be entitled to continue full coverage and participation, including coverage for his spouse and dependent children, in the city health benefit plan upon the payment of the monthly cost of such coverage as may be provided by the trustees. 
(d)  At the time of death of elected or appointed persons referred to in subsections (a) and (c), any spouse or dependent child or children of such elected or appointed person included in the coverage of the city health benefit plan shall be entitled to continue such coverage upon payment of the monthly cost of such coverage as may be provided by the trustees. Coverage under the city health benefit plan under this section shall cease for the covered spouse upon the remarriage of the spouse and shall cease for the covered dependent child or children as may be provided by the trustees. 
(e)  This section shall not affect the rights otherwise available under the city health benefit plan to retired employees and their spouses and dependents. 
(Ord. No. 89-45, § I, 8-1-89; Ord. No. 2015-35, § II, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 1-6-4. - Compensation; expenses allowance; reimbursement. 
(a)  Compensation. 
(1)  Each member of the council shall receive a salary of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month, and the mayor shall receive five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month. 
(2)  For attending each scheduled, special, called or a meeting officially representing the city council, the mayor and each council member shall receive an additional compensation of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per diem, payable monthly, not to exceed twelve (12) meetings per month. 
(b)  Expense allowance. To help defray the day-to-day costs necessary to properly carry out their duties outside of regular meetings, the five (5) council members shall receive an expense allowance of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per month and the mayor shall receive an expense allowance of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. 
(c)  Reimbursement. In addition to other compensation and allowances, each council member shall be reimbursed from city funds for actual transportation costs while traveling by public carrier, the legal mileage rate from his residence for use of a personal automobile, and the actual costs of lodging, meals and sundry items incurred while attending to city matters outside of Hall County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2013-27, § I, 12-27-13; Ord. No. HR-2015-01, § I, 6-16-15) 
Secs. 1-6-5—1-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - SOCIAL SECURITY[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Social security coverage for employees of political subdivisions, OCGA § 47-18-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1-6-21. - System established. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible, under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal security administrator, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities not excluded by law or by this chapter, the benefits of the system of old age and survivor's insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734 of the 81st Congress, and as provided for in Act No. 295, Georgia Laws 1951, approved February 21, 1951. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1958, § 9-1) 
State Law reference— Establishment of social security coverage for political subdivision, OCGA § 47-18-41. 
Sec. 1-6-22. - Authorization for execution of agreement between city and state agency. 
The mayor, or other chief executive officer, of the city, is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, referred to in this article as the state agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided for in section 1-6-21. 
(Code 1958, § 9-2) 
Sec. 1-6-23. - Salary withholdings authorized; payment to state agency. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 1-6-21 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(Code 1958, § 9-3) 
Sec. 1-6-24. - Appropriations from city funds; payment to state agency. 
There shall be appropriated from the general fund such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employers' contributions, administrative expenses, and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in section 1-6-22. Such funds shall be paid over to the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia in accordance with regulations established by such agency. 
(Code 1958, § 9-4) 
Sec. 1-6-25. - Reports and records required of city. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1958, § 9-5) 
Sec. 1-6-26. - Employees previously covered or authorized to be covered by other retirement systems. 
There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered, or authorized to be covered, by any other ordinance or law creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city or its instrumentalities. 
(Code 1958, § 9-6) 
Sec. 1-6-27. - Employees not authorized to be covered. 
There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1958, § 9-7) 
Secs. 1-6-28—1-6-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - PERSONNEL MERIT SYSTEM[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-43, § I, adopted Oct. 18, 1994, added provisions designated as art. 3 of ch. 1-6, §§ 1-6-50 and 1-6-51. Since there already existed provisions designated as art. 3, §§ 1-6-75—1-6-78, said existing provisions have been redesignated as art. 4 of ch. 1-6, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 1-6-50. - General purpose. 
The general purpose of this article is to establish a merit personnel administration for the city that provides for the recruitment, selection, development, and retention of an effective workforce of capable, diligent, and honest employees. The merit system shall include policies for employee hiring and advancement, training, career development and safety, position classification and compensation administration, effective utilization of personnel and employee performance evaluation, employee relations and the disposition of employee grievances, discipline, discharge and related activities. It shall be the purpose of this article to establish a merit system in which all personnel matters shall be determined solely on the basis of merit and qualifications, without regard to race, color, sex, age, national origin, disability or political affiliation. 
(Ord. No. 94-43, § I, 10-18-94; Ord. No. 2012-12, § I, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 1-6-51. - Merit personnel administration established; employee rules and regulations. 
The city government employee policies and procedures shall be adopted by resolution of the city council upon adoption and recommendation of the city manager. The city government employee policies and procedures currently in effect on file with human resources are hereby adopted and made a part of this section. Any future amendments to the city government employee policies and procedures shall be adopted by resolution of the city council upon recommendation of the city manager, which amended policies and procedures shall be filed in the human resources office and become a part of the employee rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 94-43, § I, 10-18-94; Ord. No. 2012-12, § II, 6-19-12) 
Secs. 1-6-52—1-6-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - RETIREMENT SYSTEM[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to art. 3. 

Sec. 1-6-75. - Defined benefit retirement system—Generally. 
The defined benefit retirement plan A for certain eligible employees of the city whom the city has elected to exclude from participation in the federal Social Security program as provided in section 3.60 of the Charter is continued. The provisions of retirement plan A, as previously contained in the provisions of the Charter, has been amended and restated in a separate plan document and on file with the secretary of the city council in the secretary's office. Retirement plan A, as so amended and restated, is hereby adopted and made a part of this section and any future amendment to retirement plan A shall be adopted by resolution of the city council and filed in the office of the secretary of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 94-28, § I, 6-21-94) 
Sec. 1-6-76. - Same—For certain employees. 
(a)  The defined benefit plan B for certain employees of the city who participate in the federal Social Security program which provides benefits to supplement those benefits provided under Social Security and also provides benefits for elected and appointed officials of the governing authority as provided in section 3.61 of the Charter is adopted. The provisions of retirement plan B on file with the secretary of the city council in the secretary's office are hereby adopted and made a part of this section and any future amendment to retirement plan B shall be adopted by resolution of the city council and filed in the office of the secretary of the city council. 
(b)  The defined contribution retirement system established and maintained by the City of Gainesville Parks and Recreation Agency for its employees known and referred to as retirement plan "C" is converted, transferred and merged into defined benefit retirement system retirement plan B, as described in subparagraph (a) above, effective June 30, 2003. 
(c)  On or before June 20, 2003, each employee of the parks and recreation agency covered by retirement Plan C shall elect in writing one of the rollover options set out in the City of Gainesville Parks and Recreation Money Purchase Plan 204(h) Notice. 
(Ord. No. 94-28, § I, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2003-28, § I, 6-3-03) 
Sec. 1-6-77. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-28, § II, adopted June 3, 2003, repealed former § 1-6-77 of the Code, which pertained to defined contribution retirement system for the parks and recreation department and derived from Ord. No. 94-28, § I, adopted June 21, 1994. 
Sec. 1-6-78. - Defined contribution retirement system—For certain supervisory personnel and appointed officials. 
The defined contribution retirement plan D established and maintained by the city for certain supervisory personnel and appointed officials as provided in section 3.63 of the Charter is continued. Retirement plan D as currently adopted and in force and on file with the secretary of the city council in the secretary's office is hereby adopted and made a part of this section and any future amendment to retirement plan D shall be adopted by resolution of the city council and filed in the office of the secretary of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 94-28, § I, 6-21-94) 
CHAPTER 1-7. - RECREATION AND PARKS[15] 
Article 1. In General 

 
Article 2. Lake Knickerbocker 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-4; play streets, § 3-4-26; use of recreational property for office purposes, § 3-5-17; animals, Ch. 4-1; solid waste, Ch. 4-3; destruction of trees or vegetation, § 4-4-14. 
Related law reference— Chicopee Woods Area Park Commission, § 1.2.1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Parks, historic areas, memorials, etc., and recreation, OCGA § 12-3-1 et seq.; local recreation systems, OCGA § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-7-1. - City park established and dedicated. 
The tract of land of fifty (50) acres, on Green Street, purchased from the estate of Mrs. Martha B. Banks by the city, is established and dedicated forever as a public park for the city to be known as the City Park. 
(Code 1958, § 15-1) 
Sec. 1-7-2. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person while in a city park to: 
(1)  Cut, remove or destroy any tree, sapling, seedling, brush or shrub whether alive or dead, or chip, blaze, box, girdle, trim or otherwise deface or injure any tree or shrub or break or remove any branch, foliage, flower or any tree or shrub or pick, gather, uproot, remove or destroy any flower, plant or grass. 
(2)  Remove or cause to be removed any sod, sand, earth, humus, peat, rocks, boulders or gravel. 
(3)  Build, light or maintain any open or outdoor fire at any place within a city park except in areas or facilities provided and designated for this purpose. 
(4)  Have in his or her possession any item considered to be a weapon under state law, excluding firearms; however, no person shall discharge any firearm on or over any public property or public park, unless: in self-defense; or, under a license or permit issued by a governmental entity; or, as part of a reenactment or recreation of an historical event if such reenactment or recreation has been approved, authorized, or sponsored by the city, the state, or the United States of America or a political subdivision of any of them. 
(5)  Sell, possess or consume alcoholic beverages on park property that is not otherwise licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages unless an official request has been made to and approved by the parks and recreation board and upon approval thereof the requestor shall make application to the city marshal for the applicable permits for the event as specified in chapter 6-4 of this Code. 
(6)  Cause a disturbance or engage in any activity which shall unreasonably interfere with the intended use of and enjoyment of any park by citizens including lewd acts, acts of violence, or the use of vulgar, profane, or abusive language. 
(7)  Drive recklessly or to drive any vehicle upon or across any part of any public park of the city except upon roadways laid out and maintained for vehicular travel. 
(8)  Deface, remove, damage, or alter in any way the benches, fences, sporting facilities, nets, signage or other structures in any park. 
(9)  Deposit trash or refuse matter of any kind therein. 
(10)  Violate any ordinance or law of the city or the state. 
(11)  Loiter within parking areas of the city parks. 
(12)  Swim in lakefront parks unless in designated swim areas or unless done at individuals own risk. City parks and recreation board does not operate beach or swim areas on lakefront parks. 
(13)  Camp, unless in a designated camping area. 
(14)  Reserved. 
(15)  Have a dog which is not controlled by a leash, not exceeding six (6) feet in length. 
(16)  It shall be unlawful for any person previously convicted of any section of the O.C.G.A. title 16, chapter 6 entitled sexual offenses or similar offenses of any other state, to enter or remain within a city park. 
(17)  a.  Smoking shall be prohibited within the boundaries of any park, sports complex, recreation area or facility owned, leased, or operated by the city, including any open area within such park sports complex, recreation area or facility. 
b.  The enforcement of subsection a. shall be as provided in section 3-7-9 and the penalties as provided in section 3-7-10. 
(18)  Use tennis courts except for intended purposes, unless otherwise authorized by the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(Code 1958, § 15-2; Ord. No. 90-58, § 1, 10-16-90; Ord. No. 93-18, § 1, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 93-58, §§ I—VI, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 2009-06, § I, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 2013-24, § I, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2014-24, §§ I, II, 10-21-14; Ord. No. 2015-04, §§ I, II, 2-20-15) 
State Law reference— Prohibited acts in state parks, OCGA § 12-3-10. 
Sec. 1-7-3. - Hours of use of city parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except authorized parks and recreation agency personnel or an authorized agent thereof, to enter, remain within, drive a vehicle in or attempt to park or park a vehicle on any of the streets or parking areas or at any location within the following city neighborhood and community parks from one (1) hour after sunset to 7:00 a.m. daily: 
(1)  Allen Creek Soccer Complex; 
(2)  Chicopee Woods Nature Park; 
(3)  Clarks Bridge Park; 
(4)  City Park; 
(5)  Civic Center; 
(6)  Desota Park; 
(7)  Engine 209 Park; 
(8)  Fair Street Neighborhood Center; 
(9)  Frances Meadows Aquatic & Community Center; 
(10)  Holly Park; 
(11)  Ivey Terrace Park; 
(12)  Kenwood Park; 
(13)  Lanier Point Park; 
(14)  Linwood Nature Preserve; 
(15)  Longwood Park; 
(16)  Myrtle Street Park; 
(17)  Poultry Park; 
(18)  Riverside Park; 
(19)  Rock Creek Park; 
(20)  Roper Park; 
(21)  Wessell Park; 
(22)  Wilshire Trails Park. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  All lighted city tennis courts shall close at 11:00 p.m. daily. 
(2)  Holly Park; Lanier Point Park. Launching ramp use will be permitted on a 24-hour basis for the expressed purpose of launching or loading a boat. 
(c)  Other than the exceptions noted above, no person shall occupy the parks or facilities listed in subsection (a) for recreation or any other purpose from one (1) hour after sunset to 7:00 a.m. daily unless for approved scheduled events or permission has been granted in advance by the parks and recreation agency with prior notification to the police department. 
(d)  Any person violating this section, other than as provided in subsection 1-7-1(17), shall be punished as described in section 1-1-7. 
(Code 1958, § 15-7; Ord. No. 90-58, § 3, 10-16-90; Ord. No. 93-58, § VII, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 96-06, §§ I, II, 3-19-96; Ord. No. 2009-06, § II, 2-17-09) 
Cross reference— Damaging trees or vegetation in parks prohibited, § 4-4-14. 
State Law reference— Prohibited acts in state parks, OCGA 12-3-10. 
Sec. 1-7-4. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 15-6; Ord. No. 90-58, § 2, 10-16-90) 
Editor's note— The provisions of § 1-7-24 were amended by § 2 of Ord. No. 90-58, adopted Oct. 16, 1990. Section 1-7-24 previously pertained to penalties for violation of § 1-7-23; inasmuch as § 1-7-24 currently pertains to violation of chapter provisions, the editor has, for classification purposes, renumbered former § 1-7-24 as § 1-7-4 under Art. I. 
Secs. 1-7-5—1-7-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - LAKE KNICKERBOCKER 

Sec. 1-7-21. - Title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the regulation of vehicles and uses on Lake Knickerbocker located in the city. 
(Code 1958, § 15-3) 
Sec. 1-7-22. - Territorial limits. 
For the purposes of this article, Lake Knickerbocker and its territorial limits shall be defined as that body of water known as Lake Knickerbocker located in the city in Land Lots 106 and 105, 9th Land District, Hall County, lying on the northern side of East Lake Drive. Whenever referred to in this article, Lake Knickerbocker shall be deemed to include the fluctuations in its pool level, from its highest point to its lowest point. 
(Code 1958, § 15-4) 
Sec. 1-7-23. - Prohibited vehicles and boats. 
No person shall operate at any time on Lake Knickerbocker, except in case of and required by a bona fide emergency, any type of boat or other floating device that is driven, propelled or powered by a gasoline or other fuel combustion engine; however, this section shall not prohibit the use of electric motors nor craft propelled by sail, paddle or oars. 
(Code 1958, § 15-5) 
Sec. 1-7-24. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note following § 1-7-4. 
CHAPTER 1-8. - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER 

Sec. 1-8-1. - Administrative hearing officer. 
There is hereby created the position of administrative hearing officer whose term and duties shall as set out below: 
(1)  The administrative hearing officer shall be appointed by the council. 
(2)  The duties of the administrative hearing officer shall be the hearing of all issues under the city ordinances which would determine the granting, denial, probating, imposing a monetary administrative penalty, suspending or revoking of any license, permit granted or action taken under the city ordinances, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Any right of direct appeal to the council; 
b.  Article 2.1 entitled Hotel-Motel Excise Tax (section 2-1-21 et seq.); 
c.  Chapter 3-6 entitled Pollution and Contamination (section 3-6-1 et seq.); 
d.  Title 4 entitled Public Works and Health (Chapter 4-1 et seq. through 4-6 et seq.); 
e.  Title 5 entitled Municipal Utilities (Chapter 5-1 et seq. and 5-2 et seq.); 
f.  Title 6 entitled Licenses, Permits and Business Regulations (Chapters 6-1 et seq. through 6-9 et seq.); 
g.  Title 7 entitled Buildings and Construction (Chapter 7-1 et seq.); 
h.  Title 8 entitled Planning (Chapters 8-1 et seq. through 8-3 et seq.); 
i.  Title 9 entitled Zoning (Chapter 94 et seq.); 
j.  Title 10 entitled Schedule of Fees (Chapter 10-1 et seq.). 
(3)  The jurisdiction of said hearing officer over such licenses, permits or action taken shall be in addition to and concurrent with that of the municipal court of the city. 
(4)  Said administrative hearing officer shall conduct hearings when requested either by the council or its designee, or by any citizen aggrieved by an administrative decision made by any city department authorized to make such decisions. Said hearing officer shall have the authority to hear evidence and subpoena witnesses on behalf of the city or said aggrieved citizen and shall generally conduct hearings in accordance with the requirements of due process as required by the United States Constitution, and the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(5)  Whenever from any cause the administrative hearing officer is unable to be in attendance, or if it should appear that the administrative hearing officer is disqualified in any case, it shall be the duty of the administrative hearing officer to appoint a hearing officer pro hac vice to preside over the hearing in place and instead of the administrative hearing officer, upon approval of the city council. 
(6)  The administrative hearing officer shall serve for a one-year term beginning January 1 of every year. In addition thereto, the council may make interim appointments for the purpose of filling said position for a portion of a term. The salary of said hearing officer shall be as set by the council. 
(Ord. No. 91-55, § 1, 1-7-92; Ord. No. 2015-06, § I—III, 4-7-15) 
CHAPTER 1-9. - CODE OF ETHICS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04, adopted April 4, 2017, amended Ch. 1-9 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 1-9, §§ 1-9.1—1-9.23, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2007-37, § I, adopted Sept. 4, 2007. 

Sec. 1-9-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(a)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials and employees; 
(b)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all city officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(c)  Require disclosure by city officials and employees of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(d)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § I, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 1-9-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all city officials and employees. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This chapter shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § I, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 1-9-3. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
City official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined, does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the City Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five (5) percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous twelve (12) months either equal or exceed: 
a.  Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in payment for goods, products or services, or 
b.  Ten (10) percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § I, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 1-9-4. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official or employee shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official or employee, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the city official or employee has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official or employee shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official or employee shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official or employee shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  Any city official or employee who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official or employee shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official or employee if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such city official or employee's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official or employee accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the city official or employee might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the city official or employee shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official or employee shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official or employee shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official or employee shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such city official, employee or persons within the city official or employee's immediate family, or those with whom the city official or employee has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official or employee shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official or employee shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official or employee shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefor. 
(p)  No city official or employee shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Gainesville. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § I, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 1-9-5. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official or employee may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official or employee has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official or employee who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official or employee may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § I, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 1-9-6. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  The board of ethics of the city shall consist of five (5) residents of the city, appointed by the mayor and approved by a majority of the city council. 
(b)  All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. 
(c)  All members of the board of ethics shall serve a four-year term. 
(d)  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. 
(e)  Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. 
(f)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing body shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(g)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten (10) years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. 
(h)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the city. 
(i)  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. 
(j)  Members of the board of ethics may be removed by vote of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § I, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 1-9-7. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the city clerk, who will give it to the mayor and council. The governing body may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the governing body. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the city clerk or the clerk's designee shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven (7) calendar days. 
(b)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this chapter. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the governing body. The board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the governing body; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the governing body; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(e)  The board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)  The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the governing body has not prescribed such forms. 
(g)  Findings of the board of ethics shall be submitted to the governing body for final action. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § I, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 1-9-8. - Service of complaint. 
The city clerk shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven (7) calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within sixty (60) calendar days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to the governing body within seven (7) calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven (7) calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any time deadlines in this section of the chapter shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the governing body to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § I, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 1-9-9. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the final action of the governing body or the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Hall County within thirty (30) days after the final action of the governing body or of the board of ethics. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § I, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 1-9-10. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)  Public reprimand or censure by the governing body; or 
(2)  Request for resignation by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § I, 4-4-17) 
Title 2 - FISCAL AFFAIRS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— In the City of Gainesville Independent School District, a homestead exemption from ad valorem taxes for educational purposes, based on net income, is provided in Ga. Laws 1987, p. 4209. 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1; municipal utilities, Tit. 5; licenses, permits and business regulations, Tit. 6; schedule of fees, Tit. 10; finance generally, § 2-3-1 et seq.; alcoholic beverage excise taxes, § 6-4-39; taxation of insurance companies, § 6-6-4 et seq. 
State Constitution reference— Taxation power of municipal governments, Art. 9, § 4. 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation, OCGA Title 48; ad valorem taxation of property, OCGA § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal taxation, OCGA § 48-5-350 et seq. 

CHAPTER 2-1. - TAXATION 
ARTICLE 1. - AD VALOREM TAXES 

Sec. 2-1-1. - Exclusions from taxation prohibited. 
No property in the city otherwise subject to taxation for ad valorem taxes shall be exempted from such taxation, and no taxes paid on such property shall be relieved or rebated, unless otherwise mandated by state or federal law or to correct error or to prevent manifest injustice, unless first authorized by a majority vote of the electors in a referendum called for such a purpose. 
(Code 1958, § 2-20) 
State Constitution reference— Exemptions from ad valorem taxation, Art. 7, § 2. 
State Law reference— Return and collection of taxes on property unlawfully exempted by county, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-21; tax exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40 et seq. 
Sec. 2-1-2. - Specified persons to furnish statement of inventory and value thereof when making return for taxation. 
(a)  Every person, agent, guardian, trustee, administrator or executor owning or controlling merchandise held as stock in trade, manufactured goods, commodities and supplies materials for manufacture or processing, or in the process of manufacture, shall upon making return of the same for taxation to the city, furnish to the county board of tax assessors a statement of the inventory of the same and the value thereof which was reported by such taxpayer on its last returns for income tax purposes made to the government of the United States and the state, when requested to do so by the county board of tax assessors. 
(b)  Failure to furnish the information required in subsection (a) shall constitute an offense against the city and upon conviction therefor the offending party shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 21-2) 
State Law reference— County board of tax assessors, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-290 et seq.; exemption of certain salesmen and merchants from municipal taxes and license fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 
Secs. 2-1-3—2-1-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Tourism and convention bureau, § 1-5-51 et seq.; funding of tourism and convention bureau, § 1-5-57. 
State Law reference— Excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 2-1-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means from the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one (1) or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truckstop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, timeshare or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license or use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in this city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sublessee, lender in possession; licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money—whether received in money or otherwise—including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
(Code 1958, § 21-3; Ord. No. 2000-73, § I, 11-7-00; Ord. No. 2009-07, § I, 2-17-09) 
Sec. 2-1-22. - Penalties. 
(a)  When any operator fails to make any return or to pay the full amount of the tax required by this chapter, there shall be imposed, in addition to other penalties provided by law, a penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days and an additional five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever if greater, for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction of thirty (30) days during which the failure continues. The penalty for any single violation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent or twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in the aggregate, whichever is greater. If the failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the city in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance is made within ten (10) days of due date, the return may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. In the case of a false or fraudulent return or of a failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due under this chapter, a penalty of fifty (50) percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any operator to fail, neglect, or refuse to collect the tax provided in this chapter, either by himself or herself, or through his or her agents or employees. In addition to the penalty of being liable for and paying the tax himself or herself, any person who violates this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than three (3) months, or both. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any operator required by this chapter to make, render, sign, or verify any return to make a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax levied by this chapter. Any person who violates this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or confinement in the county jail for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than three (3) months, or both fine and confinement. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any operator subject to this chapter to fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made by this chapter or to fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city. Any person who violates this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any operator subject to this chapter to fail to keep records or to fail to open the records to inspection as required by law. Any person who violates this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor, shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any operator to violate any other provision of this chapter for which punishment is not otherwise provided. Any person who violates this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor, shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 21-16; Ord. No. 2000-30, § I, 6-20-00) 
Sec. 2-1-23. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of a hotel located within the city to collect the tax on occupants imposed in Title 10. 
(Code 1958, § 21-5) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, OCGA § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 2-1-24. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article: 
(1)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(2)  No tax shall be imposed on charges made for hotel rooms, provided to any person who certifies that they are staying in such hotel room, as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty. 
(3)  The tax authorized by this chapter shall apply to the fees or charges for any hotel room during the first thirty (30) days of continuous occupancy and shall not apply to charges imposed for any continuous occupancy thereafter. The tax authorized by this chapter shall not apply to charges made for the use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or to any hotel room provided without charge. 
(4)  The tax authorized by this chapter shall not apply to the charges for any hotel room, furnished for a period of one (1) or more days for use by Georgia state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any hotel room with a state or local government credit card, such room shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a Georgia state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this section. 
(Code 1958, §§ 21-3, 21-6; Ord. No. 2000-30, § II, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 2009-07, § II, 2-17-09) 
Sec. 2-1-25. - Registration of operator. 
(a)  Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register such business with the city marshal, on a form provided by the city marshal for such purpose. The required registration hereunder shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business, and such information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the city marshal. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; by a member or partner in case of ownership by an association or partnership; by an officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. 
(b)  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(Code 1958, § 21-7; Ord. No. 2000-30, § III, 6-20-00) 
State Law reference— Procedures determined by taxing authority, OCGA § 48-13-53. 
Sec. 2-1-26. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator under this chapter, the city marshal shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. 
(Code 1958, § 21-8; Ord. No. 2000-30, § IV, 6-20-00) 
Sec. 2-1-27. - Due date and required report. 
(a)  All taxes levied by this section shall be due and payable to the city marshal monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city marshal. The tax imposed by this article shall become delinquent for each month after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, if the failure is for one (1) month or less; and an additional five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent or twenty-five dollars ($25.00), whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(Code 1958, § 21-9; Ord. No. 2000-30, § V, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 2000-73, § III, 11-7-00) 
Sec. 2-1-28. - Collection fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three (3) percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Code 1958, § 21-10; Ord. No. 2000-73, § II, 11-7-00) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 2-1-29. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  If any operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this chapter the city marshal shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals of such operator which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in which the operator failed to file the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city marshal. 
(b)  The city marshal or his designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of his determination as herein provided. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city marshal. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(c)  Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city marshal, such person shall have three (3) years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Code 1958, § 21-11; Ord. No. 2000-30, § VI, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 2000-73, § IV, 11-7-00) 
Sec. 2-1-30. - Required records. 
Each operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this chapter shall keep, for a period of at least three (3) years, all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers setting forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the city marshal may require. 
(Code 1958, § 21-12; Ord. No. 2000-30, § VII, 6-20-00) 
Sec. 2-1-31. - Administration and enforcement. 
The city marshal shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To examine, or authorize the examination of, the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting hotel rooms to persons subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)  To require the filing of reports by any person having in his possession or custody information relating to rentals of hotel rooms which are subject to the tax herein levied. 
(Code 1958, § 21-13; Ord. No. 2000-30, § VIII, 6-20-00) 
Sec. 2-1-32. - Action for collection of tax. 
At any time within three (3) years after any tax levied under this chapter or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the city attorney may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect such amount due, together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(Code 1958, § 21-14) 
State Law reference— Limitations of actions, O.C.G.A. § 9-3-1 et seq.; statute of limitations for tax executions, O.C.G.A. § 48-3-21. 
Sec. 2-1-33. - Successors or assignees of operator. 
If any operator liable for any tax, interest, or penalty imposed by this chapter sells his or her business or quits the business, he or she shall make a final return and payment within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting the business. The operator's successors or assigns, if any, shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase money to cover the amount of the taxes, interest, and penalties due under this chapter and unpaid until the former owner and/or operator produces either a receipt from the city showing that the taxes, interest, and penalties due under this chapter have been paid or a certificate from the city that no tax, interest, or penalty is due under this chapter. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase money as required by this chapter, that person shall be personally liable for the payment of any taxes, interest, and penalties accruing under this chapter and unpaid by any former owner and/or operator and/or assignor. The personal liability of the purchaser in such a case shall not exceed the amount of the total purchase money, but the property being transferred shall in all cases be subject to the full amount of the tax lien arising from the delinquencies of the former owner and/or operator and/or assignor. Paid executions may be transferred and enforced as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1958, § 21-15; Ord. No. 2000-30, § IX, 6-20-00) 
Sec. 2-1-34. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city marshal is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination as provided in section 2-1-27(b). 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city marshal shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period of which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 2000-73, § V, 11-7-00) 
Sec. 2-1-35. - Proceeds of the tax. 
The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(4). 
(Ord. No. 2005-18, § I, 6-7-05) 
CHAPTER 2-2. - REVENUES AND SERVICE FEES 

Sec. 2-2-1. - Returned checks—Service charge. 
When payment of any amount due the city or any of its departments (including, but not limited to, tax, the Georgia Mountains Center, or parks and recreation) occurs with a check which is subsequently returned by the bank or financial institution upon which it is written due to insufficient funds, closed account or any other reason, the customer shall pay a returned check charge in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00). The city may also charge the customer an additional fee in an amount equal to that charged to the city by the bank or financial institution as a result of the check not being honored. Such charges shall be considered part of the original amount due to the city or any of its departments for the purposes of determining nonpayment of such amount. For charges between $50.00—$2,500.00, the city manager may review the charge, upon written request from the customer. If the city manager determines that the dishonored check was due to inadvertence or mistake, the city manager may, in his discretion waive part of the returned check charge which exceeds thirty dollars ($30.00). The city council must review any charges exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the city council determines that the dishonored check was due to inadvertence or mistake, the city council may, in its discretion waive part of the returned check charge which exceeds thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(Ord. No. 97-25, § I, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2006-09, § I, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 2011-03, § I, 2-15-2011) 
CHAPTER 2-3. - FINANCE GENERALLY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, Tit. 6. 
Related law reference— Bonded debts, § 1.1.1. 
State Law reference— Acquisition, sale, lease, etc., of real and personal property, OCGA § 36-37-1 et seq.; municipal bonds, OCGA § 36-38-1 et seq.; state grants, OCGA § 36-40-1 et seq.; budgets and audits, OCGA § 36-81-1 et seq.; local government bonds, OCGA § 36-82-1 et seq.; local government investment pool, OCGA § 36-83-1 et seq.; competition for public work bids, OCGA §§ 36-84-1, 36-84-2. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-3-1. - Signs posted on city property advertised for sale; contents. 
Signs shall be posted on any city property that is authorized to be advertised for sale. Such sign shall state the lot size, time and date bids are to be returned, and other information pertinent to the bid request. The bidder may be requested to submit proposed development plans as required. 
(Code 1958, § 2-05) 
Related law reference— Disposition of property, § 1.3.1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Disposition of municipal property, OCGA § 36-37-6 et seq. 
Sec. 2-3-2. - Disposition of parcels of narrow strips of land; terms and conditions of purchase. 
(a)  As set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6(g), as hereinafter amended, the city may sell and convey parcels of narrow strips of land, so shaped or so small as to be incapable of being used independently as zoned or under applicable subdivision or other development ordinances, or as streets, whether owned in fee or used by easement, to abutting property owners where such sales and conveyances facilitate the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property without first submitting the sale or conveyance to the process of an auction or the solicitation of sealed bids; provided, however, that each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and shall have the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. 
(b)  If city-owned property is identified for potential sale or conveyance pursuant to subsection 2-3-2(a), the city, through the city manager or the city manager's designee, may make the following determinations in writing: 
(1)  That the real property sought to be sold or conveyed meets the criteria set forth in subsection 2-3-2(a) and state law, as amended; and 
(2)  The reasonable fair market value of the property, based upon an appraisal conducted by a licensed real estate appraiser within one year of making such determination. 
(c)  Upon completion of the determinations set forth in subsection 2-3-2(b), the city may notify in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery as defined in O.C.G.A. § 9-10-12, as hereinafter amended, each abutting property owner of the availability of the property for purchase and present the opportunity to purchase the property at its fair market value, as determined by the city manager or the city manager's designee under subsection 2-3-2(b). The notice shall further provide that the abutting property owner has 30 days from the date of the notice to express a desire in writing to purchase the property at the fair market value stated in the notice. The abutting property owner's written response expressing the desire to purchase shall be delivered to the city representative identified in the written notice to the abutting property owner. 
(d)  If the city receives only one response from an abutting property owner expressing a desire to purchase the property, then a recommendation may be presented by the city manager or the city manager's designee to the city council for its consideration and approval to sell such property to the abutting property owner for the fair market value set forth in the notice to the abutting property owner. 
(e)  If the city receives a response from more than one abutting property owner expressing a desire to purchase the property, then a recommendation may be presented by the city manager or the city manager's designee to the city council for its consideration and approval as to the disposition of property that facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. 
(f)  In the event the city receives no response from any abutting property owner, then the city may consider conveying the property in the best interest of the city, negotiating the sale or conveyance with one or more abutting property owners, or selling the property via a competitive bidding process as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6(a), as hereinafter amended. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall obligate the city in any manner to sell and/or convey any property identified hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2016-24, § I, 10-4-16) 
Secs. 2-3-3—2-3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - ANNUAL BUDGET GENERALLY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Budgets and audits, OCGA § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-3-26. - Adoption of budget. 
On or before the first day of each budget year, the city council shall adopt a budget which shall set forth a program for the financial operation of the city throughout that budget year. 
(Code 1958, § 2-1) 
State Law reference— Adoption of budget, OCGA § 36-81-6. 
Sec. 2-3-27. - Budget year. 
The budget year of the city shall begin July first and run through the following June thirtieth. 
(Code 1958, § 2-2) 
State Law reference— Establishment of fiscal year, OCGA § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-3-28. - Balanced budget. 
The budget which shall be adopted shall be a balanced budget. 
(Code 1958, § 2-3) 
State Law reference— Annual balanced budget required, OCGA § 36-81-3. 
Secs. 2-3-29—2-3-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF BUDGET 

Sec. 2-3-46. - Preparation by city manager. 
The city manager shall be considered to be the budget officer. The city manager shall prepare the proposed annual budget. For such purposes, he, or an officer designated by him, shall obtain from the head of each office, department, or agency estimates of revenues and expenditures of that office, department or agency, along with any supporting data as may be required. The head of each office, department, or agency shall also submit an estimate of all capital projects which are either pending or are projects which the department head believes should be undertaken (a) within the current budget year and (b) within the next five (5) succeeding years. In preparing the budget, the city manager, shall review the estimates of each department, shall hold hearings with the department heads and other appropriate officials thereon, any may revise the estimates as he may deem advisable. 
(Code 1958, § 2-4; Ord. No. 2005-26, § I, 6-21-05) 
State Law reference— Appointment of budget officer, OCGA § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, OCGA § 36-81-5. 
Sec. 2-3-47. - Submission, contents. 
At least forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of each budget year, the city manager shall submit his proposed budget to the city council. The budget as submitted by the city manager shall contain the following items: 
(1)  Budget message. 
a.  General. The city manager shall explain the budget in a budget message. Such message shall address established goals and objectives, service delivery issues, and preservation of financial health, and shall describe in connection therewith the important features of the proposed budget program. It shall also set forth the reasons for proposed changes from the previous years' cost and revenue items, if any. 
b.  Capital improvements. As a part of the budget message, the city manager shall include a statement of pending capital projects and proposed new capital projects and shall relate these projects to the various means of financing them proposed within the budget. 
c.  Capital program. The city manager shall include in the budget message, or attached thereto, a capital program of proposed capital projects for the five (5) fiscal years next succeeding the budget year, together with his comments thereon and estimates of costs. 
d.  Supporting schedules. Attached to the budget message shall be such supporting schedules, exhibits and other explanatory materials, in respect to both current operations and capital improvements, as the city manager shall believe useful to the city council. 
(2)  The budget. 
a.  Balanced budget. The budget as proposed by the city manager shall be a balanced budget with respect to the general fund, each special revenue fund and each debt service fund. Each capital projects fund shall operate under a project-length balanced budget. Balanced budgets shall also be prepared for enterprise funds such as public utilities, internal service funds, and component units such as parks and recreation. 
b.  Budget summary. The submitted budget shall include a summary of revenues, including property tax, and expenditures. Such information shall be presented in a manner as will provide the taxpayers a simple and clear summary of the detailed estimates of the budget. 
c.  Budget details. Detail of revenues and expenditures shall be provided for each budgeted fund. Revenue detail shall include all significant revenues or financing sources with the proposed budget amount. Expenditure detail shall include all expenditure and financing use categories with the proposed budget amount including, but not limited to departments, agencies, and other organizational units; functions; activities; and line item objects of expenditure. Budget detail shall reflect the State of Georgia Uniform Chart of Accounts and the city's chart of accounts. 
d.  Draft appropriations resolution. The budget submission shall include a draft of the appropriations resolution that may be adopted or modified by the council based upon its budget review. 
(Code 1958, § 2-5; Ord. No. 2005-26, §§ II—VI, 6-21-05) 
State Law reference— Submission of budget, OCGA § 36-81-5; form of budget, OCGA § 36-81-6. 
Secs. 2-3-48—2-3-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - ADOPTION OF BUDGET 

Sec. 2-3-66. - Public hearing to be held. 
At least one (1) week before taking final action on the budget, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the budget, public notice of which shall be prominently advertised not less than seven (7) days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. At such hearing, all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against the proposed budget or any item thereof. 
(Code 1958, § 2-6; Ord. No. 2005-26, § VII, 6-21-05) 
State Law reference— Budget hearing, OCGA § 36-81-5. 
Sec. 2-3-67. - Adoption of budget. 
After such public hearing, the city council may make such adjustments in the budget as shall seem appropriate, but where the city council shall increase the total proposed expenditures, it shall also provide for increase in the total anticipated revenue to at least equal such total proposed expenditures. The budget shall be adopted on a date at least one (1) week after the public hearing. The meeting for adoption shall be prominently advertised not less than seven (7) days prior to such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(1)  Vote required for adoption. The budget shall be adopted by the favorable votes of at least a majority of all members of the city council. 
(2)  Failure to adopt. The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the first day of the budget year. Should the city council take no final action on or prior to such day, the budget as submitted by the city manager shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1958, § 2-7; Ord. No. 2005-26, § VIII, 6-21-05) 
State Law reference— Adoption of budget, OCGA § 36-81-6. 
Sec. 2-3-68. - Effective date. 
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be certified by the city manager and city clerk and filed in the city clerk's office. The budget so certified shall be published or reproduced and sufficient copies thereof shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies and for the use of interested citizens. 
(Code 1958, § 2-8) 
State Law reference— "Budget year" and "fiscal year" defined, OCGA § 36-81-2(4). 
Sec. 2-3-69. - Adoption of budget establishes appropriations. 
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named. 
(Code 1958, § 2-9) 
Sec. 2-3-70. - Legal level of control. 
All budgets shall be adopted at the legal level of control. The legal level of control for revenues shall be all major revenue categories, including all budgeted revenues requiring mandatory reporting under the State of Georgia Uniform Chart of Accounts. The legal level of control for expenditures shall be the department, agency, or other organizational unit where applicable, or major expense category for non-departmental expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 2005-26, § IX, 6-21-05) 
Secs. 2-3-71—2-3-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - ADMINISTERING OF BUDGET[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Related law reference— Disposition of property, § 1.3.1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, OCGA § 36-60-13; local political subdivision purchases through state, OCGA § 50-5-100 et seq. 

Sec. 2-3-86. - Interim budget reports. 
The city manager shall keep the city council informed regarding budget activity throughout the fiscal year with monthly budget progress reports. 
(Code 1958, § 2-10; Ord. No. 2005-26, § X, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 2-3-87. - Budget amendments. 
(a)  General amendment. The council may amend the budget as deemed necessary or advantageous during the fiscal year, provided additional revenues or funding sources are identified for any net increase in expenditure. Following the end of each fiscal year quarter, any approved adjustments, including budgets for any projects authorized during the quarter shall be enacted through a budget adjustment resolution upon a favorable vote of the city council. The supplemental budget resolutions shall be balanced for each and every fund that is amended. 
(b)  Revenue shortfall. If, at any time during the budget year, the city manager shall determine that the available revenues and funding sources for the year will be less than the total appropriations, he shall so notify the council. He shall reconsider the work programs and appropriations of the several offices, departments, and agencies and prepare recommended amendments to the budget so as to forestall the making of expenditures in excess of the revenue. These recommendations shall be implemented upon a favorable vote of the city council. 
(Code 1958, § 2-11; Ord. No. 2005-26, § XI, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 2-3-88. - Transfers of appropriations. 
The city manager may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications of expenditures below the legal level of control within a department, agency, or organizational unit. 
(Code 1958, § 2-12; Ord. No. 2005-26, § XII, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 2-3-89. - When contracts and expenditures prohibited. 
No officer, department, or agency shall, during any budget year, expend or contract to expend any money or incur any liability, or enter into any contract which by its terms involves the expenditures of money, for any purpose, in excess of the amounts appropriated for that general classification of expenditures in the budget. Any contract, verbal or written, made in violation of this section shall be null and void. Any employee of the city who shall violate this section shall be suspended from his employment. Nothing in this section, however, shall prevent the making of contracts or the spending of money for capital improvements which are to be financed in whole by the issuance of bonds. 
(Code 1958, § 2-13) 
Sec. 2-3-90. - Contracts between city and relatives of city council members, public officials, board members, or employees prohibited. 
(a)  The city shall not enter into a contract for the sale or furnishing of products, goods, materials or services with any parent, spouse, lineal descendant or a lineal descendant's spouse of a city council member, public official, board member, or employee. Nor shall the city similarly contract with any corporation, partnership, trust or association in which any parent, spouse, lineal descendant or lineal descendant's spouse of a city council member, public official, board member, or employee owns a substantial interest. This section shall only apply to new contracts and shall not affect such existing contracts. The foregoing provision notwithstanding, this section shall not apply to contracts existing at the time of a future city council member's election, or the appointment or employment of any public official, board member, or employee, nor shall it invalidate any such existing contract or invalidate the council member's election or the appointment or employment of any public official, board member or employee. 
(b)  A substantial interest is defined as ownership of ten (10) percent or more of the total outstanding stock and/or an investment value in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) in a corporation, partnership, trust or association. 
(Ord. No. 89-32, § I, 7-18-89) 
Cross reference— Legislative, Ch. 1-4; personnel, Ch. 1-6; boards and commissions, § 1-5-1 et seq.; employment of relatives of council member, public official, employee, § 1-6-1. 
State Law reference— Ethics in government, OCGA § 21-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-3-91. - Appropriations lapse at end of year. 
All appropriations, other than project-length appropriations for capital projects, shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered. 
(Code 1958, § 2-14; Ord. No. 2005-26, § XIII, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 2-3-92. - Emergency appropriations. 
In the event of a genuine emergency that poses an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the city manager shall, using prudent judgment, direct such action as necessary to eliminate or diminish the threat. The city manager shall notify the council of the threat and action to be taken without delay. To the extent that the response to the emergency requires expenditure beyond the amounts currently available in the budget, the city manager shall notify the council as soon as practical and seek formal amendment of the budget through the established budget amendment process. 
(Code 1958, § 2-19; Ord. No. 2005-26, § XIV, 6-21-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-21, § I, adopted Apr. 6, 1999, deleted §§ 2-3-92—2-3-96, which pertained to contracts for city improvements, competitive bidding, control of purchases and purchasing agent, and derived from Code 1958, §§ 2-15—2-18, and renumbered § 2-3-97 as § 2-3-92. 
Cross reference— Emergency management, § 3-1-46 et seq. 
CHAPTER 2-4. - PURCHASING[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-27, §§ I, II, adopted Dec. 20, 2016, repealed Ch. 2 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 2 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 2, §§ II-4-1—2-4-29, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2006-14, § I, adopted May 16, 2006; Ord. No. 2010-40, §§ I—IV, adopted Oct. 5, 2010; Ord. No. 2012-05, § I, adopted March 6, 2012. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-4-1. - Scope. 
This chapter shall govern acquisitions by the city of commodities, equipment, and services. 
(Ord. No. 2016-27, § II, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 2-4-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter shall be construed and applied to promote its underlying purposes and policies which are: 
(1)  To foster effective, fair and broad-based competition for public procurement within the free enterprise system; and 
(2)  To provide safeguards for the maintenance of quality, integrity and equity in the purchasing process of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-27, § II, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 2-4-3. - Application of federal and state law. 
It is intended that this chapter shall conform to all applicable provisions of the laws of the United States and of the state, and the provisions hereof shall be so construed wherever possible. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city may enter into contracts, follow any procedure, or take any action which is otherwise at variance with this chapter if required as a condition to receiving funds from the State of Georgia or the United States Government. 
(Ord. No. 2016-27, § II, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 2-4-4. - Budgeted expenditures and expenses. 
It is the responsibility of the department director to ensure all purchases are consistent with and support the current approved budget prior to committing funds. 
(Ord. No. 2016-27, § II, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 2-4-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Acquisition means a transaction in which the city purchases, orders, contracts for, or otherwise agrees to obtain for value any commodity, service, real property or combination thereof. 
Active vendor status means a vendor has completed and returned all necessary documents and met requirements according to the city's vendor program policy and procedures. 
Bid means submission of information from an offeror that describes the offeror's commodities or services, and any other information necessary to respond to the specifications and other requirements set forth in a request for bids. 
Bid bond means a bond with good and sufficient surety or sureties for the faithful acceptance of the contract payable to, in favor of, and for the protection of the city. 
City means City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Commodity means a discrete and distinct item of tangible personal property, including, without limitation, any such item that is intended to become an integrated part of another item of tangible personal property or of any improvement to real property, but not including after incorporation into another item of personal property or real property in a manner which ends to separate character as personality under the law. 
Confidential information means any information that is available to an employee because of the employee's status as an employee of the city and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request. 
Contract means any agreement, purchase order, lease, or other document which creates or intended to create binding reciprocal obligations including, without limitation, any document evidencing a bid or proposal award that has been accepted by the offeror. 
Contractor means any person who is party to a contract, except the city. 
Day(s) means calendar day(s) unless otherwise stated. 
Employee/official means an individual drawing a salary or wages from the city, whether elected or not; any noncompensated individual performing personal services for the city or any department, agency, commission, council, board, or any other entity established by the executive or legislative branch of the city; and any noncompensated individual serving as an elected official of the city. 
Gratuity means a payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, service or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is received. 
Invitation to bid means all information and documentation disseminated by the city to solicit bids. 
Local vendor means a bidder or offeror which operates and maintains a brick and mortar business, i.e., a physical business address, within the city limits of the City of Gainesville, has a current business license, has paid in full all real and personal taxes owed the city, is considered a vendor in good standing with the city and can obtain an active vendor status. 
Offeror means any person who has submitted a bid or proposal to the city or otherwise offered to form a contract with the city. 
Person means any individual or legal entity. 
Proposal means submission of information from an offeror (including a consultant) which states how that offeror intends to fulfill the specifications and other requirements described in a request for proposals. 
Purchasing manager means the employee designated by the city to review purchase requests and bids, make purchasing recommendations, and ensure that employees of the city comply with rules, regulations, and laws relating to purchasing. 
Request for proposals means all information and documentation disseminated by the city to solicit proposals. 
Responsive bidder or offeror means a person who has submitted a bid or proposal that conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation. 
Services means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor which is not intended to accomplish the delivery of a specified tangible product other than reports that are merely incidental to the required performance, including, without limitation, a professional or consulting service. 
Specification means, in connection with a request for bids or request for proposals, a list of the characteristics of the commodities or services that will meet the city's requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-27, § II, 12-20-16) 
Secs. 2-4-6—2-4-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - PROCUREMENT ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 2-4-11. - Procurement procedures. 
The purchasing manager is authorized to establish, implement and enforce written operational procedures relating to procurement and contractual arrangements on behalf of the city. Such procedures shall, to the extent consistent with applicable law, be based upon generally accepted public purchasing principles and practices and shall become effective upon approval by the chief financial officer and the city manager. These procedures may be revised, as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2016-27, § II, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 2-4-12. - Parks and recreation. 
The city parks and recreation board was established as a legally separate entity through a special election in 1924 and operates pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq., and is given the same status with parks and recreation transactions relative to purchasing as the city council has with respect to other city departments. The parks and recreation director, under full authority of the city parks and recreation board, is the chief executive officer and is given the same status with parks and recreation transactions relative to purchasing as the city manager has with respect to other city departments. 
(Ord. No. 2016-27, § II, 12-20-16) 
Secs. 2-4-13—2-4-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - SOURCE SELECTION 

Sec. 2-4-16. - Protests. 
(a)  If a vendor or bidder/offeror may be aggrieved by any aspect of a solicitation, the vendor or bidder/offeror must protest in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Bidders/offerors may protest the contract award in connection with the invitation to bid/request for proposal on which the bidder/offeror has submitted a bid/proposal. Any such protest must be filed no later than ten (10) days following the date of the notice of award or purchase order. Vendors who do not submit a timely bid proposal may not protest the contract. 
(c)  Protests pertaining to events or facts arising during the solicitation process, including, but not limited to, specifications, must be filed no later than two (2) business days prior to the bid opening or proposal due date. 
(d)  Issues not raised in the initial protest may at the discretion of the city be deemed waived with prejudice by the protestor. 
(e)  A protest is filed when a written protest signed by a company officer authorized to sign contracts on behalf of the vendor is received by the purchasing manager or designee. 
(f)  A written protest shall include as a minimum the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the protestor; 
(2)  Appropriate identification of the solicitation; 
(3)  A statement of the reasons for the protest; 
(4)  Supporting exhibits, evidence, or documents to substantiate any claims unless not available within the filing time; in which case the expected availability date shall be indicated. 
(g)  Stay of procurement during protest. 
(1)  When a protest pertaining to events or facts arising during the solicitation process, such as protests concerning specifications and evaluation criteria, has been timely filed at least two (2) business days prior to the bid opening or proposal deadline date, the city shall make no award of a contract until a final decision has been issued, unless the purchasing manager makes a written determination, after consulting with the user department, that the award of the contract without delay is necessary to protect the interests of the city. 
(2)  When a protest has been filed in a timely fashion within ten (10) calendar days following the issuance of a contract award, the purchasing manager shall consult with the user department to determine if performance of the contract without delay is necessary to protect the interests of the city. If it is determined that it is necessary to proceed with contract performance without delay, the bidder/offeror with this contingent contract may proceed with performance and receive payment for work performed in strict accordance with the terms of the contract; however, such bidder/offeror shall not be entitled to reimbursement for any capital outlay costs, or other up front expenses incurred in performing the contract. 
(h)  Decision by purchasing manager. A decision on a protest shall be made by the purchasing manager as expeditiously as possible after receiving all relevant requested information. If a protest is sustained, the available remedies include: 
(1)  If a protest is sustained prior to an award: modification of the solicitation document, including but not limited to specifications, terms and conditions and evaluation criteria, and extension of the opening date if appropriate. 
(2)  If a protest is sustained after an award is made: suspension or cancellation of the award, re-evaluation and re-award or re-solicitation with appropriate changes to the new solicitation document. 
(i)  Request for formal review. 
(1)  If a protestor or user department disagrees with the decision of the purchasing manager, the protestor or user department may request a formal review of the decision by the chief financial officer or designee within three (3) days of the date of the purchasing manager's decision. The request for formal review shall contain a detailed statement of the factual and legal grounds upon which reversal or modification is deemed warranted, specifying any errors in the purchasing manager's decision. The chief financial officer or designee may, in his/her sole discretion, allow the protestor to make an oral presentation, and may solicit whatever other information he/she deems appropriate. 
(2)  The decision of the chief financial officer or designee shall be final. 
(j)  Recovery of costs. In no event shall a protestor be entitled to recover any costs incurred in connection with the solicitation, including bid/proposal preparation costs or attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 2016-27, § II, 12-20-16) 
Sec. 2-4-17. - Local vendor preference. 
(a)  Opportunity to match. For purchases, bids, proposals or contracts at twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or more and less than one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00), the local vendor may be given an opportunity to match the lowest price proposal, if the quotation or bid of the local vendor is within three (3) percent of the lowest price proposal by a nonlocal vendor. In the event a local vendor matches the lowest price proposal, including all other terms, quality, service and conditions, then the local vendor shall be awarded the contract. 
(b)  Multiple local vendors. In the event the price proposal of more than one (1) local vendor is within three (3) percent of the lowest overall price proposal of a nonlocal vendor, the local vendor with the lowest proposal will be given the first opportunity to match the lowest overall price proposal. If this local vendor declines to match the price proposal, then the local vendor with the next lowest bid within three (3) percent will be given the opportunity to match the lowest proposal. This process will continue with all local vendors having proposals within three (3) percent of the lowest overall bid by a nonlocal vendor. 
(c)  Policy to be stated. This policy shall be so stated in all applicable solicitations. 
(d)  Exemptions. This provision does not apply to public works construction projects or road projects pursuant to the laws of the State of Georgia or other situations to be found in conflict with federal or state laws or granting agency contracts. 
(Ord. No. 2016-27, § II, 12-20-16) 
CHAPTER 2-5. - FIXED ASSET MANAGEMENT 

Secs. 2-5-1—2-5-40. - Reserved. 
Title 3 - PUBLIC SAFETY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1; public works and health, Tit. 4; parades, § 6-9-6. 
Related law reference— Northeast Georgia Surface and Air Transportation Commission, § 3.3.1 et seq. 

CHAPTER 3-1. - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Public safety, Tit. 3; business license fees, Tit. 10; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-4; destruction of trees or vegetation, § 4-4-14. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1-1. - Powers of mayor—Declaration of emergency; specification of emergency area. 
(a)  In addition to all other powers enumerated in this Code, the mayor may declare an emergency to exist when, in his opinion, one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions. 
(2)  Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making the use of city streets or areas difficult or impossible. 
(3)  Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists. 
(4)  There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. 
(b)  The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
(Code 1958, § 2-02) 
State Law reference— Offenses against public order and safety, OCGA § 16-11-1 et seq.; calling out state militia during invasion or insurrection, OCGA § 45-12-28. 
Sec. 3-1-2. - Same—Powers specified; duration of emergency. 
(a)  After declaration of such emergency the mayor, as chief executive, shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following: 
(1)  The power to use employees of the city to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of citizenry of the city. 
(2)  The power to close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists. 
(3)  The power to impose emergency curfew regulations. 
(4)  The power to close business establishments within the affected area. 
(5)  The power to close any and all municipallyowned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public. 
(6)  The power to do any and all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city. 
(b)  No emergency power set forth herein may be effective for more than seventy-two (72) hours after the declaration of an emergency by the mayor. However upon declaration of a second or further emergencies to exist, the emergency powers as set forth herein may be exercised during such further emergency period or periods, but never for more than seventy-two (72) hours in one (1) declared emergency period. 
(c)  No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular, special or called meeting of the city council. 
(Code 1958, § 2-03) 
Secs. 3-1-3—3-1-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Legislative, Ch. 1-3. 

Sec. 3-1-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Civil emergency means: 
(1)  A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force or violence or the threat of riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force or violence. 
(2)  Any civil disturbance or threat of civil disturbance to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the city. 
Curfew means a prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city, excepting persons officially assigned to duty with reference to a civil emergency. 
(Code 1958, § 14-1.2) 
State Law reference— Offenses against public order, OCGA § 16-11-30 et seq. 
Sec. 3-1-22. - Declaration. 
When in the judgment of the mayor, or any council member acting for him in his absence, a civil emergency is deemed to exist he shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of same. 
(Code 1958, § 14-1.3) 
Sec. 3-1-23. - Imposition of curfew. 
After proclamation of a civil emergency the city council may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city or the city as a whole as it deems advisable and such curfew shall be applicable during such hours of the day or night as it deems necessary in the interest of public safety and welfare. 
(Code 1958, § 14-1.4) 
Sec. 3-1-24. - Powers of city council. 
After proclamation of a civil emergency, the city council may also in the interest of public safety and welfare make any or all of the following orders: 
(1)  Private clubs. Order the closing of all private clubs. 
(2)  Gasoline. Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
(3)  Gasoline stations. Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief activity of which is the sale, distributing, or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products. 
(4)  Firearms. Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever. 
(5)  Firearms establishments. Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever. 
(6)  Protection of life and property. Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(Code 1958, § 14-1.5) 
Sec. 3-1-25. - Closing of streets. 
After the proclamation of a civil emergency the chief of police shall have the authority to temporarily close any and all streets, alleys and other public ways in the city to the public whenever, in the opinion of the chief of police, it is necessary in order to maintain the public safety and welfare of said community. 
(Code 1958, § 14-1.6) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 4-4. 
Sec. 3-1-26. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article, or any order issued pursuant thereto, shall be guilty of an offense against the city and shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7. 
(Code 1958, § 14-1.7) 
Secs. 3-1-27—3-1-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency appropriations, § 2-3-96; police department, Ch. 3-2; fire department, Ch. 3-3; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-4; pollution and contamination, Ch. 3-6; flood protection and prevention, Ch. 4-5; water shortage management, § 5-2-96 et seq.; fallout shelters, § 7-1-20. 
State Law reference— State militia, OCGA § 38-2-1 et seq.; emergency management, OCGA § 38-3-1 et seq.; emergency funds for local government, OCGA § 50-8-8. 

Sec. 3-1-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or other state and federal agencies are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of man-made or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, law enforcement and police services, medical and health services, rescue services, engineering services, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
Energy emergency means a condition of danger to the health, safety, welfare or economic well-being of the citizens of this city arising out of a present or threatened shortage of usable energy resources; also any condition of substantial danger to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of this city resulting from the operation of any electrical power-generating facility, the transport of any energy resource by any means whatsoever, or the production, use or disposal of any source material, special nuclear material, or by-product, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 68 Stat. 919, 42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.; also any nuclear incident, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, occurring within or outside this city, substantially affecting the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of this city. 
(Code 1958, § 8-1; Ord. No. 90-40, § 1, 9-4-90) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 3-1-47. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rules, orders or regulations made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-7. 
(Code 1958, § 8-6; Ord. No. 90-40, § 1, 9-4-90) 
Sec. 3-1-48. - Office established; appointment, general duties of county emergency management director/coordinator. 
In agreement with the governing officials within the county, there is hereby established the Hall County Emergency Management Office. The commissioners of Hall County and the city council shall jointly nominate, for appointment by the governor, a director/coordinator of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director/coordinator is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the city and county therein on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist the city, the county and other officials in organizing city, county and all other governmental departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with all county and city departments and other governmental agencies, the county plan for the emergency functions set forth in this chapter. Such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the city and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the emergency management office and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices. 
(6)  To produce, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operations center staff during periods of a declared emergency, and under the supervision of county and city governing officials. 
(Code 1958, § 8-2; Ord. No. 90-40, § 1, 9-4-90) 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1. 
State Law reference— State director of emergency management, OCGA § 38-3-20 et seq.; plans and programs for emergency management, OCGA § 38-3-22; local organizations for emergency management, OCGA § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 3-1-49. - Emergency management organization. 
(a)  The county emergency management organization shall be established around the existing county and city departments and other agencies and the emergency functions listed in section 3-4-1 are assigned as follows: 

 
(b)  Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing the plan for their assigned emergency functions. Such plans will be submitted through the emergency management director/coordinator to the city and to the county commission and other governing officials for approval. 
(Code 1958, § 8-3; Ord. No. 90-40, § 1, 9-4-90) 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1. 
State Law reference— Local emergency management regulations, OCGA § 38-3-28. 
Sec. 3-1-50. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairman of the county commission, and/or mayor, or in his absence a legally appointed successor (vice chairman/mayor pro tem), may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter the mayor, or in his absence, a legally appointed successor, shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes. 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack, and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies. 
(3)  To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers. 
(4)  To establish a primary and one (1) or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster. 
(5)  Subject to the order of the governor or the mayor or his legally appointed successor, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the city relating to firefighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the city. 
(6)  In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims; and to enter into whatever arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payment of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units. 
(Code 1958, § 8-4; Ord. No. 90-40, § 1, 9-4-90; Ord. No. 91-49, § 1, 12-3-91) 
State Law reference— Emergency interim successors to officials, OCGA § 38-3-50 et seq. 
Sec. 3-1-51. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as municipal and county officers and employees. 
(Code 1958, § 8-5; Ord. No. 90-40, § 1, 9-4-90) 
State Law reference— Immunity under emergency management law, OCGA §§ 38-3-32, 38-3-33, 38-3-35; emergency management personnel, OCGA § 38-3-34. 
Sec. 3-1-52. - Liberality of construction. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Code 1958, § 8-7; Ord. No. 90-40, § 1, 9-4-90) 
CHAPTER 3-2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[5] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— This chapter is reserved for future use. 
Cross reference— Emergency management, § 3-1-46 et seq.; members of fire department vested with police power during fire, § 3-3-3; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-4; guard dogs, § 4-1-60; sexton to have police power, § 4-2-11; enforcement of taxicab ordinance, § 6-8-3. 
State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering of law enforcement officers, OCGA § 16-10-24; arrest of persons, OCGA § 17-4-1 et seq.; law enforcement officers and agencies, OCGA Title 35; state grants for public purposes, OCGA § 36-40-20 et seq. 

CHAPTER 3-3. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency management, § 3-1-46 et seq.; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-4; guard dogs, § 4-1-60; fire prevention code, § 7-1-56 et seq. 
State Constitution reference— Power of city to provide fire protection services, Art. 9, § 2, para. 3. 
State Law reference— Fire escapes, OCGA § 8-2-50 et seq.; forest fires, OCGA § 12-6-89; transmitting false report of a fire, OCGA § 16-10-27; fire protection and safety, OCGA Title 25; remedy of unsafe conditions upon failure to comply with court order, OCGA § 25-2-25; local ordinances, regulations or codes relating to fire prevention or protection, OCGA § 25-3-4; state grants for public purposes, OCGA § 36-40-20 et seq.; electronic security systems, installation, service, etc., by counties or municipal corporations, OCGA § 36-60-12; Georgia Firemen's Pension Fund, OCGA § 47-7-1 et seq.; liability of officers, agents, etc., of fire departments for activities, OCGA § 51-1-30. 

Sec. 3-3-1. - Injuring fire apparatus. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or damage in any way and by any means, any of the apparatus of the fire department. 
(Code 1958, § 10-3) 
State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, OCGA § 16-7-22 et seq.; interference with government property, OCGA § 16-7-24 et seq. 
Sec. 3-3-2. - Obstruction of fire plugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with building material or otherwise, or to place any post nearer than three (3) feet of any fire plug on their side, such as would obstruct the approaches of the fire department to the same. 
(Code 1958, § 10-4) 
Cross reference— Water, Ch. 5-2. 
State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering of firefighters, OCGA § 16-10-24.1. 
Sec. 3-3-3. - Members of fire department vested with police power during fire. 
The chief and each member of the fire department are hereby vested with all the powers of a police officer of the city, insofar as to make arrests within the city, during a fire. 
(Code 1958, § 10-6) 
Cross reference— Police department, Ch. 3-2. 
State Law reference— Power of state fire marshal and staff to make arrests and carry weapons, OCGA § 25-2-9. 
Sec. 3-3-4. - City firefighting equipment not to be used outside city, exception. 
(a)  No firefighting equipment or personnel of the city shall be used outside the corporate limits of the city, except for: 
(1)  The purpose of extinguishing fires at schools, churches, industrial plants, veterans' clubs, radio stations or in response to calls for aid from other municipalities within Hall County unless approved by the city manager. 
(2)  The purpose of complying with the terms and conditions of any automatic aid agreement entered into with any other governmental entity. 
(Code 1958, § 10-8; Ord. No. 97-63, § I, 10-21-97) 
State Law reference— Mutual aid resource pacts, OCGA § 25-6-1 et seq. 
CHAPTER 3-4. - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[7] 
Article 1. In General 

 
Article 2. Traffic Signs, Signals and Markings 

 
Article 3. Railroads 

 
Article 4. Speed 

 
Article 5. Stopping, Standing and Parking 

 
Article 6. Miscellaneous Rules 

 
Article 7. Off-Road Vehicles 

 
Article 8. Serious Traffic Offenses 

 
Article 9. Traffic Division of Police Department 

 
Article 10. Schedules; Specific Locations 

 
Article 11. Traffic Congestion Thoroughfares 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Recreation and parks, Ch. 1-7; emergency management, § 3-1-46 et seq.; police department, Ch. 3-2; fire department, Ch. 3-3; abandoned motor vehicles, § 3-5-31 et seq.; animals, Ch. 4-1; cemeteries, Ch. 4-2; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 4-4; wrecker services on rotation list, § 6-1-1; taxicabs, Ch. 6-8; parades, § 6-9-6; business license fees, Tit. 10. 
Related law reference— Northeast Georgia Surface and Air Transportation Commission, § 3.3.1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, OCGA Title 40; Uniform Rules of the Road, OCGA 40-6-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, OCGA § 40-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-4-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Traffic Ordinance." 
(Code 1958, § 23-101) 
Sec. 3-4-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Central traffic district means all streets and portions of streets within the boundaries described as follows: 
Beginning at the center of intersection of West Academy Street and Academy Street; extending along West Academy Street to Jesse Jewell Parkway; extending along Jesse Jewell Parkway to E. E. Butler Parkway; extending along E. E. Butler Parkway to Academy Street; and thence along Academy Street to the beginning point at the intersection of Academy Street and West Academy Street. 
Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight. 
Limited loading zones means zones in which it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within a properly marked loading zone between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. (except if otherwise marked), Sundays excepted, except for the purpose of loading or unloading such vehicle. It shall be unlawful to be parked in any loading zone for more than fifteen (15) minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Sundays excepted. 
Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Speed detection device means, unless otherwise indicated, that particular device designed to measure the speed or velocity of a motor vehicle and marketed under the name "Vascar" or any similar device operating under the same or similar principle and any devices for the measurement of speed or velocity based upon the Doppler principle of radar or the speed timing principle of laser. All such devices must meet or exceed the minimum performance specifications established by the department of public safety. 
Traffic division means the traffic division of the police department of this city, or in the event a traffic division is not established, then such term whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the police department of this city. 
(Code 1958, § 23-104; Ord. No. 93-16, § 1, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 98-40, § I, 7-21-98) 
Sec. 3-4-3. - Penalty for violation of provisions. 
If any person shall be convicted of the violation of any section of the traffic ordinance of the city, such person shall on conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 23-103) 
Sec. 3-4-4. - Repeal of ordinances in conflict; effect on prior violations. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter. 
(Code 1958, § 23-102) 
Sec. 3-4-5. - Uniform rules of the road. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. Pursuant to Chapter 6 of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, OCGA Sections 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, Code Sections 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in OCGA section 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(c)  Repeal. The existing ordinances covering the same matters as embraced in this section are hereby repealed and all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. 
(d)  Effective date. The effective date of this section shall be upon approval by the city council. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1601; Ord. No. 91-46, 11-5-91) 
Sec. 3-4-6. - City public works director. 
(a)  The city public works director shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  It shall be the general responsibility of the city public works director to determine or cause to be determined the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct or cause to be conducted engineering analysis of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct or to have conducted engineering investigation of traffic conditions, to plan or cause to be planned the operation of traffic on the streets of this city, to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1958, § 23-105) 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1. 
Sec. 3-4-7. - Operation of vehicles on streets; exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of vehicles refer to the operation of vehicles upon streets except: 
(1)  Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section; 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to a vehicle operated at shopping centers or parking lots or similar areas which although privately owned are customarily used by the public as through streets or connector streets; 
(3)  The provisions of this chapter relating to reckless driving, driving in violation of section 3-4-132, and homicide by vehicle shall apply to vehicles operated upon streets and elsewhere throughout the city; and 
(4)  The provisions of section 3-4-10 shall apply upon the streets of this city, in all parking areas, and in all areas which are customarily open to the public and within two hundred (200) feet of all such streets, parking areas, and areas customarily open to the public. 
(Code 1958, § 23-106) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 40-6-3. 
Sec. 3-4-8. - Duty of driver to stop at or return to scene of accident. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or the death of any person or in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident or shall stop as close thereto as possible and forthwith return to the scene of the accident and shall in every event remain at the scene of the accident until fulfilling the requirements of OCGA Section 40-6-271. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(b)  If such accident is the proximate cause of death or a serious injury as defined in OCGA Section 33-34-2, any person knowingly failing to stop and comply with the requirements of subsection (a) above shall be guilty of a felony and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than one (1) nor more than five (5) years. 
(c)  If such accident is the proximate cause of an injury other than a serious injury as defined in OCGA Section 33-34-2, or if such accident resulted in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person, any person knowingly failing to stop or comply with the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and: 
(1)  Upon conviction shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which fine shall not be subject to suspension, stay, or probation, or imprisoned for up to one (1) year, or both; 
(2)  Upon the second conviction within a five-year period of time, as measured from the dates of previous arrests for which convictions were obtained to the date of the current arrest for which a conviction is obtained, shall be fined not less than six hundred dollars ($600.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which fine shall not be subject to suspension, stay, or probation, or imprisoned for up to one (1) year, or both; and for purposes of this section, previous pleas of nolo contendere accepted within such five-year period shall constitute convictions; and 
(3)  Upon the third or subsequent conviction within a five-year period of time, as measured from the dates of previous arrests for which convictions were obtained to the date of the current arrest for which a conviction is obtained, shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which fine shall not be subject to suspension, stay, or probation, or imprisoned for up to one (1) year, or both; and for purposes of this section, previous pleas of nolo contendere accepted within such five-year period shall constitute convictions. 
For the purpose of imposing a sentence under this subsection, a plea of nolo contendere shall constitute a conviction. If the payment of the fine required under this subsection will impose an economic hardship on the defendant, the judge, at his sole discretion, may order the defendant to pay such fine in installments and such order may be enforced through a contempt proceeding or a revocation of any probation otherwise authorized by this section. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the limits set forth in the charter, the municipal court shall be authorized to impose the punishments provided for in this section upon a conviction of violating this section or upon conviction of violating any ordinance adopting the provisions of this section. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 40-6-270. 
Sec. 3-4-9. - Duty upon striking unattended vehicle. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and the owner of the vehicle doing the striking. 
(b)  Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of subsection (a) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 40-6-272. 
Sec. 3-4-10. - Duty to report accident resulting in injury, death, or property damage. 
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the police department. The above notice shall be in addition to the written report required by OCGA Section 40-9-30. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1508) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 40-6-274. 
Sec. 3-4-11. - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county or city. It shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
(Code 1958, § 23-111) 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1. 
State Law reference— Observance of Uniform Rules of the Road, OCGA § 40-6-1. 
Sec. 3-4-12. - Animals, use of devices for self-transportation and similar devices restricted. 
(a)  The utilization of any device designed for self-transportation or self-propulsion, or riding any animal shall be prohibited in places not specifically designated for their use. Prohibited places shall include the downtown square, public courtyards, public parking lots and decks, and all sidewalks and roadways. Exceptions may be granted by the city council at their discretion based on specific requests presented to them in a timely manner and via the proper channels. This section shall not limit the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(b)  Bicycles are allowed on roadways subject to the provisions of state law but are prohibited in places not specifically designated for their use. Prohibited places shall include public courtyards, public parking lots and decks, and all sidewalks. Exceptions may be granted by the city council at their discretion based on specific requests presented to them in a timely manner and via the proper channels. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § I, 3-3-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-06, § I, adopted Mar. 3, 2010, repealed § 3-4-12 in its entirety and enacted a new § 3-4-12 as set out herein. The former § 3-4-12 pertained to use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted and derived from the Code of 1958, § 23-112. 
Sec. 3-4-13. - Standing on streets or highways and soliciting employment, business, or contributions from occupants of vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall stand on any street or highway of the city for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2000-97, § I, 12-21-00) 
Secs. 3-4-14—3-4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS 

Sec. 3-4-26. - Authority to establish play streets. 
The city public works director shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(Code 1958, § 23-208) 
Cross reference— Recreation and parks, Ch. 1-7. 
Sec. 3-4-27. - Driving on play streets. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1958, § 23-209) 
Sec. 3-4-28. - Designation of crosswalks and safety zones. 
The city public works director is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary; 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 1958, § 23-210) 
Sec. 3-4-29. - Traffic lanes. 
(a)  The city public works director is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any such vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(Code 1958, § 23-211) 
State Law reference— Driving on roadways laned for traffic, OCGA § 40-6-48. 
Sec. 3-4-30. - Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever any ordinance of this city designates any one-way street or alley the city public works director shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1958, § 23-212) 
Sec. 3-4-31. - Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets during certain periods. 
(a)  The city public works director is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one (1) direction during one (1) period and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The city public works director may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the roadway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1958, § 23-213) 
Secs. 3-4-32—3-4-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - RAILROADS 

Sec. 3-4-46. - Speed of trains restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, its agent or employee, or any other person to operate a train within the corporate limits of the city at a rate of speed greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(Code 1958, § 17-1) 
Sec. 3-4-47. - Crossings—Obstructing. 
Any railroad train or part of a railroad train or railroad car or locomotive or other rolling equipment shall not be halted upon railroad crossings of the public streets, alleys or thoroughfares of the city so as to block or interfere with the use of any public street, alley or thoroughfare for a period of time in excess of fifteen (15) minutes. 
(Code 1958, § 17-2) 
Sec. 3-4-48. - Same—Manner of keeping. 
All railroad companies shall keep the street crossings over their tracks level with the top of the rails by plank or otherwise, and in a safe and convenient condition for vehicles or foot passengers. When the railroad runs under any street so as to make a bridge necessary, it shall be the duty of such company to keep such bridge at all times safe and in good repair. Upon failure of any railroad company to comply with the provisions of this section, the agent of such company shall be served with a notice of the defect, and upon failure to put such crossing in proper condition within thirty (30) days, the same shall be remedied by the city at the expense of the company, and the costs collected by execution against the company as provided by law. 
(Code 1958, § 17-3) 
State Law reference— Duty of railroads to maintain grade crossings, OCGA § 32-6-190; procedure for grade crossing elimination, OCGA § 32-6-194; responsibility for maintenance of overpasses and underpasses, OCGA § 32-6-197; procedure to obtain maintenance of grade separation structures, protective devices and grade crossings, OCGA § 32-6-202; crossing obstructed or in disrepair, OCGA § 46-8-128. 
Sec. 3-4-49. - Same—Protection to be provided. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating trains across grade crossings in the city, to provide at each such grade crossing complete public safety from danger from approaching trains for all persons using the streets at such crossings. For this purpose, persons operating trains, or having control of the track, shall place and keep at each such grade crossing at all times a watchman or flagman, or shall install, operate and maintain standard automatic gates or signaling devices sufficient to protect the public fully from the danger of any approaching train. 
(b)  No train shall be run across any grade crossing where adequate provision, as required by the preceding section, has not been made for the protection of human life. 
(Code 1958, § 17-4) 
Sec. 3-4-50. - Train water closet. 
All conductors of railroads and sleeping car companies running into or through the city shall keep the water closets of the cars in them clean, securely locked, and shall not permit them to be used while stopping in this city. Any conductor failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 17-5) 
Secs. 3-4-51—3-4-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - SPEED 

Sec. 3-4-61. - Speed laws applicable. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. ch. 6 of tit. 40, §§ 40-6-181, 40-6-184, 40-6-185, and 40-6-188 of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of City of Gainesville with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1958, § 23-801; Ord. No. 2017-26, § I, 11-7-17) 
State Law reference— Speed restrictions, OCGA § 40-6-180 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, OCGA § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 3-4-62. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
The city public works director is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1958, § 23-804) 
Secs. 3-4-63—3-4-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Off-street parking under zoning ordinance, § 9-1-13 et seq. 

Sec. 3-4-76. - Application of article provisions. 
The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
(1)  The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(2)  When official traffic-control devices are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or portions of streets described in Schedules 4 and 5 set out in sections 3-4-174 and 3-4-175. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1013) 
Sec. 3-4-77. - Official traffic-control devices. 
Whenever by this or any other ordinance of this city any parking time is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the city public works director to install appropriate official traffic-control devices giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless such devices are in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1014) 
Sec. 3-4-78. - Limited loading zones—Designation, criteria. 
(a)  The city public works director is hereby authorized to determine the location of limited loading zones. 
(b)  Limited loading zones will be based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Passenger loading zones. Loading zones for passengers will be limited to places of public gatherings. Therefore, passenger loading zones will be limited to the following areas: 
a.  Public auditoriums and meeting places. 
b.  Hotels. 
c.  Theaters. 
d.  Schools. 
e.  Churches. 
(2)  Package and freight loading zones. Package and freight loading zones will be established without charge by the city after study by the public works director to determine need and location. The following standards must be met to justify a package and freight loading zone: 
a.  A minimum of five (5) establishments without off-street access that will derive service from the zone. 
b.  A maximum of two (2) freight loading zones within a one (1) block area. 
(3)  Limited loading zones are hereby established on parts of the streets described in Schedule 8, section 3-4-178 and Schedule 9, section 3-4-179. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1006; Ord. No. 93-16, § 2, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 3-4-79. - Same—Applications. 
The city public works director shall not designate or sign any loading zone upon special request of any person unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone. The city public works director upon receipt of the application will make a study to determine the loading characteristics of the establishment in question. After analysis of the information and comparison with the established standards set forth in section 3-4-78 the request will be granted or denied on the basis of the results. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1007) 
Sec. 3-4-80. - Standing in passenger curb loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1008) 
Sec. 3-4-81. - Standing in freight curb loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1009) 
Sec. 3-4-82. - Designation of public carrier stops and stands. 
The city public works director may establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every bus stop, bus stand, or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1010) 
Cross reference— Taxicabs, Ch. 6-8. 
Sec. 3-4-83. - Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated. 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that a bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18) inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(d)  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1011) 
Cross reference— Taxicabs, Ch. 6-8. 
Sec. 3-4-84. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1012) 
Cross reference— Taxicabs, Ch. 6-8. 
Sec. 3-4-85. - Parking in shopping center fire lanes. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle within ten (10) feet of the curb adjacent to a sidewalk in the front or rear of any business located within a shopping center, if such sidewalk exists, or within fifteen (15) feet of the front or rear of any building if a sidewalk does not exist and when such area has been marked as a fire lane, for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes; provided, however, this section shall not apply to designated loading zones. 
(b)  As used herein "shopping center" is defined as a group of five (5) or more commercial establishments existing on a single tract of land which have been planned and developed as a unit and which have a combined floor area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1014.1) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, Tit. 6. 
Sec. 3-4-86. - Reserved parking spaces for city officials and employees. 
Reserved parking spaces are hereby established for the exclusive use of city officials and city employees on property owned by the city and marked for use by city officials and/or city employees. The parking of a vehicle in these reserved spaces except by a city official and/or city employee shall be a violation of this section. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1015) 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1. 
Sec. 3-4-87. - Parking zones. 
(a)  Limited parking zones are hereby established on those streets or parts of streets described in Schedule 6, section 3-4-176, in which zones the parking of vehicles upon streets shall be for a maximum of two (2) hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and public holidays. Parking for more than two (2) hours in any limited parking zone shall be a violation of this section and each two-hour period in which any such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
(b)  The city public works director is hereby authorized, subject to the approval of the city council by amendment of Schedule 6, section 3-4-176, to establish parking zones at other locations upon those streets or parts of streets where it is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that limited parking shall be necessary to aid in the regulation, control and inspection of the parking of vehicles. 
(c)  Limited parking zones are hereby established on those streets or parts of streets described in Schedule 10, section 3-4-180, in which zones the parking of vehicles upon streets shall be for a maximum of twenty (20) minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays. Parking for more than twenty (20) minutes in any limited parking zone shall be a violation of this section and each twenty-minute period in which any such violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit any vehicle to park adjacent to a yellow curb. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1016; Ord. No. 89-51, § I, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 2010-12, § I, 4-20-10) 
State Law reference— Public and legal holidays, OCGA § 1-4-1. 
Sec. 3-4-88. - Trucks or tractors prohibited from using certain streets. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any truck or tractor at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described elsewhere in this chapter, except that such vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise and then only by entering such street at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceeding thereon no farther than the nearest intersection thereafter. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1017) 
Sec. 3-4-89. - Parking time limits—Posted notices. 
Any vehicle parking or standing in any designated and posted parking space shall be parked within the lines marked on the street or curb and may occupy such space during the parking limited provided by this article and the posted notice for the part of the street in which such parking space is located. 
(Ord. No. 93-16, § 3, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 3-4-90. - Same—Parking overtime; separate offenses, marking system, fines, wheel locks, bonds and fees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to stay parked in any designated parking space beyond the designated unit of time. 
(c)  Exceeding the period of legal parking time in any designated parking space, or designated parking spaces, within the established downtown business parking zone (see section 3-4-91), shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(d)  The police department shall adopt an appropriate marking system for identifying cars in order that this section may be adequately enforced. 
(e)  The fine for the first violation of the following parking offenses shall be: 
(1)  First offense for parking in a fire lane, section ..... $100.00 
(2)  Parking in a handicapped zone ..... 250.00 
(3)  Parking on sidewalk ..... 50.00 
(4)  Parking in employee parking spaces or lot without permit ..... 50.00 
(5)  All other violations not described in subsections (e)1—4. ..... 20.00 
(f)  Any person who fails to pay any parking offense within five (5) days of receipt thereof shall pay double the fine for such parking offense. 
(g)  Any person who receives two (2) parking tickets within thirty (30) days shall pay double the fine of the first parking offense. 
(h)  Any person who receives three (3) parking tickets within thirty (30) days shall pay triple the fine of the first parking offense. 
(i)  The vehicle owner shall, within five (5) days of receiving the fifth unpaid parking ticket, satisfy all delinquent tickets or shall be subject to an additional penalty six (6) times the fine of the first parking offense. 
(j)  Court summons; bond for failure to appear. Additionally, such owner shall be issued a summons to appear in the municipal court of the city. If such owner fails to appear at the appointed time and date as specified in the summons, he or she shall be subject to arrest and shall post a fifty dollar ($50.00) bond plus an amount equal to all fines and penalties accrued to such date. 
(k)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 93-16, § 4, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 2003-57, §§ I—IV, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 2010-12, § II, 4-20-10) 
Sec. 3-4-91. - Establishment of a downtown business parking zone. 
A downtown business parking zone is hereby established to facilitate enforcement of section 3-4-90 of this Code, which zone shall include the herein described portions of the following downtown streets: 
Bradford Street—from Spring Street to Academy Street. 
Broad Street—from Main Street to West Academy Street. 
Brenau Avenue—from E.E. Butler Parkway to Main Street. 
Green Street—from Jesse Jewell Parkway to Academy Street. 
Main Street—from Jesse Jewell Parkway to Academy Street. 
Maple Street—from Broad Street to Academy Street. 
Spring Street—from Green Street to West Academy Street. 
Washington Street—from E.E. Butler Parkway to West Academy Street. 
(Ord. No. 93-16, § 5, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 2003-57, § V, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 3-4-92. - Construction permit parking fees in the downtown area. 
There shall be a construction permit parking fee for the use of parking spaces in the downtown area by contractors in the performance of their work as follows: 
Per parking space per day ..... $5.00 
(Ord. No. 93-16, § 6, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 2003-57, § VI, 9-2-03) 
Secs. 3-4-93—3-4-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - MISCELLANEOUS RULES 

Sec. 3-4-101. - Control of vehicle load. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or transport or cause to be hauled or transported by truck or other vehicle any load of logs, lumber, pipes and other like material on or over the public streets of the city without first having such load securely fastened to such vehicle by at least two (2) chains or steel cables of sufficient strength to securely hold the load upon the truck or other vehicle. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1116) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 32-6-21. 
Sec. 3-4-102. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-32, § I, adopted June 1, 1999, repealed § 3-4-102 which pertained to blowing horns excessively, and derived from Code 1958, § 23-1116. 
Sec. 3-4-103. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-32, § II, adopted June 1, 1999, repealed § 3-4-103, which pertained to the prohibition of noise devices attached to exhaust, and derived from Code 1958, § 23-1117. 
Sec. 3-4-104. - Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb. 
(a)  The city public works director is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1118) 
Sec. 3-4-105. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-32, § III, adopted June 1, 1999, repealed § 3-4-105, which pertained to operation of radios, stereos, etc., from motor vehicles at levels audible from 100 feet, and derived from Ord. No. 91-14, § 1, adopted May 21, 1991. 
Secs. 3-4-106—3-4-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Off-road vehicles, OCGA § 40-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 3-4-116. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authority means an agency of the state established by a special act to perform a special purpose or purposes. 
Chicopee Woods Area Park Commission means the authority created by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia during the 1980 session, established for the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance and operation of a recreational center(s) and area(s). 
Off-road vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain and not intended for use predominantly on public roads. It includes, but is not limited to, four-wheel drive or low-pressure tire vehicles, two-wheel vehicles, three-wheel vehicles, jeeps, amphibious machines, ground effect or air cushion vehicles, and any other means of transportation deriving power from any source other than muscle or wind, except that such term shall exclude any motorboat; any military, fire, or law enforcement vehicle; any vehicles used exclusively on airports; all farm machinery, farm tractors, and other self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, for clearing land for planting, for utility services and maintenance, for earth moving, construction, or mining; and self-propelled lawnmowers, snowblowers, garden or lawn tractors, or golf carts, while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes. 
Property means any and all real and personal property owned by the Chicopee Woods Area Park Commission and/or the city. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1702) 
State Law reference— "Off-road vehicle" defined, OCGA § 40-7-3. 
Sec. 3-4-117. - Declaration of policy. 
The rapid increase in the use of off-road vehicles and their growing impact upon aspects of the public interest are matters of concern to the city council and to the people of this city. Therefore, in order to promote the safe use of the off-road vehicles, to protect the wildlife and natural resources of the city, and to guarantee the availability of various forms of recreation to all citizens in an environment of diversity and quality, this article is enacted. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1701) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 40-7-2. 
Sec. 3-4-118. - Prohibited use of off-road vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate an off-road vehicle on, upon or across that property lying on the southeastern side of Interstate Highway 985, also known as State Route 365, which is designated as Tracts B and C on a survey entitled "Gainesville Area Park Commission Property Boundary Survey," dated May, 1985, and prepared by Farley-Collins & Associates, which survey is on file with the city clerk, and more commonly known and designated as Chicopee Woods Nature Park, without the express written permission of the Gainesville Area Park Commission or except in properly designated areas. 
(b)  No person shall operate an off-road vehicle on, upon, or across that property known and designated as the Gainesville Industrial Park without the express written permission of the city council or except in properly designated areas. 
(c)  No person shall operate an off-road vehicle on, upon or across any undeveloped property belonging to the city without the express written permission of the city council or except in properly designated areas. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1704) 
State Law reference— Operating restrictions, OCGA § 40-7-4. 
Sec. 3-4-119. - Authority to enact. 
The authority to enact this article was delegated by the General Assembly of Georgia as codified in OCGA Section 40-7-5. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1703) 
Secs. 3-4-120—3-4-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 8. - SERIOUS TRAFFIC OFFENSES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Disorderly conduct generally, § 3-5-4. 

Sec. 3-4-131. - Reckless driving. 
(a)  Any person who drives any vehicle in reckless disregard for the safety of persons or property commits the offense of reckless driving. 
(b)  Every person convicted of reckless driving shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, provided that no provision of this section shall be construed so as to deprive the court imposing the sentence of the power given by law to stay or suspend the execution of such sentence or to place the defendant on probation. 
(Code 1958, § 23-901) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 40-6-390. 
Sec. 3-4-132. - Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs—Penalties for first and subsequent offenses. 
(a)  A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any moving vehicle while: 
(1)  Under the influence of alcohol to the extent that it is less safe for the person to drive; 
(2)  Under the influence of any drug to the extent that it is less safe for the person to drive; 
(3)  Under the combined influence of alcohol and any drug to the extent that it is less safe for the person to drive; or 
(4)  The person's alcohol concentration is 0.12 grams or more at any time within three (3) hours after such driving or being in actual physical control from alcohol consumed before such driving or being in actual physical control ended. 
(b)  The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has been legally entitled to use a drug shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section; provided, however, that such person shall not be in violation of this section unless such person is rendered incapable of driving safely as a result of using a drug other than alcohol which such person is legally entitled to use. 
(c)  Every person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  First conviction with no conviction of and no plea of nolo contendere accepted to a charge of violating this section within the previous five (5) years, as measured from the dates of previous arrests for which convictions were obtained or pleas of nolo contendere were accepted to the date of the current arrest for which a conviction is obtained or a plea of nolo contendere is accepted: 
a.  A fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which fine shall not, except as provided in subsection (g) of this section, be subject to suspension, stay, or probation; and 
b.  A period of imprisonment of not less than ten (10) days nor more than one (1) year, which period of imprisonment may, at the sole discretion of the judge, be suspended, stayed, or probated; 
(2)  For the second conviction within a five-year period of time, as measured from the dates of previous arrests for which convictions were obtained or pleas of nolo contendere were accepted to the date of the current arrest for which a conviction is obtained or a plea of nolo contendere is accepted: 
a.  A fine of not less than six hundred dollars ($600.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which fine shall not, except as provided in subsection (g) of this section, be subject to suspension, stay, or probation; and 
b.  A period of imprisonment of not less than ninety (90) days nor more than one (1) year. The judge, at his sole discretion and under such terms and conditions as he shall impose, may suspend, stay, or probate all but forty-eight (48) hours of any term of imprisonment imposed under this subsection b. The judge, at his sole discretion, may suspend, stay, or probate the minimum forty-eight-hour term of imprisonment not subject to suspension, stay, or probation provided that a condition of the suspension, stay or probation of the minimum forty-eight-hour term of imprisonment shall be that the defendant shall perform not less than eighty (80) hours of community service; 
(3)  For the third or subsequent conviction within a five-year period of time, as measured from the dates of previous arrests for which convictions were obtained or pleas of nolo contendere were accepted to the date of the current arrest for which a conviction is obtained or a plea of nolo contendere is accepted: 
a.  A fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which fine shall not, except as provided in subsection (g) of this section, be subject to suspension, stay, or probation; and 
b.  A mandatory period of imprisonment of not less than one hundred twenty (120) days nor more than one (1) year. The judge, at his sole discretion and under such terms and conditions as he shall impose, may suspend, stay, or probate all but ten (10) days of any term of imprisonment imposed under this subsection b. The judge, at his sole discretion, may suspend, stay, or probate the minimum ten-day term of imprisonment not subject to suspension, stay, or probation provided that a condition of the suspension, stay, or probation of the minimum ten-day term of imprisonment shall be that the defendant shall perform not less than thirty (30) days of community service; 
(4)  For the purpose of imposing a sentence under this subsection, a plea of nolo contendere shall constitute a conviction. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the limits set forth in the city charter, the municipal court shall be authorized to impose the punishments provided for in this section upon a conviction of violating this section. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, any court authorized to hear cases involving violations of this section shall be authorized to exercise the power to probate, suspend, or stay any sentence imposed. Such power shall, however, be limited to the conditions and limitations imposed by subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  The foregoing limitations on punishment also shall apply when a defendant has been convicted of violating, by a single transaction, more than one (1) of the four (4) provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  The provisions of OCGA Section 17-10-3, relating to general punishment for misdemeanors including traffic offenses, and the provisions of Article 3 of Chapter 8 (Section 42-8-60 et seq.) of OCGA Title 42, relating to probation of first offenders, shall not apply to any person convicted of violating any provision of this section. 
(g)  If the payment of the fine required under subsection (c) of this section will impose an economic hardship on the defendant, the judge, at his sole discretion, may order the defendant to pay such fine in installments and such order may be enforced through a contempt proceeding or a revocation of any probation otherwise authorized by this section. 
(h)  For purposes of determining under this chapter prior convictions of or pleas of nolo contendere to violating this section, in addition to the offense prohibited by this section, a conviction of or plea of nolo contendere to any of the following offenses shall be deemed to be a violation of this section: 
(1)  Any federal law substantially conforming to or parallel with the offense covered under this section; 
(2)  Any local ordinance adopted pursuant to Article 14 of Chapter 6 of OCGA Title 40 (Sections 40-6-370 through 40-6-376), which ordinance adopts the provisions of this section; or 
(3)  Any previously or currently existing law of this or any other state, which law was or is substantially conforming to or parallel with this section. 
(Code 1958, § 23-902) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 40-6-391. 
Sec. 3-4-133. - Same—Entry of plea of nolo contendere; order to attend alcohol and drug course. 
(a)  The decision to accept a plea of nolo contendere to a charge of violating section 3-4-132 shall be at the sole discretion of the judge but, if such plea is accepted, the penalties provided for in subsection (c) of section 3-4-132 shall be imposed. 
(b)  If the defendant has not been convicted of or had a plea of nolo contendere accepted to a charge of violating section 3-4-132 within the previous five (5) years and if the plea of nolo contendere shall be used as provided in subparagraph (b)(1)(A) of OCGA Section 40-5-70, no such plea shall be accepted unless, at a minimum, the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The defendant has filed a verified petition with the court requesting that such plea be accepted and setting forth the facts and special circumstances necessary to enable the judge to determine that accepting such plea is in the best interest of justice; and 
(2)  The judge has reviewed the defendant's driving records that are on file with the state department of public safety. 
(c)  The judge, as part of the record of the disposition of the charge, shall set forth, under seal of the court, his reasons for accepting the plea of nolo contendere. 
(d)  If a plea of nolo contendere is accepted as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the judge shall, as a part of the disposition of the case, order the defendant to attend and complete a certified and approved basic alcohol and drug course from an approved driver improvement clinic. The order shall stipulate that the defendant shall complete such course within one hundred twenty (120) days and that the defendant shall submit evidence of such completion to the state department of public safety. The judge shall also notify the defendant that, if he fails to complete such course by the date specified in the court's order, his driver's license shall be suspended, by operation of law, as provided in OCGA Section 40-5-72. 
(e)  The record of the disposition of the case, including the ruling required in subsection (c) of this section, shall be forwarded to the state department of public safety as required in subsection (c) of OCGA Section 40-5-69. 
(f)  If a plea of nolo contendere is accepted under the conditions set forth in subsection (b) of this section and the defendant's driver's license has not been suspended under any other provision of this Code and if the defendant has not been convicted of or has not had a plea of nolo contendere accepted to a charge of violating section 3-4-132 within the previous five (5) years, the court shall, subject to subsection (d) of this section, return the driver's license to the person; otherwise, such driver's license shall be forwarded to the state department of public safety as provided in subsection (c) of OCGA Section 40-5-69. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 40-6-391.1. 
Sec. 3-4-134. - Same—Chemical tests for alcohol or drugs in blood. 
(a)  Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person in violation of section 3-4-132, evidence of the amount of alcohol or drug in a person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance at the alleged time, as determined by a chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance shall be admissible. Where such a chemical test is made, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance, to be considered valid under this section, shall have been performed according to methods approved by the Division of Forensic Sciences of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation and by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the division of forensic sciences for this purpose. The Division of Forensic Sciences of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation is authorized to approve satisfactory techniques or methods to ascertain the qualifications and competence of individuals to conduct analyses and to issue permits, which shall be subject to termination or revocation at the discretion of the division of forensic sciences; 
(2)  When a person shall undergo a chemical test at the request of a law enforcement officer under OCGA Section 40-5-55, only a physician, registered nurse, laboratory technician, emergency medical technician, or other qualified person may withdraw blood for the purpose of determining the alcoholic content therein, provided that this limitation shall not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. No physician, registered nurse, or other qualified person or employer thereof shall incur any civil or criminal liability as a result of the medically proper obtaining of such blood specimens when requested in writing by a law enforcement officer; 
(3)  The person tested may have a physician or a qualified technician, chemist, registered nurse, or other qualified person of his own choosing administer a chemical test or tests in addition to any administered at the direction of a law enforcement officer. The justifiable failure or inability to obtain an additional test shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the test or tests taken at the direction of a law enforcement officer; and 
(4)  Upon the request of the person who shall submit to a chemical test or tests at the request of a law enforcement officer, full information concerning the test or tests shall be made available to him or his attorney. The arresting officer at the time of arrest shall advise the person arrested of his rights to a chemical test or tests according to this section. 
(b)  Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person in violation of section 3-4-132, the amount of alcohol in the person's blood at the time alleged, as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance, shall give rise to the following presumptions: 
(1)  If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of 0.05 grams or less, it shall be presumed that the person was not under the influence of alcohol, as prohibited by paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a) of section 3-4-132; 
(2)  If there was at that time an alcohol concentration in excess of 0.05 grams but less than 0.10 grams, such fact shall not give rise to any presumption that the person was or was not under the influence of alcohol, as prohibited by paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a) of section 3-4-132, but such fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining whether the person was under the influence of alcohol, as prohibited by paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a) of section 3-4-132; 
(3)  If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of 0.10 grams or more, it shall be presumed that the person was under the influence of alcohol, as prohibited by paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a) of section 3-4-132; and 
(4)  If there was at that time or within three (3) hours after driving or being in actual physical control of a moving vehicle from alcohol consumed before such driving or being in actual physical control ended an alcohol concentration of 0.12 or more grams, the person shall be in violation of paragraph (4) of subsection (a) of section 3-4-132. 
(c)  In any criminal trial, the refusal of the defendant to permit a chemical analysis to be made of his blood, breath, urine, or other bodily substance at the time of his arrest shall be admissible in evidence against him. 
(d)  A certification by the office of the Secretary of State of Georgia or by the state department of human resources that a person was a licensed or certified physician, physician's assistant, registered nurse, practical nurse, medical technologist, medical laboratory technician, or phlebotomist at the time the blood was drawn shall be admissible into evidence for the purpose of establishing that such person was qualified to draw blood as required by this section. 
(Code 1958, § 23-902.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 40-6-392. 
Sec. 3-4-135. - Serious injury by vehicle. 
Whoever, without malice, shall cause bodily harm to another by depriving him of a member of his body, by rendering a member of his body useless, by seriously disfiguring his body or a member thereof, or by causing organic brain damage which renders the body or any member thereof useless through the violation of section 3-4-131 or 3-4-132 shall be guilty of the crime of serious injury by vehicle. A person convicted under this section shall be guilty of a felony and shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than one (1) year nor more than five (5) years. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 40-6-394. 
Sec. 3-4-136. - Fleeing or attempting to elude police officer; impersonating law enforcement officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle willfully to fail or refuse to bring his vehicle to a stop or otherwise to flee or attempt to elude a pursuing police vehicle or police officer when given a visual or an audible signal to bring the vehicle to a stop. The signal given by the police officer may be by hand, voice, emergency light, or siren. The officer giving such signal shall be in uniform prominently displaying his badge of office, and his vehicle shall be appropriately marked showing it to be an official police vehicle. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and: 
(1)  Upon conviction shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which fine shall not be subject to suspension, stay, or probation or imprisoned for up to six (6) months, or both; 
(2)  Upon the second conviction within a five-year period of time, as measured from the dates of previous arrests for which convictions were obtained to the date of the current arrest for which a conviction is obtained, shall be fined not less than six hundred dollars ($600.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which fine shall not be subject to suspension, stay, or probation or imprisoned for up to six (6) months, or both; and for purposes of this paragraph, previous pleas of nolo contendere accepted within such five-year period shall constitute convictions; and 
(3)  Upon the third or subsequent conviction within a five-year period of time, as measured from the dates of previous arrests for which convictions were obtained to the date of the current arrest for which a conviction is obtained, shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which fine shall not be subject to suspension, stay, or probation or imprisoned for up to six (6) months, or both; and for purposes of this paragraph, previous pleas of nolo contendere accepted within such five-year period shall constitute convictions. 
For the purpose of imposing a sentence under this subsection, a plea of nolo contendere shall constitute a conviction. If the payment of the fine required under this subsection will impose an economic hardship on the defendant, the judge, at his sole discretion, may order the defendant to pay such fine in installments and such order may be enforced through a contempt proceeding or a revocation of any probation otherwise authorized by this subsection. Notwithstanding the limits set forth in the city Charter, the municipal court shall be authorized to impose the punishments provided for in this subsection upon a conviction of violating this subsection or upon conviction of violating any ordinance adopting the provisions of this subsection. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person: 
(1)  To impersonate a sheriff, deputy sheriff, state trooper, agent of the state division of investigation, agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, police officer, or any other authorized law enforcement officer by using a motor vehicle or motorcycle designed, equipped, or marked so as to resemble a motor vehicle or motorcycle belonging to any federal, state, or local law enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Otherwise to impersonate any such law enforcement officer in order to direct, stop, or otherwise control traffic. 
(Code 1958, § 23-904) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA § 40-6-395. 
Secs. 3-4-137—3-4-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 9. - TRAFFIC DIVISION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 3-4-151. - Established. 
There is hereby established in the police department of this city a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1501) 
Sec. 3-4-152. - Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the traffic division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, to enforce the vehicular traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to vehicular traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the public works director and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon such division by this chapter. 
(b)  The officers of the police department or the traffic division, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with the traffic laws of this city, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire may direct or assist police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1502) 
Sec. 3-4-153. - Records of traffic violations. 
(a)  The police department or the traffic division thereof shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of this city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violation and the total of each. Such record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(b)  All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)  All such records and reports shall be public records. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1503) 
Sec. 3-4-154. - Investigation of accidents. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police officers of the department, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1504) 
State Law reference— Accidents, OCGA § 40-6-270 et seq.; reporting accidents, giving security for damages, OCGA § 40-9-30 et seq. 
Sec. 3-4-155. - Traffic accident studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the public works director in conducting studies of such accidents and determine remedial measures. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1505) 
Sec. 3-4-156. - Traffic accident reports. 
The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the public works director. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1506) 
Sec. 3-4-157. - Annual traffic safety report. 
The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city manager. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data. 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police. 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1507) 
Sec. 3-4-158. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The chief of police, with the approval of the public works director, may make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary and experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days. 
(b)  The public works director may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1512) 
Secs. 3-4-159—3-4-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 10. - SCHEDULES; SPECIFIC LOCATIONS 

Sec. 3-4-171. - Schedule 1; school zone streets. 
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby designated as school zone streets: 

 
(Code 1958, § 23-1018; Ord. No. 93-44, § I, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 2004-69, § I (Att. A), 9-21-04) 
Sec. 3-4-172. - Schedule 2; one-way streets. 
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets: 

 
(Code 1958, § 23-1019; Ord. No. 92-62, § 1, 12-30-92; Ord. No. 2015-23, § I, 8-18-15; Ord. No. 2016-03, § I, 5-17-16) 
Sec. 3-4-173. - Schedule 3; through streets. 
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to be through streets: 

 
(Code 1958, § 23-1020) 
Sec. 3-4-174. - Schedule 4; parking prohibited, both sides. 
Pursuant to section 3-4-76, parking is prohibited on both sides of the indicated street as described herein: 

 
(Code 1958, § 23-1021; Ord. No. 89-79, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 90-76, § 2, 1-2-91; Ord. No. 92-06, § 1, 2-4-92; Ord. No. 2000-59, §§ I—IV, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2001-58, § 1, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 2007-28, § I, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 2012-02, § I, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 3-4-175. - Schedule 5; parking prohibited, one side. 
Pursuant to section 3-4-76, parking is prohibited on the designated side of the indicated street as described herein: 

 
(Code 1958, § 23-1022; Ord. No. 89-33, § 1, 7-18-89; Ord. No. 90-41, § 1, 9-4-90; Ord. No. 91-25, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 91-47, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 93-44, § II, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 93-77, § I, 1-18-94; Ord. No. 94-18, § I, 4-5-94; Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 95-14, § I, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 95-41, § I, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 95-52, § I, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 2000-59, § V, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2007-28, §§ II, III, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 2011-12, § I, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 2012-02, § II, 2-7-12; Ord. No. 2015-24, § I, 8-18-15) 
Sec. 3-4-176. - Schedule 6; parking zones, two-hour limit. 
Pursuant to section 3-4-87, the following parking zones are hereby established: 

 
(Code 1958, § 23-1023; Ord. No. 90-12, § 1, 3-20-90; Ord. No. 90-76, § 1, 1-2-91; Ord. No. 92-25, § 1, 7-7-92; Ord. No. 93-23, § 1, 6-1-93) 
Sec. 3-4-177. - Schedule 7; trucks prohibited. 
Trucks are hereby prohibited from operating on the following streets or portions of streets; except as allowed by section 3-4-88: 

 
(Code 1958, § 23-1024; Ord. No. 88-79, § 1, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 93-44, § III, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 94-05, § I, 2-15-94; Ord. No. 95-19, § I, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 2012-02, § II, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 3-4-178. - Schedule 8; passenger loading zones. 
The following locations have been designated as passenger loading zones: 
240 Atlanta Street, S.E., from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on weekdays. 
First four (4) parking spaces west of Green Street on the north side of Brenau Avenue, from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on weekdays. 
516 Candler Street, from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon. 
705 Summit Street, from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
437 Washington Street, from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1025; Ord. No. 90-12, § 2, 3-20-90; Ord. No. 95-04, § I, 1-17-95) 
Sec. 3-4-179. - Schedule 9; package and freight loading zones. 
The following locations have been designated as package and freight loading zones: 
South side of Brenau Avenue, between Main and Bradford (one space). 
North side of Washington Street at northwest corner of intersection of Washington and Bradford (one space). 
North side of Washington Street at northwest corner of intersection of Washington and Main (one space). 
West side of Main Street at southwest corner of intersection of Washington and Main (one space). 
East side of Bradford at northeast corner of intersection of Bradford and Spring (one space). 
East side of Bradford at northeast corner of intersection of Bradford and Washington (one space). 
North side of Washington Street at northwest corner of intersection of Washington and Green Street (one space). 
Northwest corner of Bradford Street and Brenau Avenue in front of 100 Brenau Avenue NW (two spaces). 
(Code 1958, § 23-1026; Ord. No. 93-16, § 7, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 94-42, § I, 10-18-94) 
Sec. 3-4-180. - Schedule 10; parking zones, twenty-minute limit. 
Pursuant to section 3-4-87, the following twenty-minute limit parking zones are established: 

 
(Code 1958, § 23-1027; Ord. No. 89-49, § 1, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 93-23, § 2, 6-1-93) 
Sec. 3-4-181. - Speed limits on specified streets. 
(a)  The speed limits on specified streets within the City of Gainesville shall be as set forth in the list of speed limits on specified streets, which shall be kept in the city clerk's office, as well as in the city public works department's engineering section. Speed limits on specified streets can only be changed through city council resolution. 
(b)  The specified streets upon which speed detection devices are permitted and authorized shall be as set forth in the list of specified streets upon which speed detection devices are permitted and authorized, which shall be kept in the city clerk's office, as well as in the city police department. 
(Code 1958, § 23-805; Ord. No. 90-19, § I, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 92-26, § 1, 7-7-92; Ord. No. 93-44, § IV, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 94-12, § I, 3-1-94; Ord. No. 98-40, § II, 7-21-98; Ord. No. 2001-03, § I, 1-16-01; Ord. No. 2009-41, § I, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 2017-27, § I, 11-7-17) 
Sec. 3-4-182. - Left turns restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to make a left turn when entering Green Street from any drive or exit or otherwise leaving the property of the United States Post Office at 364 Green Street, according to the uniform property numbering system of the city, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Mondays through Fridays. 
(Code 1958, § 23-1119) 
Sec. 3-4-183. - Left turns prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to make a left turn from Browns Bridge Road onto Old Flowery Branch Road. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § I, 2-3-98) 
Sec. 3-4-184. - Left turns restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to make a left turn when entering Athens Street from any drive or exit otherwise leaving the property at 1280 and 1300 Athens Street between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and between the hours of 2:15 p.m. and 3:15 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2009-40, § I, 11-3-09) 
Secs. 3-4-185—3-4-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 11. - TRAFFIC CONGESTION THOROUGHFARES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 90-42, adopted Sept. 4, 1990, amended the Code by adding provisions thereto; inclusion of the provisions as Art. 11 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-4-201. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the repeated driving of a motor vehicle along and across any portion of a congested public thoroughfare, which shall constitute a strict liability violation without any requirement of culpable mental state, all as described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-42, § 1(23-1801), 9-4-90) 
Sec. 3-4-202. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Thoroughfare is any public roadway or street in the city. 
Traffic congestion thoroughfare is any portion of a public thoroughfare within the city affected by traffic congestion caused in whole or in part by the repeated driving of the same motor vehicle(s) along or across that portion of the thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 90-42, § 1(23-1802, 23-1803), 9-4-90) 
Sec. 3-4-203. - Posting signs. 
(a)  With respect to any traffic congested roadway or street, the chief of police or his designee after consulting with the city traffic engineer is authorized to declare that portion of the street to be a traffic congestion thoroughfare and to cause signs, as described in this article, to be posted notifying of that designation. 
(b)  The signs referred to in subsection (a) shall notify drivers that they are entering a traffic congestion thoroughfare; that repeated passage of a motor vehicle along or across the traffic congestion thoroughfare is a violation of section 3-4-204; and that for a subsequent violation, the vehicle will be towed. 
(Ord. No. 90-42, § 1(23-1804, 23-1805), 9-4-90) 
Sec. 3-4-204. - Prohibited acts. 
Between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following morning, no vehicle shall pass along or across a traffic congestion thoroughfare, designated as such by signs as described in section 3-4-203(b), more than 3 times. 
(Ord. No. 90-42, § 1(23-1806), 9-4-90) 
Sec. 3-4-205. - Penalty generally. 
If any person shall be convicted of the violation of this article, such person shall on conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 90-42, § 1(23-1807), 9-4-90) 
Sec. 3-4-206. - Subsequent violations—Generally. 
If a vehicle passes along or across a traffic congestion thoroughfare as designated by signs as referred to in section 3-4-203(b), in violation of section 3-4-204, any single subsequent drive along or across that traffic congestion thoroughfare by that vehicle within the same 6:00 p.m to 5:00 a.m. time period shall constitute a separate violation of section 3-4-204 punishable as provided in section 3-4-205; and the vehicle may be towed and taken to a storage area designated by the city and may be held for not more than twenty-four (24) hours, all at the expense of the owner or person entitled to possession. 
(Ord. No. 90-42, § 1(23-1808), 9-4-90) 
Sec. 3-4-207. - Same—Notice of towing. 
Upon issuing a citation for a violation of section 3-4-204, the officer shall give the person to whom the citation is issued a written notice which shall state: 
NOTICE 
You have been cited for violation of section 3-4-204 of the Code of the City of Gainesville for repeated passage of a motor vehicle along or across a traffic congestion thoroughfare. 
If the vehicle you are driving is again driven along or across this traffic congestion thoroughfare before 5:00 a.m. this morning this vehicle shall be impounded and towed in accordance with section 3-4-206 of the Code of the City of Gainesville. 
Chief of Police of the City of  Gainesville, Georgia 
(Ord. No. 90-42, § 1(23-1809), 9-4-90) 
Sec. 3-4-208. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any publicly owned vehicle of any city, county, state or federal agency; 
(2)  Any vehicle licensed for public transportation; 
(3)  Any other vehicle granted an exemption by the chief of police because passage of the vehicle along or across the traffic congestion thoroughfare is necessary for commercial or medical reasons. 
(Ord. No. 90-42, § 1(23-1810), 9-4-90) 
CHAPTER 3-5. - OFFENSES—MISCELLANEOUS[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, OCGA Title 16; limitations on home rule powers, OCGA § 36-35-6; abatement of nuisances in cities, OCGA § 41-2-5. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-5-1. - Aircraft and pilots restricted. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, only aircraft and pilots licensed by the Federal Aviation Administration may operate in or over the city; however, this restriction shall not apply to public aircraft of the federal government, or of a state, territory, possession or political subdivision thereof. 
(Code 1958, § 14-1) 
State Law reference— Aviation, OCGA § 6-1-1 et seq.; licensing of pilots, OCGA § 6-2-10. 
Sec. 3-5-2. - Peddling balloons, trinkets, etc., on streets prohibited. 
The peddling of balloons and trinkets and the sale of other merchandise is hereby prohibited on the public streets, roads, alleys and thoroughfares of the city. 
(Code 1958, § 14-1.1) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 4-4. 
State Law reference— Peddling without license, OCGA § 43-32-7. 
Sec. 3-5-3. - Crowding or following officer with prisoner. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to crowd around or follow after an officer when making an arrest or taking a prisoner to or from the jail, or through streets or any street or alley in the city, unless such persons are duly summoned and authorized by the officer to assist in keeping the prisoner in safe custody. Any person violating any of the provisions of the above section shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1958, § 14-3) 
State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering of law enforcement officers, OCGA § 16-10-24. 
Sec. 3-5-4. - Disorderly conduct generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of disorderly conduct in the city. 
(b)  A person commits disorderly conduct when he: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby that person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health; or 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of that person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; or 
(3)  Without provocation, uses to or of another person, in his presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace; that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in his presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; or 
(4)  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years, which threatens an immediate breach of the peace; or 
(5)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; or 
(6)  Disturbs the peace of others by violent, indecent, offensive or boisterous conduct or language which conduct or language was calculated to cause anguish or injury to another and had a direct tendency to cause immediate acts of violence by the person to whom the conduct or language was addressed, i.e., constituted "fighting words"; or 
(7)  Throws any stone or other missile upon or at any person, vehicle, building, tree, sign or other public or private property; or 
(8)  Throws any stone or missile from any vehicle, either moving, stopped, or parked, upon or at any person, building, vehicle, tree, sign, or other public or private property; or 
(9)  By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(10)  Expectorates, urinates, or defecates on any public street, alley, sidewalk or floor of any public building or a building where the public gathers or has access; or 
(11)  With the intent to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, procession or gathering, substantially obstructs or interferes with the meeting, procession or gathering by physical action or verbal utterance; or 
(12)  Frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; or 
(13)  Assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or who shall aid and abet therein. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate any subsection of this section may be charged with the offense of disorderly conduct, and on conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 14-6; Ord. No. 2016-13, § I, 7-5-16) 
Cross reference— Serious traffic offenses, § 3-4-131 et seq. 
State Law reference— Assault and battery, OCGA § 16-5-20 et seq.; fraud and related offenses, OCGA § 16-9-50 et seq.; offenses against public order, OCGA § 16-11-30 et seq.; fighting in a public place, OCGA § 16-11-32; loitering or prowling, OCGA § 16-11-36; use of fighting words, obscene and vulgar or profane language, harassing telephone calls, OCGA §§ 16-11-39, 46-5-21; pointing or aiming gun or pistol at another, OCGA § 16-11-102. 
Sec. 3-5-5. - Criminal trespass by motor vehicle—Generally. 
A person commits the offense of criminal trespass by motor vehicle when the person, after having been requested not to do so by a law enforcement officer or by the owner or an authorized agent of the owner, parks or stands an occupied or unoccupied motor vehicle in, or repeatedly drives a motor vehicle through or within, a parking area which is located on privately owned property and is provided by a merchant, a group of merchants, or a shopping center or other similar facility for customers if: 
(1)  The parking area is identified by at least one (1) sign as specified in this paragraph, and if the parking area contains more than one hundred fifty (150) parking spaces then by at least one (1) such sign at each entrance to the parking area, each such sign containing the following information in easy to read printing: 
a.  Notice of the elements of the crime of criminal trespass by motor vehicle; 
b.  Identification of the property which is reserved for customers' use only; 
c.  Identification of the merchant, group of merchants, or shopping center or other similar facility providing the parking area; 
d.  Warning that violators will be prosecuted; and 
(2)  The motor vehicle is parked, is standing, or is being operated other than for the purpose of: 
a.  Transporting some person to or from the interior of the place of business of a merchant identified by the sign or signs in the parking area or to or from the interior of the shopping center or other facility so identified; 
b.  Making use of a telephone, vending machine, automatic teller machine, or other similar facility located in the parking area; 
c.  Meeting the requirements of a situation in which it has unexpectedly become impossible or impractical for the motor vehicle to continue to travel on the public roads; or 
d.  Carrying out an activity for which express permission has been given by the owner of the parking area or an authorized representative of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 90-43, § 1, 9-4-90) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 90-43, adopted Sept. 4, 1990, repealed provisions of the 1958 Code included in this Code as §§ 3-5-5—3-5-7, and enacted provisions in lieu thereof included by the editor as §§ 3-5-5 and 3-5-6. The repealed provisions pertained to disorderly conduct in parking areas and derived from Code 1958, §§ 14-6.4—14-6.6. 
Sec. 3-5-6. - Same—Penalty for violation. 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of section 3-5-5 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine: 
(1)  Not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first such violation; 
(2)  Not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second such violation; and 
(3)  Not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the third or subsequent such violation. 
(Ord. No. 90-43, § 2, 9-4-90) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 3-5-5. 
Sec. 3-5-7. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note following § 3-5-5. 
Sec. 3-5-8. - Drunkenness on streets. 
All persons found drunk on the streets, or who while in a state of intoxication, shall behave in a disorderly manner on the streets of this city shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 14-13) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, OCGA § 16-11-41; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, OCGA §§ 37-7-1 et seq., 37-8-1 et seq.; pedestrian under influence of alcohol or drug, OCGA § 40-6-96. 
Sec. 3-5-9. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages upon public property. 
(a)  Except as provided in chapter 1-7 and chapter 6-4 of this Code, no alcoholic beverages shall be consumed upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, or parking lots within the city, whether public or private. 
(b)  Anyone convicted of violating this section shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 14-13.1; Ord. No. 2015-05, § I, 2-20-15) 
Sec. 3-5-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-47, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 1992, repealed former § 3-5-10, which pertained to public indecency. 
Sec. 3-5-11. - Leaving of junk or salvage materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place, abandon, leave, keep or store junk and salvage materials, including nonfunctioning motor vehicles, appliances, machinery, equipment or parts thereof, out-of-doors upon any public or private land within the city except within the confines of a licensed junk or salvage yard or within designated public disposal areas. 
(b)  Whenever it shall appear to any authorized member or representative of the city government that subsection (a) is being violated, he shall, in writing, notify the owner or tenant in possession of the land on which the violation exists to abate such violation by removing the material or materials to a conforming location, or into an enclosed garage, barn or other building. 
(c)  There shall be a systematic method and program to inspect all premises within the city to locate nonlicensed junk salvage areas and premises and to require the abatement thereof. 
(d)  If the tenant or owner of the premises on which the violation exists fails to abate the violation within the required time after notice, the city, by and through its agents, shall abate the violation, charge the cost thereof to the legal owner of the premises, and the legal owner of the premises shall pay the cost of such abatement to the city. 
(e)  Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section, shall upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. Each day such violation exists fifteen (15) days after receipt of notice of violation shall be considered a separate offense or violation of this section. 
(Code 1958, §§ 14-17.1—14-17.5; Ord. No. 2004-77, §§ I, II, 10-5-04) 
State Law reference— Junkyards near certain highways, OCGA § 32-6-240 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5-12. - Offenses against public health generally. 
(a)  Weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash, deleterious or unhealthful growths, other noxious matter or other debris of any kind. No owner of any lot, parcel or area of land within the city, or the agent of such owner, or tenant of an owner, or other occupant of the premises, shall permit on such lot, parcel or area of land, or upon any sidewalk abutting the same, any weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash, deleterious or unhealthful growths, other noxious matter, or other debris of any kind which may in any way impair the visibility of persons using the public streets to the danger of such users thereof; or which may emit foul or unhealthful odors; or which may serve as a place for the breeding of flies, mosquitoes, or other insects of a destructive nature; or serve as the haven or refuge of mice, rats, snakes or other animals and reptiles of a destructive nature and generally odious to man; or which may constitute a fire hazard; or which may constitute an impediment on or overhanging the sidewalks along any of the streets; or which may be generally disagreeable or obnoxious to the residents in the immediate vicinity of any lot, parcel or area of land from which such weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash, deleterious or unhealthful growths, or other noxious matter, or other debris of any kind may exist; or which may constitute a public nuisance or health hazard. 
(b)  Inspection of lot, parcel or area of land. The city marshal, or such subordinate official as may be designated to act in his behalf, may enter and inspect every lot, parcel or area of land to determine if same is being kept in a clean and neat condition free from weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash, deleterious or unhealthful growths, other noxious matter or debris of any kind. 
(c)  Notice to destroy. Whenever it shall appear to the city marshal or his designee that subsection (a) is being violated, he shall, in writing, notify the owner of any such lot, parcel or area of land within the city or the agent of such owner, to cut, destroy or remove any such weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash, deleterious or unhealthful growths, other noxious matter or other debris of any kind, found growing, lying or located on such owner's lot, parcel or area of land, or upon the sidewalk abutting same. Such notice may be served by registered or certified mail, addressed to the owner, or the agent of such owner, at his last known address or service of such notice may be perfected upon such owner or the agent of such owner as provided by OCGA Section 36-34-1 et seq. 
(d)  Action upon non-compliance . Any person who receives a written notice pursuant to subsection (c) shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city marshal and shall be entitled to a hearing, pursuant to section 1-8-1. Unless such hearing is requested within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice, such person shall be presumed to have accepted summary process. The administrative hearing officer may affirm or deny the decision of the city marshal. If the administrative hearing officer affirms the decision of the city marshal in issuing the notice pursuant to subsection (c), the owner of the property or agent shall have ten (10) days from the date of the decision of the administrative hearing officer in which to comply with the notice received pursuant to subsection (c). If the administrative hearing officer overrules the decision of the city marshal, the owner or agent will have no further duty as a result of the notice received pursuant to subsection (c). If the owner or agent shall fail, neglect or refuse after being so notified to cut, destroy or remove such weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash, deleterious or unhealthful growth, other noxious matter or other debris of any kind growing, lying or located upon such owner's property or upon the sidewalk abutting same within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice provided for in subsection (c) or within ten (10) days after the date of such notice in the event same is returned to the city by the United States Postal Service because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or the agent of such owner, or within ten (10) days after the date of a decision by the administrative hearing officer affirming the decision of the city marshal, the city marshal may pay for the cutting, destroying or removal of such weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash, deleterious, unhealthy growth, other noxious matter or other debris of any kind or to order the removal by the city. 
(e)  Charges. When the city has effected the removal of such weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash, deleterious or unhealthful growths, other noxious matter or other debris of any kind, or has paid for its removal, an amount provided in Title 10 shall be charged to the owner of such property, and such charge shall be due and payable by the owner within thirty (30) days. Service of notice of such charge may be served by registered or certified mail, addressed to the owner or the agent of the owner, at his last known address or service of notice of such charge may be perfected upon the owner or the agent of the owner as provided in OCGA § 36-34-2. Upon nonpayment of such charge within thirty (30) days after receipt of the written notice of such charge, in the event same is returned to the city by the United States Postal Service because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or the agent of such owner, the secretary of the council may issue an execution against such owner's property or against the owner and shall deliver the same to the levying officer of the city or his deputy, who shall levy the same upon the property liable therefore and after advertisement, and other proceedings as in the case of sales for city taxes, the same shall be sold at public outcry to the highest bidder. Such charge shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month in the event same is not paid in full on or before the date the bill upon such charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section, shall on conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 14-17.6; Ord. No. 2004-76, §§ I—III, 10-5-04) 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 4-1; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 4-4; fire prevention code, § 7-1-56 et seq. 
State Law reference— Georgia Pesticide Control Act of 1976, OCGA § 2-7-50 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5-13. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Code 1958, § 14-18; Ord. No. 2012-37, § I, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 2016-14, § I, 7-5-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-37, § I, adopted January 8, 2013, changed the title of section 3-5-13 from "Loitering and idling" to "Loitering."   Subsequently, Ord. No. 2016-14, § I adopted July 5, 2016, changed the title of section 3-5-13 from "Loitering" to "Loitering and prowling." These historical notations have been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 3-5-14. - Obstructing officers. 
No person shall in any manner oppose or obstruct by acts or menaces the city marshal, deputy marshal or any police officer in the discharge of his official duties, or strike or assault, molest or abuse such officer. 
(Code 1958, § 14-19) 
State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering of law enforcement officers, OCGA § 16-10-24. 
Sec. 3-5-15. - Public or private property—Injuring or defacing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to injure or deface any church or schoolhouse, building or property belonging to the state, county, city or to any person, or for any person to write or draw figures, letters or characters, on walls thereof, or on the fences or enclosures thereof; 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the area known as "The Rock" located on the property described in Exhibit "A" and shown on the plat attached as Exhibit "B" unless such person has written permission to enter such area signed by the superintendent of the Gainesville City Schools, the principal of Gainesville High School or their designee. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, write, draw or paint letters, characters or pictures on "The Rock" located on the property described in Exhibit "A" and shown on the plat attached as Exhibit "B" unless such person has written permission to enter such area signed by the superintendent of the Gainesville City Schools, the principal of Gainesville High School or their designee. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person maliciously or wantonly to kill, disable, disfigure, destroy or injure any article or commodity of value which is the property of another. 
(e)  Any person found guilty of any of the crimes against this section shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1958, §§ 14-25, 14-26; Ord. No. 88-11, § I, 3-15-88) 
State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, OCGA §§ 16-7-22, 16-7-23; interference with government property, OCGA §§ 16-7-24, 16-7-25. 
EXHIBIT "A" 
All that lot, tract or parcel of land, together with all improvements thereon, situated, lying and being in the Gainesville District, GMD 411, Hall County, Georgia, being more particularly shown and designated according to a plat prepared by Edward J. Standera, Jr., Georgia Registered Surveyor, dated November 20, 1987, entitled "Survey for City of Gainesville," which plat is incorporated herein by reference for a more complete description and all other legal purposes. According to said plat, the property is more particularly described as follows: 
TO FIND THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING, commence at the common corner of Land Lots 155, 156, 163 and 164 of said District and County; thence South 37° 16′ 53″ East 257.60 feet to a point, being the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; thence from said TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING South 33° 52′ 17″ East 50.00 feet to a point; thence South 56° 07′ 43″ West 50.00 feet to a point; thence North 33° 52′ 17″ West 50.00 feet to a point; thence North 56° 07′ 43″ East 50.00 feet to the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. 

Sec. 3-5-16. - Same—Tampering with utility property. 
Any person who shall tap, connect with, disturb, damage, turn on or off any main, service connection or meter of any public utility in the city, whether such device is within the public ways, or on private premises, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless such person is acting by the consent of, or under the direction of the utility owning such property. 
(Code 1958, § 14-27) 
Cross reference— Municipal utilities, Tit. 5. 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies, municipalities or political subdivisions, OCGA § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 3-5-17. - Same—School and recreational property, use for office purposes restricted. 
(a)  No person shall occupy as an office any space on any property of the city devoted to school purposes or recreational purposes, or devoted to use as a place of public gathering, contrary to the order of the city council. 
(b)  Any person occupying any such property contrary to the order of the city council shall be summarily ejected. 
(c)  Any person who shall occupy any property referred to in this section contrary to the order of the city council or who shall refuse to immediately vacate such property upon the order of the city council shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(d)  Each day such property shall be occupied contrary to the order of the city council shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1958, § 14-27.1) 
Cross reference— Recreation and parks, Ch. 1-7. 
State Law reference— Failure to leave campus or facility of unit of university system when directed, OCGA § 16-11-35; disrupting public school, OCGA § 20-2-1181. 
Sec. 3-5-18. - Wells or excavations, covering required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any well or like excavation to remain open or uncovered. Such wells or excavations shall be covered or capped with concrete or other permanent material. 
(Code 1958, § 14-32) 
State Law reference— Abatement of hazard from abandoned well or hole, OCGA § 44-1-14. 
Sec. 3-5-19. - Discharging firearms within the city limits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, shoot off or discharge a firearm within the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Persons who shall fire, shoot off or discharge a firearm in defense of person or property; 
(2)  Law enforcement officers; and 
(3)  Persons who shall fire, shoot off or discharge a firearm at a firing range approved by the sheriff or police chief of the county or city in which the firing range is located and which is supervised by law enforcement officers or representatives of a local, state or national gun club. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section, shall on conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 14-33) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearm, OCGA § 16-11-103 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5-20. - Disturbance at night. 
No person shall make, and no person shall permit to be made on his premises by any person or thing, any noise at night calculated to disturb the peace of the city, or the rest and quiet of any of the citizens thereof. 
(Ord. No. 92-40, § 1, 10-6-92) 
Sec. 3-5-21. - Urban camping and improper use of public places. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bridge means a structure, including the approaches thereto, erected in order to afford passage over any obstruction in any public road, railroad, or other right-of-way; or to afford passage under or over existing public roads, railroads, or other rights-of-way. As used in section the definition of "bridge" shall include a controlled access highway overpass as defined herein. 
Camp means to reside in or use a location for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for more than an hour at a time; cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
Controlled access highway overpass means a crossing of two (2) controlled access highways or of a controlled access highway and other public road, pedestrian path, railroad or public right-of-way at different levels where clearance to traffic on the lower level is obtained by elevating the higher level. 
Public park means and includes all municipal parks and trails, public playgrounds, public plazas & squares, attractions, and monuments. 
Public street means and includes all public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots, and medians. 
Store or storing personal property means leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for more than one (1) hour. This term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(b)  Public parks. It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any public park. 
(c)  Public streets. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, sit, or lie down on any public street. 
(d)  Underneath bridges. It shall be unlawful to camp or store personal property underneath any bridge. 
(e)  Other property; blocking ingress or egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any public property so as to interfere with the ingress or egress from buildings. 
(f)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this section until he has received an oral or written warning to cease the unlawful conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, he is subject to arrest for urban camping. 
(g)  Exceptions: This section shall not be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons sitting in wheelchairs in public parks, public streets, or other public places; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades for which valid permits have been issued; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing sidewalk cafes; 
(5)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; provided, however, that this exception shall not be construed so as to allow persons to camp on such a chair or bench; 
(6)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(7)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line awaiting entry into any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provision of meals; or 
(9)  Children sleeping anywhere while being carried by a supervising adult or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(Ord. No. 2018-20, § I, 10-2-18) 
Sec. 3-5-22. - Prohibited solicitation. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggressive manner means: 
(1)  Approaching or following a person before, during, or after soliciting if the conduct is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(2)  Continuing to solicit from a person after the person had given a negative response to such solicitation, if continuing the solicitation is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or to is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(3)  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with a person, without that person's consent, in the course of soliciting; 
(4)  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally protest and acts authorized by a permit issued by the city shall not constitute an obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or 
(5)  Using abusive or threatening language or gestures intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or intended to, or reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
Automated teller machine means a device linked to a financial institution's account records which is able to perform transactions, including, but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, or mortgage and loan payments. 
Automated teller machine facility means the area comprised of one (1) or more automatic teller machines and the adjacent space which is made available to financial institution customers after regular financial institution hours. 
Check cashing business means any person duly licensed to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts, or money orders for consideration pursuant to Georgia law. 
Financial institution means any banking corporation, credit union, or foreign exchange office as defined by Georgia law. 
Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including, but not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public. 
Solicit means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, including employment, business, or contributions, or to request the purchase of goods or services. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
(b)  Aggressive solicitation prohibited. It shall be unlawful to solicit in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(c)  Other prohibited solicitation. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to solicit in any public transportation vehicle or at any bus or public transportation station or stop. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to solicit within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance or exit of any financial institution or check cashing business or within fifteen (15) feet of any automated teller machine without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facility. When an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, the distance of fifteen (15) feet shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to solicit on private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to solicit any operator or other occupant of a motor vehicle while such vehicle is on any public street for the purpose of performing or offering to perform a service in connection with such a vehicle or otherwise soliciting the sale of goods or services. This subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to solicit from any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle on a public street in exchange for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to solicit in any public parking lot or public parking structure. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful to solicit within ten (10) feet of an entrance to any building. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful to solicit from any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful to solicit while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful to solicit after sunset or before sunrise. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false or misleading representation in the course of soliciting. False or misleading misrepresentations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(A)  Stating that the solicitor is from out of town and is stranded when this statement is not true; 
(B)  Stating or suggesting falsely that the solicitor is either a present or former member of the armed services; 
(C)  Displaying any indication of physical disability when the solicitor does not suffer the disability indicated; or 
(D)  Stating that the solicitor is homeless when he or she is not. 
(12)  It shall be unlawful to solicit in a group of three (3) or more persons. 
(d)  Applicability. This chapter regulates the time, place, and manner of solicitations and shall not apply to any persons exercising their clearly established constitutional right to picket, protest, or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21, § I, 10-2-18) 
Secs. 3-5-23—3-5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - REMOVAL, STORAGE AND DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES, NONSELF-PROPELLED VEHICLES, ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY AND FIREARMS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-4. 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, OCGA § 40-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 3-5-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned means all personal property, except motor vehicles, that has been left unattended on any public street, road, or highway or any other public or private property within the limits of the city for a period in excess of five (5) days. 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer: 
(1)  Which has been left by the owner or some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman, or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of thirty (30) days after the time agreed upon; or within thirty (30) days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer, repairman, or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within thirty (30) days after the completion of necessary repairs; 
(2)  Which is left unattended on a public street, road, or highway or other public property for a period of at least five (5) days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(3)  Which has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than thirty (30) days without anyone's having made claim thereto; 
(4)  Which has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than thirty (30) days without the owner's having made claim thereto; or 
(5)  Which has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than thirty (30) days without anyone's having made claim thereto. 
City marshal means the marshal of the city or his lawfully appointed deputy. 
Firearm means any weapon which fires a projectile by means of powder, spring, gas cartridge or any other means, other than by means of elastic bands and shall not include archery equipment. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorscooters, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers. 
Nonself-propelled vehicle shall mean all vehicles other than motor vehicles whether propelled by human or by animal power and shall include, but not by way of limitation, bicycles, unicycles and tricycles. 
Other personal property means all other tangible and intangible personal property. 
Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property means any street, road, highway or sidewalk which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purpose of vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic, and shall also mean other city or publicly owned property or facility. 
(Code 1958, § 14-41) 
State Law reference— Definitions relating to abandoned motor vehicles, OCGA § 40-11-1. 
Sec. 3-5-32. - Motor vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the city for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours after such motor vehicle shall become abandoned within the meaning of this article. The presence of an abandoned motor vehicle on public or private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such within the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If any motor vehicle shall become an abandoned motor vehicle within the meaning of this article while located on any public street, road or highway or on any other publicly owned property within the city or upon any privately owned property in the city without the consent of the owner of such property, the chief of police or the city marshal may have such abandoned motor vehicle removed from such public street, road, highway, sidewalk or other public or private property and stored at such place as the chief of police or city marshal shall designate. Notice in writing of such action shall be given by registered mail within five (5) days to the registered owner of the vehicle or as soon thereafter as he can be ascertained. The contents of such notice shall include a complete description of the motor vehicle and license number, the date the vehicle was removed by the city, a statement of the towing cost and storage cost and notice that the owner has a right to redeem the vehicle upon payment of towing and storage cost. In addition, written notice shall be sent to the state department of revenue and the state department of public safety. 
(c)  If within seven (7) days of the date of notice of removal no person has made any claim to the abandoned motor vehicle, the chief of police or the city marshal shall sell the vehicle or vehicles at public auction upon notice of sale under this subsection. 
(1)  Notice by registered mail at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of sale shall be sent to the person or legal entity in whose name the vehicle is registered and to all persons claiming a lien on such vehicle as shown by the records of the state department of revenue or with corresponding agencies of any other state. In addition, notice of the time and place of such sale shall be given by publication of such notice once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation, or in the newspaper officially designated for legal advertisements, published in the county where such vehicle is lawfully towed at the request of a law enforcement officer, or where a person shall have such abandoned motor vehicle on his property. The first publication or posting, as the case may be, shall be at least twenty (20) days before the sale. The notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle and the date and place the vehicle was found or taken into possession, provided however, if after diligent search the registered or true owner of the abandoned vehicle cannot be determined, then the notice by registered mail shall not be required but in lieu thereof the report of sale as required by subsection (c)(4) hereof shall contain the reason why such notice could not be given. 
(2)  The chief of police or the city marshal shall have the right to reject any and all bids if the amount of the bid is unreasonably low, and shall have the right to continue the sale from time to time if no bidders are present. 
(3)  Upon sale to the highest bidder, the chief of police or the city marshal shall upon payment of the sales price issue a bill of sale to the purchaser, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. 
(4)  The person making such sale shall promptly file with the city clerk a report of the sale, showing the date such abandoned automobile first came into his possession or was abandoned on his premises, the name of the newspaper in which notice of sale was published and the dates of such publication, the time and place of the sale, the amount for which the abandoned motor vehicle was sold, the amounts deducted from such sales price for repair, towing, storage expenses, expense of publication of notice of sale, and the amount paid over to the city clerk. Such report shall contain a statement by the person making such sale, certifying to the correctness of such report under oath. 
(5)  The proceeds of such sale shall, after the costs for towing and for storage have been deducted, be paid to the city clerk who shall hold such proceeds for one (1) year. If at the end of that period no person has made any claim thereto, the city clerk shall pay such proceeds into the general fund of the city. 
(d)  The owner of any vehicle impounded under this section may redeem such vehicle at any time after removal but prior to sale or destruction by the payment to the city clerk of all costs of towing and storage, plus all other expenses incurred in connection therewith. 
(e)  Any peace officer who, under the provisions of this section, causes any motor vehicle to be removed to a garage or other place of safety shall be liable for gross negligence only, and any person removing such vehicle or other property at the direction of a peace officer in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall have a lien on such motor vehicle for a reasonable fee for such removal and for storage of such motor vehicle. 
(Code 1958, § 14-42) 
Sec. 3-5-33. - Nonself-propelled vehicles and other personal property. 
(a)  No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any abandoned nonself-propelled vehicle or other personal property upon any public or private property within the city. The presence of any abandoned nonself-propelled vehicle or other personal property on any public or private property shall constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such under the provisions of this article. This subsection shall not apply to any person who places such a vehicle at the curbside for the regular pickup of such refuse as provided by this Code. 
(b)  The procedure for the removal of such vehicles or personal property shall be the same as for abandoned motor vehicles except that no notice to a registered owner or to the state department of revenue or the state department of public safety shall be required. 
(c)  The method of notice and sale by the chief of police or the city marshal shall be the same as that for abandoned motor vehicles except that the proceeds shall not be held by the clerk for one (1) year but shall be paid immediately into the general fund for the city. 
(Code 1958, § 14-43) 
Sec. 3-5-34. - Firearms. 
(a)  All firearms which come into the possession of the city whether due to the commission of a crime or otherwise shall be stored in a properly secured area within the city public safety building. 
(b)  All firearms which come into the possession of the city due to the commission of a crime shall be held until the final disposition of any proceedings arising out of the commission of such crime before being disposed of. All other firearms shall be held for thirty (30) days before being disposed of. 
(c)  Firearms shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  They shall be returned to their lawful owner: 
a.  If the weapon was used in the commission of a crime but the lawful owner was not convicted thereof, or 
b.  If the weapon was lost or stolen and recovered by city law enforcement personnel. 
(2)  If not returned to the lawful owner under provisions of subsection (c)(1) above, they shall be sold or destroyed by the chief of police or city marshal as provided below regardless of whether the firearm came into the possession of the city due to the commission of a crime or otherwise. At such time as there shall be a final judgment entered finding the accused guilty of the commission or attempted commission of a crime against any person, any firearm which was used as a weapon in the commission of such crime which was the property of the accused shall be turned over by the person having custody of such device to the chief of police or the city marshal wherein such device was confiscated. The chief of police or the city marshal shall within ninety (90) days after receiving such device either destroy the same or advertise it for sale in such manner as sheriff's sales are advertised and shall sell such devices to the highest bidder at the sale conducted after the completion of the advertisements and fulfilling the requirements of the laws of the United States and this state pertaining to the sale of firearms. The proceeds of any sale shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(3)  All handguns which are .32 caliber or smaller, have a barrel four (4) inches or less in length, and have a market value of less than forty dollars ($40.00) and all weapons which are declared illegal by the Federal Firearms Control Act, 18 U.S.C., Section 921 et seq. shall be destroyed by the chief of police or the city marshal. 
(4)  All provisions of this subsection except where no forfeiture would work under subsections (c)(1) and (2) or under any other federal or state law shall be subject to the following provision: In the event the director of the state department of archives and history or the director of state department of public safety, in that order or priority, shall desire to receive and retain the device for historical or instruction purposes of his department and gives written notice thereof to the chief of police or city marshal either prior to the advertisement of same for sale or within ten (10) days thereafter, the chief of police or city marshal shall forthwith deliver the device to the department which shall retain same for such purposes. A device delivered to such department in accordance herewith shall become property of the state. 
(Code 1958, § 14-44) 
State Law reference— Disposition of weapon involved in criminal offense, OCGA §§ 17-5-51, 17-5-52; department of public safety, OCGA § 35-2-1 et seq.; department of archives and history, OCGA § 45-13-40 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5-35. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. Each act in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1958, § 14-45) 
Sec. 3-5-36. - Article provisions deemed cumulative and supplemental. 
This article is hereby declared to be cumulative of and supplemental to any power or authority now possessed by the city relative to the disposal of discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junk motor vehicles under any provision of law, and not in lieu thereof, and supplemental and cumulative of any state law relative to same. 
(Code 1958, § 14-46) 
Secs. 3-5-37—3-5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - RESTRICTED CITY FACILITIES 

Sec. 3-5-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Escort means an employee or other official of the city who has authorized access to restricted city facilities. 
Restricted city facilities means those areas, under the operation and control of the city, that are posted with at least one (1) sign bearing the following legend: "Restricted City Facility." 
(Code 1958, § 14-51) 
Sec. 3-5-52. - Declaration of policy. 
The rapid increase in the abuse of unauthorized persons in entering certain sensitive and extremely dangerous city facilities is a matter of concern to the city council and to the people of the city. Such abusive actions threaten the city's liability and endanger the safety of each person, authorized or unauthorized, coming in contact with such sensitive city facilities. Therefore, in order to ensure the safety of each of the individuals and the public, to limit the city's liability, to enable such sensitive city facilities to operate without distraction, and to protect the lives and property of the people of the city, this article is hereby enacted. 
(Code 1958, § 14-50) 
Sec. 3-5-53. - Declared prohibited areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter or for any person in charge of a restricted city facility to permit any unauthorized person to enter any restricted city facility without an escort, unless such person has permission to enter such areas through the consent of the city manager or by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1958, § 14-52) 
Sec. 3-5-54. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 14-53) 
CHAPTER 3-6. - POLLUTION AND CONTAMINATION[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency management, § 3-1-46 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 5-1. 
State Constitution reference— Power of city to provide air quality control services, Art. 9, § 2, para. 3. 
State Law reference— Control of water pollution and surface-water use, OCGA § 12-5-20 et seq.; prevention, control, etc., of air pollution, OCGA § 12-9-1 et seq.; abatement of nuisances in cities, OCGA § 41-2-5. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3-6-1—3-6-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - AIR POLLUTION[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, § 7-1-56 et seq. 

Sec. 3-6-11. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air-cleaning device means any method, process, or equipment which removes, reduces, or renders less noxious air contaminants discharged into the atmosphere. 
Air contaminant means solid or liquid particulate matter, dust, fumes, gas, mist, smoke, or vapor or any matter or substance either physical, chemical, biological, radioactive (including source material, special nuclear material, and by-product material), or any combination of any of the above. 
Air pollution means the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one (1) or more air contaminants. 
Approved means meeting the requirements of the public works director. 
ASTM means the American Society for Testing and Materials. 
Chimney means a vertical masonry or concrete shaft enclosing one (1) or more flues. 
Department means the public works department. 
Dust means solid particles released into, or carried in the air by natural forces, or by any fuel-burning, combustion or process equipment or device or by construction work, or by mechanical or industrial process. 
Excess air means air entering a combustion chamber in excess of the amount theoretically required for complete combustion of materials in the combustion chamber. 
Flue means a passageway for the purpose of removing products of combustion from solid, liquid or gas fuel. 
Fly ash means particulate matter capable of being gas-borne or air-borne and consisting essentially of fused ash and/or other burned or unburned materials resulting from combustion of fuel or refuse. 
Fuel-burning equipment (incinerator) means any equipment, device or contrivance for burning any fuel except refuse and all appurtenances thereto, which is used for indirect heating and in which the material being heated is not contacted by, and adds no substance to, the products of combustion. Such equipment typically includes that used for; heating water, generating or super-heating steam, heating air as in warm air furnaces, furnishing process heat indirectly through transfer by fluids or transmission through process vessel walls. 
Hand fired fuel-burning equipment means fuel- burning equipment in which fresh fuel is manually introduced directly into the combustion chamber. 
Incinerator means any equipment, device, or contrivance used for the destruction and/or reduction of rubbish or other waste by burning, and all appurtenances thereto. 
Multiple chamber incinerator means any article, machine, equipment, or contrivance which is used for disposal of refuse by burning and which consists of a series of three (3) or more combustion chambers physically separated by refractory walls, inter-connected by gas passages or ducts, lined with refractories having a pyrometric cone equivalent of at least 17, tested according to ASTM Method C-24, and is designed for efficient combustion of the type and volume of material to be burned. 
Objectionable odor means an odor deemed objectionable by the public works director and at least twenty-five (25) percent of the people exposed to it if there are at least twenty (20) people so exposed or at least five (5) people if there are fewer than twenty (20) people exposed. 
Open burning means any outdoor fire from which the products of combustion are emitted directly into the open air without passing through a flue. 
Particulate matter means material other than water, which is suspended in air or other gases, in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality or political subdivision of a state, and any agency, department or instrumentality of the United States government, or any other entity, and any officer, agent or employee of any of the above. 
Process equipment means any equipment, device or contrivance for mixing, changing, storing, or handling any material, the use or existence of which may cause any discharge of air contaminants into the open air, but excluding that equipment defined herein as "fuel-burning equipment" or "incinerator." 
Process input weight rate means a rate established as follows: 
(1)  For continuous or long-run, steady-state source operations, the total process weight for the entire period of continuous operation or for a typical portion thereof, divided by the number of hours of such period. 
(2)  For cyclical or batch source operations, the total process weight for a period that covers a complete operation or an integral number of cycles, divided by the hours of actual process operation during such a period. Where the nature of any process or operation or the design of any equipment is such as to permit more than one interpretation of this definition, the interpretation that results in the minimum value for allowable emission shall apply. When recycled material is handled by the process equipment, it shall be included in the total process weight. Moisture shall not be considered as part of process weight. 
Public works director means the public works director or his designee. 
Ringelmann smoke chart means the chart published and described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7718 for use in measuring the shades, density or opacity of air contaminants arising from stacks and other sources, and being on file in the department. The miniature Ringelmann is a derivative of the above in common use. 
Smoke means gas-borne or air-borne particles resulting from combustion operations and industrial processes and consisting of carbon and ash or other matter and present in sufficient quantity to be visible. 
Source means any property, source, facility, building, structure, location or installation at, from or by reason of which emissions of air contaminants are or may reasonably be expected to be emitted into the atmosphere. Such terms include both real and personal property, stationary and mobile sources or facilities, and direct and indirect sources or facilities, without regard to ownership, and both public or private property. 
Standard cubic foot means one (1) cubic foot of a gas mixture corrected to standard conditions of sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit and 14.7 pounds per square inch absolute. 
Vapor means the gaseous form of a substance normally in the liquid or solid state. 
(Code 1958, § 16-1) 
State Law reference— Definitions relating to air quality, OCGA § 12-9-3. 
Sec. 3-6-12. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this article shall be given a written notice and instructions from the public works director as to the required remedy for such violation and shall be given thirty (30) days to comply. Failure to comply with the requirements of such written notice and instructions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and in addition thereto may be enjoined from continuing such violation. Each day violations occur thirty (30) days after receipt of notice of violations, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1958, § 16-10) 
Sec. 3-6-13. - Visible emissions; prohibited, exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall cause, allow or permit visible smoke into the open air from any source, of an opacity, shade or appearance equal to or darker than number two (2) of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart. The use of miniature Ringelmann charts to determine compliance with this section is authorized. 
(b)  Exceptions to subsection (a) are as follows: 
(1)  Visible emissions consisting of uncombined water droplets. 
(2)  Smoke emitted during the cleaning of a fire, the building of a new fire or the blowing of soot from boiler surfaces, the shade or appearance of which is not darker than number three (3) of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart for a period or periods aggregating no more than three (3) minutes in any thirty (30) consecutive minutes. 
(3)  Smoke resulting from any fire ignited for the purpose of training firemen or for research in fire protection or prevention. 
(4)  Smoke resulting temporarily and briefly from an unavoidable breakdown or malfunction of equipment, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the continued operation of equipment subject to repeated breakdown or chronic malfunction, or of equipment so obsolete or worn as to require frequent repairs or to preclude dependable and efficient operation. The department shall be notified when breakdowns of equipment cause smoking for thirty (30) minutes or longer, by the owner or his agent. 
(Code 1958, § 16-2) 
State Law reference— Control of air pollution by state, OCGA § 12-9-4 et seq. 
Sec. 3-6-14. - Open burning. 
(a)  No open burning shall be allowed on any premises, except for the cooking of food and/or training of firefighting personnel except under a permit from the fire department under the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code, Article 501, section 501.1. 
(b)  Materials such as asphaltic materials, plastic materials, rubber materials, gasoline and/or oils, or any other material producing dense smoke and/or obnoxious odors shall not be used for starting or maintaining an open fire as permitted in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-7. 
(Code 1958, § 16-3) 
Sec. 3-6-15. - Incinerators; minimum requirements. 
(a)  No person shall construct a new incinerator within the city unless: 
(1)  It is a multiple chamber incinerator with sufficient combustion volume for its rated capacity and type of material to be burned. 
(2)  It is provided with an auxiliary burner for the purposes of creating pre-ignition temperatures. 
(3)  It has an efficient gas washer of the venturi or impingement type with at least three (3) wet impingement surfaces plus any needed dry collection or electrostatic equipment. 
(4)  It has an adequate and approved induced draft fan. 
(5)  It has a secondary burner for use when necessary to destroy smoke and/or odors and maintains a temperature of at least fifteen hundred (1500) degrees Fahrenheit in the secondary chamber. 
(6)  Designs other than those mentioned above shall be considered on an individual basis and will be exempt from those provisions if, in the judgment of the department, such design results in performance which meets the standards set forth in subsection (c). 
(b)  Incinerators shall be maintained in good working order and shall be operated so as to: 
(1)  Maintain a temperature of at least eight hundred (800) degrees Fahrenheit in the primary combustion chamber. 
(2)  Comply with generally recognized good practices and all applicable provisions of this article. 
(3)  Make full and proper use of all components and appurtenances thereof. 
(c)  No person shall cause or allow to be emitted into the open air from any refuse-burning equipment, fly ash or other particulate matter in quantities exceeding 0.2 grains per dry standard cubic foot of flue gases, calculated to twelve (12) percent carbon dioxide for products of combustion and at sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit and at a gas pressure of 14.7 pounds per square inch absolute. This limitation shall apply when the refuse-burning equipment is operating at full load. In measuring emissions from refuse-burning equipment, the carbon dioxide produced by combustion of any "auxiliary" fuels shall be excluded from the calculation to twelve (12) percent carbon dioxide. 
(Code 1958, § 16-4) 
Sec. 3-6-16. - Emission of fly ash and other solid particulate matter from fuel-burning equipment. 
(a)  No person shall cause, let, permit, suffer or allow any emission from any fuel-burning equipment which does not comply with the visible emission limitations in Figure 1 (maximum permissible emission of fly ash and other particulate matter from fuel-burning installations), which is hereinafter set out. 
(b)  Equipment in operation, or under construction contract, on or before September 2, 1969, shall be considered existing equipment. All other equipment put in operation or extensively altered after said date is to be considered new equipment. 
(c)  No person shall cause, let, permit, suffer, or allow the emission from any fuel-burning equipment of particles in sufficient number, or of sufficient size, or of such nature as to be visible individually as incandescent particles so as to unreasonably interfere with enjoyment of life, or use of the property of any other person. This subsection shall only apply if such particles fall on real property other than that of the person responsible for the emission. 
(Code 1958, § 16-5) 
Reduce to fit on 19 
Total Input - Millions of BTU Per Hour  Maximum Permissible Emission of Fly Ash and Other Particulate  Matter From Fuel Burning Installations  Figure 1 
Sec. 3-6-17. - Particulate emission from manufacturing processes. 
(a)  No person shall cause, let, permit, suffer, or allow the emission in any one (1) hour from any source, particulate matter in total quantities in excess of the amount shown in table I-A or I-B. (To use tables I-A and I-B, take the process input weight rate (lb/hr or tons/hr). Then find this figure on the table, opposite is the maximum number of pounds of contaminants which may be discharged into the atmosphere in any one (1) hour.) 
Table I-A 
ALLOWABLE RATE OF EMISSION BASED ON PROCESS WEIGHT RATE ON NEW  EQUIPMENT 

 
Table I-B 
ALLOWABLE RATE EMISSION BASED ON PROCESS WEIGHT RATE ON EXISTING EQUIPMENT 

 
(b)  The limitations expressed in subsection (a) above and tables I-A and I-B shall not require a reduction in particulate concentration, based on source gas volume, below the limits in table II. In the use of table II, the person responsible for the emission may elect to substitute, in place of the total source gas volume entering an air-cleaning device in which the particulate concentration is reduced, provided that said cleaning device collects at least sixty (60) percent of the particulate weight entering into it. It is further provided that substituted gas volume used shall be corrected to standard conditions of sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit and 14.7 pounds per square inch absolute, and to a moisture content no greater than that of any gas volume substituted for use with table II, and the methods of determining and computing such volume, shall be on the person operating a source seeking to come within the provisions of this subsection. 
Table II 
MINIMUM CONCENTRATION TO BE  REQUIRED 

 
Interpolation of the data in this table shall be based on linear interpolation between adjacent valves. 
(Code 1958, § 16-6) 
Sec. 3-6-18. - Sulfur oxides. 
(a)  No person shall cause, allow or permit any emission of sulfur oxides which results in ground level concentrations at any point in excess of 0.5 parts per million by volume for a continuous period of more than one (1) hour, and the average concentration shall not exceed 0.2 parts per million by volume of sulfur oxides, in any twenty-four-hour period. These limitations shall not apply to ground level concentrations occurring on the premises on which such emission occurs. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) above, no person shall cause, permit or allow the emission of gas containing sulfur oxides in excess of two thousand (2,000) parts per million by volume at point of discharge. 
(c)  All sampling of exhaust gases shall be conducted following techniques designated by or approved by the public works director. For purposes of this section, all sulfur present in gaseous compounds and containing oxygen shall be deemed to be present as sulfur dioxide and analyses of samples taken to determine the amount of sulfur dioxide in exhaust gases shall be made as specified by the public works director. The test for determining compliance with this section shall be for at least thirty (30) representative consecutive minutes or ninety (90) percent of the time of actual source operation, whichever is less. 
(Code 1958, § 16-7) 
Sec. 3-6-19. - Odors. 
No person shall permit the emission of objectionable odors from any source under his control. 
(Code 1958, § 16-8) 
Sec. 3-6-20. - Plan review. 
(a)  Timely notice shall be given the public works director before any fuel-burning equipment, refuse-burning equipment and/or process equipment is hereafter installed or extensively altered. Such notice shall be supplemented by such plans, specifications and other information as the public works director deems necessary to assess the potential effect of such equipment on air pollution or to determine whether it would comply with this article. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to fuel-burning equipment used for heating dwellings of fewer than three (3) families nor to equipment for burning gas or No. 1 or No. 2 fuel oil or to internal combustion engines. 
(Code 1958, § 16-9) 
Sec. 3-6-21. - Air pollution prohibited. 
(a)  The discharge from any source of air contaminants resulting in air pollution in excess of the limits stipulated in this article is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as authorizing or legalizing the creation or maintenance of a nuisance or violation of any other city ordinance provision. 
(Code 1958, § 16-11) 
Sec. 3-6-22. - Power of entry. 
The person in charge of any premises subject to the provisions of this article shall permit access of the public works director to all parts of the premises or facilities thereon to determine compliance with this article, and such persons shall permit the public works director to collect and preserve evidence of all facts pertinent to such determination. Such person shall upon official request, and for official use only, make available such data and records as the public works director may require to enforce this article or to determine compliance therewith. 
(Code 1958, § 16-12) 
State Law reference— Inspections and investigations relating to air pollution, OCGA § 12-9-10. 
Secs. 3-6-23—3-6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - WATER POLLUTION[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Water, Ch. 5-2. 
State Law reference— Control of water pollution and surface-water use, OCGA § 12-5-20 et seq.; state grants for water pollution control projects, OCGA § 12-5-33. 

Sec. 3-6-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Contaminate means to create undesired environmental effects. 
Hazardous waste means wastes that pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment and include, but are not limited to, offal, solid waste, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewerage sludge and chemical wastes. 
Surface water or waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and all other bodies of surface or subsurface waters, natural or artificial, within the city, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of an individual person, partnership or corporation. 
(Code 1958, § 16-22) 
State Law reference— Definitions relating to water pollution control, OCGA § 12-5-22; definitions relating to hazardous waste management, OCGA § 12-8-62. 
Sec. 3-6-37. - Purposes. 
In accordance with OCGA Section 41-2-5, the purpose of this article shall be to prevent the disposal of hazardous wastes into surface waters within the city limits, when such disposal poses substantial hazards to public health, safety or welfare or to the environment. 
(Code 1958, § 16-21) 
State Law reference— Hazardous waste disposal, treatment, etc., OCGA § 12-8-60 et seq.; injunctions to abate public nuisances, OCGA § 31-5-9. 
Sec. 3-6-38. - Proceedings to abate generally. 
Any process or activity that causes hazardous waste to contaminate surface waters within the corporate limits of the city in violation of this article shall be abated in the manner set forth in this article. 
(1)  Initiation. Proceedings to abate the process or activity that causes hazardous waste to contaminate surface waters within the city shall be initiated by the city manager after investigation by the city utilities department and determination by the city manager that the hazardous waste and resulting contamination of surface waters threatens persons who come within the sphere of such hazardous waste. Upon recommendation of the city manager, the city attorney shall file with the city clerk a complaint stating the nature and location of the hazardous waste and of the process or activity causing such hazardous waste. 
(2)  Notice of hearing. Upon filing a complaint as set out herein above, the city clerk shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the premises upon which the process or activity that causes the hazardous waste complained of is located and, if the person maintaining the same is a different person from the owner, then also to the person in control of such process or activity, calling on such person to show cause, either personally or by attorney, at the time and place directed by the city clerk, why such process or activity alleged to be causing such hazardous wastes to contaminate surface waters should not be ordered abated and/or removed by the municipal court. Such notice shall be served at least three (3) days prior to the date set for the hearing by any city police officer and shall be made either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice to the party's last known address, return receipt requested. 
(3)  Order of abatement. If, after hearing all the evidence, the municipal court decides that the activity or process complained of causes hazardous waste that contaminates the surface waters, then the municipal court shall, by order, direct the chief of police to abate the process or activity creating the hazardous waste and may issue such other order as is necessary to prevent further contamination. A copy of such order of abatement shall be served on the party or parties that control such process or activity. 
(4)  Effect of noncompliance. In the event of a refusal to comply with the order of abatement issued by the municipal court, the person controlling the process or activity that causes such hazardous wastes shall be subject to sanctions as set out in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 16-23) 
Sec. 3-6-39. - Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the municipal court from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of any process or activity that is a nuisance per se in the law, or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public is in imminent danger. 
(Code 1958, § 16-24) 
State Law reference— Nuisances, OCGA § 41-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-6-40. - Costs. 
A person who allows the disposal of hazardous wastes into the surface waters within the city shall pay reasonable investigation expenses and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city and shall pay restitution to the city for removing the hazardous wastes from the surface waters and the surrounding area. 
(Code 1958, § 16-25) 
Sec. 3-6-41. - Appeals. 
A person shall have the right of certiorari to the superior court from the municipal court as provided by law. 
(Code 1958, § 16-26) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction and powers of superior courts, OCGA § 15-6-8. 
Secs. 3-6-42—3-6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - WATER QUALITY CONTROL[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference— Water, Ch. 5-2. 

Sec. 3-6-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Household laundry detergent means a laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder or other form used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
(1)  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner or other substance that is intended to be used for nonlaundry cleaning purposes. 
(2)  A detergent used in dairy, beverage or food processing cleaning equipment. 
(3)  A phosphorus acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner or metal conditioner. 
(4)  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, health care facilities or in agricultural production. 
(5)  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning. 
(6)  A detergent manufactured, stored or distributed for use or sale outside of the state. 
(7)  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory and engineering laboratory. 
(8)  A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry services for hospital, health care facility or veterinary hospital. 
Phosphorus means elemental phosphorus. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 2, 2-6-90) 
Sec. 3-6-52. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city to encourage the use of clean, phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight. The city finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in wastewater discharge so as to protect the state's rivers and lakes downstream and promote health, safety and welfare, prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of this city that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 1, 2-6-90) 
Sec. 3-6-53. - Sale of detergents restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level in the city a household laundry detergent which contains greater than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes cleaning purposes. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 3, 2-6-90) 
Sec. 3-6-54. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person found guilty of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 4, 2-6-90) 
Sec. 3-6-55. - Civil remedy. 
In addition to the penalty provided for the violation of this article, the city may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 5, 2-6-90) 
Sec. 3-6-56. - Not a bar to recovery of damages. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right to any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this article and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding therefor. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 6, 2-6-90) 
CHAPTER 3-7. - SMOKEFREE AIR[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-23, § I, adopted June 21, 2005, amended Ch. 3-7 in its entirety. Prior to amendment, Ch. 3-7, §§ 3-7-1—3-7-12, pertained to smoking pollution control and derived from Ord. No. 91-43, § 1, adopted Oct. 15, 1991. 

Sec. 3-7-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as City of Gainesville Smokefree Air Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-23, § I, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 3-7-2. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The City of Gainesville does hereby find that: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy non-smokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. 
(2)  Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. 
(b)  Accordingly, the city council finds and declares that the purpose of this chapter is: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and public and private places of employment; 
(2)  To guarantee the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air, and 
(3)  To recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. No. 2005-23, § I, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 3-7-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Business means any corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership, professional corporation, enterprise, franchise, association, trust joint venture, or other entity, whether for profit or nonprofit. 
City means the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Employee means an individual who is employed by a business in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Employer means an individual or a business that employs one (1) or more individuals. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, homes for the chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms and wards within health care facilities. This definition shall not include long-term care facilities as defined in paragraph (3) of the Official Code of Georgia section 31-8-81, as amended. 
Infiltrate means to permeate an enclosed area by passing through its walls, ceilings, floors, windows, or ventilation systems to the extent that an individual can smell secondhand smoke. 
Person in charge means the person who ultimately controls, governs, or directs activities upon a public transportation vehicle or within any other place regulated by this chapter, regardless of the person's status as owner, lessee, or governmental official. 
Place of employment means an enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer that employees utilize during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, and hallways. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a licensed child care, adult day-care, or health care facility. This term shall not include vehicles used in the course of employment. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, public transportation vehicles, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theatres, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a licensed child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term shall include a bar area within any restaurant. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Secondhand smoke means smoke emitted from lighted, smoldering, or burning tobacco when the person smoking is not inhaling, smoke emitted at the mouthpiece during puff drawing, and smoke exhaled by the person smoking. 
Service line means an indoor line in which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted tobacco product including cigarettes, cigars, and pipe tobacco. 
Smoking area means a separately designated enclosed room which need not be entered by an employee in order to conduct business that is designated as a smoking area and, when so designated as a smoking area, shall not be construed as to deprive employees of a nonsmoking lounge, waiting area, or break room 
Sports arena means enclosed stadiums and enclosed sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
(Ord. No. 2005-23, § I, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 2005-45, §§ I, II, 10-4-05) 
Sec. 3-7-4. - Smoking prohibited in all enclosed public places. 
Except as otherwise specifically authorized in section 3-7-6, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-23, § I, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 3-7-5. - Smoking prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of employment. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in section 3-7-6, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of employment, including, but not limited to, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(b)  Such prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all current employees by July 1, 2005, and to each prospective employee upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. No. 2005-23, § I, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 3-7-6. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of section 3-7-4 and 3-7-5: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care, adult day-care, or health care facility; 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than twenty (20) percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated; 
(3)  Retail tobacco stores, provided that secondhand smoke from such stores does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Long-term care facilities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-8-81(3), as amended; 
(5)  Outdoor areas of places of employment; 
(6)  Smoking areas in international airports, as designated by the airport operator; 
(7)  All workplaces of any manufacture, importer, or wholesaler of tobacco products, of any tobacco leaf dealer or processor, all tobacco storage facilities, and any other entity set forth in O.C.G.A. § 10-13A-2, as amended; 
(8)  Private and semiprivate rooms in health care facilities licensed under Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia that are occupied by one (1) or more persons, all of whom have written authorization by their treating physician to smoke; 
(9)  Smoking areas designated by an employer which shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The smoking area shall be located in a nonwork area where no employee, as part of his or her work responsibilities, shall be required to enter, except such work responsibilities shall not include custodial or maintenance work carried out in the smoking area when it is unoccupied; 
b.  Air handling systems from the smoking area shall be independent from the main air handling system that serves all other areas of the building and all air within the smoking area shall be exhausted directly to the outside by an exhaust fan of sufficient size and capacity for the smoking area and no air from the smoking area shall be recirculated through or infiltrate other parts of the building; and 
c.  The smoking area shall be for the use of employees only. 
The exemption provided for in this paragraph shall not apply to restaurants and bars. 
(10)  Private offices in private places of employment occupied exclusively by smokers and which are not subject to public access in the ordinary course of business; and 
(11)  a.  Private clubs, military officer clubs and noncommissioned officer clubs during periods of time when the public is not invited or permitted. 
b.  In order to qualify for exempt status under subsection (a) of this Code section, any area described in subsection (a) of this Code section, except for areas described in paragraph (1)a., shall post conspicuously at every entrance a sign indicating that smoking is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2005-23, § I, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 3-7-7. - Right to declare entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as nonsmoking place. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection (a) of Code section 3-7-8 is posted. 
(Ord. No. 2005-23, § I, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 3-7-8. - Posting of signs and removal of ashtrays. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in every public place where smoking is regulated by this chapter by the person in charge of such public place. Such signs shall contain letters of not less than two (2) inches in height or the international symbol for "No Smoking," consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle, with a red bar bisecting the circle. 
(b)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of the area, unless such ashtray is permanently affixed to an existing structure. 
(Ord. No. 2005-23, § I, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 2005-45, § III, 10-4-05) 
Sec. 3-7-9. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city marshal's office and/or the Gainesville Police Department shall be responsible for enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the health department, the chief of police, or the city marshal, or his designee. 
(c)  Any person who smokes in violation of this chapter and any owner, operator, manager, or person in charge of any establishment regulated by this chapter who allows, condones, or ignores smoking in violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7. 
(Ord. No. 2005-23, § I, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 2005-45, § IV, 10-4-05) 
Sec. 3-7-10. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a second violation of this chapter within one (1) year; and 
(3)  A fine not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) but not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of this chapter within one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 2005-23, § I, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 3-7-11. - Other applicable laws and disclaimer. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to allow smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. By regulating smoking, the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general health and welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, neither the city, its officers nor its employees are liable in money damages to any person who claims that any breach of this chapter caused injury. 
(Ord. No. 2005-23, § I, 6-21-05) 
CHAPTER 3-8. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 3-8-1. - Loud noises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any load, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which unreasonably annoys, disturbs or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city, and which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability more than one hundred (100) feet from the point of origin of this sound or noise. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § I, 6-1-99) 
Sec. 3-8-2. - Unlawful noises designated. 
The following are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Blowing horns excessively. The blowing or use of automobile horns or similar signaling devices upon motor vehicles upon the public streets, alleys or thoroughfares of the city in excess of those signals necessary for the preservation of safety is hereby prohibited. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using of, operating of, or permitting to be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for any producing or reproducing of sound in a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with a louder volume than is reasonably necessary for the convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, building, structure or vehicle in which this machine or device is operated, and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of the set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the room, building, structure or vehicle in which it is locates shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Operation of radios, stereos, etc., from motor vehicle at levels audible at one hundred (100) feet. 
a.  Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street or highway to operate or amplify the sound produced by a radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within the motor vehicle so that the sound is: 
1.  Plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more from the motor vehicle; 
2.  Louder than necessary for the convenient hearing by persons inside the vehicle in areas adjoining churches, schools, or hospitals. 
b.  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Any law enforcement motor vehicle equipped with any communication device necessary in the performance of law enforcement duties or to any emergency vehicle equipped with any communication device necessary in the performance of any emergency procedures. 
2.  Motor vehicles used for business or political purposes, which in the normal course of conducting such business use sound-making devices. 
c.  Definitions; standards. The definition of "plainly audible" and the standards regarding the measurement of sound by law enforcement personnel shall be as promulgated by the department of public safety, as required in O.C.G.A § 40-6-14(d). 
(4)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using of, operating of, or permitting to be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
(5)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Noisy animals or birds. Anyone who keeps or maintains an animal or bird that unreasonably disturbs the comfort or repose of any person or persons because the animal or bird is emitting frequent or long continued sound or noise, and who continues to keep, maintain, or allow any animal or bird to so disturb the comfort or repose of any person or persons shall be deemed in violation of this section; provided that the person keeping or maintaining the animal has been first notified in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the complaining party that this animal or bird being kept by the addressee is unreasonably disturbing his or her comfort or repose. This section shall be liberally construed to accomplish the objective thereof, and the person making this written notification need not use the exact words of this section to the addressee so long as the notification sufficiently informs the addressee of the nature of the disturbing noise emitted by the animal or bird. Upon receipt of a certified letter notifying the person keeping or maintaining such animal or bird, said person shall be required to immediately comply with this section. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary or moving internal combustion engine or motor boat except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. Such are not in any event to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(8)  Schools, courts, place of worship, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, place of worship or court while in use, or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in those streets indicating a school, hospital or court is adjacent thereto. 
(9)  Hawkers, peddlers, vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(10)  Noise to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(11)  The use of skateboards, roller skates, inline roller skates, roller blades or a bicycle in a residential district so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling or other type of residence. The use of any skateboards, roller skates, inline roller skates, roller blades or a bicycle in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from any dwelling or other type residence shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § I, 6-1-99) 
Sec. 3-8-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, any activity which would naturally cause a loud noise such as a parade, Fourth of July fireworks display, construction of a building or similar type functions or activities which are properly permitted by the proper official or officials of the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It is also provided that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any government vehicle while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § I, 6-1-99) 
Sec. 3-8-4. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 99-33, § I, 6-1-99) 
CHAPTER 3-9. - PUBLIC HEALTH 

Sec. 3-9-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as City of Gainesville Public Health Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-20, § I, 6-16-09) 
Sec. 3-9-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and more specifically for the purpose of requiring the maintenance of property, sidewalks and rights-of-way to retain property values, protect the general environment and appearance of neighborhoods, residential complexes and commercial and industrial areas and ensure safe and sanitary conditions in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-20, § I, 6-16-09) 
Sec. 3-9-3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Front yard means the yard extending across the front of the lot between the side yard and lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projections thereof, other than the projections of uncovered steps, uncovered balconies and uncovered porches. If there is no building on the property, the entire property shall be deemed the front yard. The right-of-way is included in the definition of "front yard" for purposes of this chapter. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description. 
Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership, authority created by statute, association or other entity or combination thereof. 
Polluted water is defined for the purpose of this chapter, as water which contains bacterial growth, remains of garbage, refuse, debris, papers and any other foreign matter or material which constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition. 
Rubbish means any wastepaper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metal, cans, glass, packing material and similar material. 
Right-of-way means that real property, titled in the city or held in perpetual easement for street-related purposes, lying between the edge of the paved or unpaved street and the adjoining property boundary with private property. The term shall encompass all areas adjoining the public street or roadway wherein utilities and sidewalks are located and maintained. 
To place means to establish the presence on property of an object which: 
(1)  Is capable of being moved or removed and which is not affixed to the real property, and 
(2)  Is present on the property for a period of at least ten (10) consecutive days, whether or not the location of the item on the property is changed. 
Wooded areas means those portions of lots consisting of a dense growth of trees, which exceed three (3) inches in diameter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-20, § I, 6-16-09) 
Sec. 3-9-4. - Duty to maintain cleanliness of property. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any lot, parcel, or area of land within the city, or the agent of such owner, or tenant of an owner, or other occupant of the premises, to permit on such lot, parcel or area of land, to have, place or allow to be placed any of the following on such premises, including the front, side or rear yard, sidewalk or right-of-way: 
(1)  Any accumulation of offensive matter or odor including, but not limited to, overgrown or dead or decayed trees, dead organic matter, rubbish, garbage, animal intestinal waste and urine, and toxic or otherwise hazardous liquids and substances and material. 
(2)  Dead plant material piled such that it emits objectionable and foul odors or presents a haven for rodents, snakes, rats, mice or other vermin. 
(3)  Any condition that would create or provide a harborage for mice, rats, snakes, rodents or other vermin. 
(4)  Dead trees, shrubs or other plant materials which if they should fall, would present a safety hazard to adjacent public or private property; 
(5)  Any vegetation which, because of its characteristics of growth, spreads onto adjacent property and cannot be controlled; 
(6)  Grass, weeds or undergrowth that exceeds eight (8) inches or more on any lot on which a residential, institutional, commercial or industrial structure is built. 
(7)  Grass, weeds or undergrowth that exceeds twelve (12) inches on any vacant or undeveloped lot located within a residential district. 
(8)  Grass, weeds or undergrowth that exceeds twelve (12) inches on any lot or property other than those described in subsections (6) or (7) of this section. 
Exception: For the purposes of this section, wooded areas as defined herein shall be exempt from the above requirements. 
(9)  All clotheslines and other outdoor clothes drying equipment shall be placed and maintained in only the rear yard of a residence or other residential property. In no instance shall clothes, sheets, towels or other household materials be hung from any object other than a clothesline or other outdoor drying equipment. The placement or hanging of clothes, sheets, towels or other household materials on fences, cars, hand railings, decks, porches, playground or other similar objects shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(10)  A swimming pool, pond, stream, or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, stagnant, or not otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted. 
(11)  It is unlawful to clean or maintain private property located in the city by blowing, raking or otherwise moving objects, debris, yard waste or other items onto adjoining property, the right-of-way or the street. All such objects, debris, yard waste or other items shall be properly bagged or containerized for removal by the owner/occupant or, in the case of collectible solid waste, for removal by the city or its designee. 
(12)  Both the occupant and the owner of the premises shall be liable for compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and shall be responsible for violations thereof. Lease of property of an owner which purports to transfer responsibility for this provision shall be ineffective in shielding the owner for responsibility under this provision, and such owner shall remain liable along with the occupant of the leased premises. 
Exception: For the purposes of all subsections of this section, with the exception of subsections (3) and (4), wooded areas as defined in this chapter shall be exempt from the above requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2009-20, § I, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 2018-16, §§ III, IV, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 3-9-5. - Additional duties for nonresidential properties. 
(a)  In addition to the obligations set forth above in this chapter, the proprietor, person in charge and owner of every non-residential property in the city are hereby required to keep the sidewalks and right-of-way abutting such property, business, driveways, yards and parking lots and areas clean at all times. In the case of shopping centers, the owner and person in charge of a center shall be responsible for keeping parking lots, rear areas, drives and connecting property that is under the same ownership or control clean of litter, trash, garbage, stray shopping carts and commercial or other wastes. 
(b)  Inspection of lot, parcel or area of land. The city marshal, or such subordinate official as may be designated to act in his behalf, or code enforcement officer with twenty-four (24) hours prior written notice, may enter and inspect every lot, parcel or area of land to determine if same is being kept in a clean and neat condition free from weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash, deleterious or unhealthful growths, other noxious matter or debris of any kind as prescribed in subsection (a). Twenty-four-hour prior written notice shall be perfected either by tack and nail or by first class mail to the last known owner or agent of the lot subject to inspection. The term "enter and inspect" shall not include the following conduct: 
(1)  Any observation of the property from any point not within the boundary lines of the property; 
(2)  Any entry onto the property for the purpose of discussing the condition of the property with the owner or occupier of the property; and 
(3)  Any entry onto the property for the purpose of serving a copy of any written notice or other official document upon any owner or occupier of the property. 
Additionally, the 24-hour notice provided for in this subsection shall be deemed waived in the event that any owner or occupier of the property gives written consent to an inspection of the property. 
(c)  Notice to destroy. Whenever it shall appear to the city marshal, his designee, or code enforcement officer that subsection (a) is being violated, he shall, in writing, notify the owner of any such lot, parcel or area of land within the city or the agent of such owner, to cut, destroy or remove any such weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash, deleterious or unhealthful growths, other noxious matter or other debris of any kind, found growing, lying or located on such owner's lot, parcel or area of land, or upon the sidewalk abutting same. Such notice may be served by registered or certified mail, addressed to the owner, or the agent of such owner, at his last known address or service of such notice may be perfected upon such owner or the agent of such owner as provided by O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq. Such notice shall notify the owner of his right to appeal the notice to destroy to the administrative hearing officer within five (5) working days of receipt of written notice of the decision of the city marshal, his designee or code enforcement officer. 
(d)  Action upon non-compliance. 
(1)  Any person who receives a written notice pursuant to subsection (c) shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city marshal, his designee, or code enforcement officer and shall be entitled to a hearing, pursuant to section 1-8-1. 
(2)  Unless such hearing is requested within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice, such person shall be presumed to have accepted summary process. 
(3)  The administrative hearing officer may affirm or deny the decision of the city marshal or code enforcement officer. 
a.  If the administrative hearing officer affirms the decision of the city marshal or code enforcement officer in issuing the notice pursuant to subsection (c), the owner of the property or agent shall have ten (10) days from the date of the decision of the administrative hearing officer in which to comply with the notice received pursuant to subsection (c). 
b.  If the administrative hearing officer overrules the decision of the city marshal or code enforcement officer, the owner or agent will have no further duty as a result of the notice received pursuant to subsection (c). 
(4)  If the owner or agent shall fail, neglect or refuse after being so notified to cut, destroy or remove such weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash, deleterious or unhealthful growth, other noxious matter or other debris of any kind growing, lying or located upon such owner's property or upon the sidewalk abutting same within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice provided for in subsection (c) or within ten (10) days after the date of such notice in the event same is returned to the city by the United States Postal Service because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or the agent of such owner, or within ten (10) days after the date of a decision by the administrative hearing officer affirming the decision of the city marshal or code enforcement officer, the city marshal or code enforcement officer may pay for the cutting, destroying or removal of such weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash, deleterious, unhealthy growth, other noxious matter or other debris of any kind or to order the removal by the city. 
(e)  Charges. 
(1)  When the city has effected the removal of such weeds, untrimmed grass, litter, trash deleterious or unhealthful growths, other noxious matter or other debris of any kind, or has paid for its removal, an amount provided in section 10-1-3 shall be charged to the owner of such property and such charge shall be due and payable by the owner within thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Service of notice of such charge may be served by registered or certified mail, addressed to the owner or the agent of the owner, at his last known address or service of notice of such charge maybe perfected upon the owner or the agent of the owner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2, as amended. Upon nonpayment of such charge within thirty (30) days after receipt of the written notice of such charge, in the event same is returned to the city by the United States Postal Service because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or the agent of such owner, the clerk of the council may issue an execution against such owner's property or against the owner and shall deliver the same to the levying officer of the city or his deputy, who shall levy the same upon the property liable therefore and after advertisement, and other proceedings as in the case of sales for city taxes, the same shall be sold at public outcry to the highest bidder. 
(3)  Such charge shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month in the event same is not paid in full on or before the date the bill upon such charge appears becomes delinquent. 
(4)  Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section, shall on conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-20, § I, 6-16-09) 
Title 4 - PUBLIC WORKS AND HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Public safety, Tit. 3; solid waste, Ch. 4-3; municipal utilities, Tit. 5; licenses, permits and business regulations, Tit. 6; business license fees, Tit. 10. 
Related law reference— Public health, § 2.1.1. 
State Law reference— Health, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

CHAPTER 4-1. - ANIMALS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— License fees, Tit. 10; recreation and parks, Ch. 1-7; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-4; offenses against public health generally, § 3-5-12; sewage from poultry processing plants, § 5-1-44 et seq. 
State Law reference— Animals, OCGA Title 4; Georgia Animal Protection Act, OCGA § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, OCGA § 16-12-4; slaughter, preparation, sale or transportation of animals, meat or meat food products, OCGA § 26-2-110; game and fish, Title 27; civil liability for damage by animal, OCGA § 51-2-6 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means any domesticated animal that shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or attendant of the private property and is unattended or uncared for. Any domesticated animal shall also be considered as abandoned which shall have been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of this animal for a period of time in excess of thirty-six (36) hours unattended and without proper food and water. 
Animal at large means an animal not under restraint. 
Animal control officer: 
(a)  Animal control officer means any officer, agent or employee of the city designated by the city council to perform the duties of animal control and enforcement of this article and perform the duties of dog control officer pursuant to OCGA Section 4-8-22(c). 
(b)  In the event that the city enters into a governmental agreement with another government agency to provide animal control services, then the animal control officer shall be the individual or individuals so designated by that governmental agreement. 
Animal under restraint means any animal, except a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal, that is: 
(1)  Controlled within the property limits of its owner; 
(2)  Controlled by a leash; 
(3)  At heel or beside a competent person and is obedient to the person's commands; or 
(4)  Within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets. 
Dangerous animal means any animal other than livestock maintained on agricultural property, that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Has without provocation inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans, domesticated animals or agricultural animals without provocation after the animal has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Domesticated animals means animals that are accustomed to live in or about the habitation of men, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, cows, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated wild animals and/or exotic animals, except animals classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous by the animal control officer. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which he is located. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or control of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal within this city. 
Potentially dangerous animal means any animal, other than livestock maintained on agricultural property, with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of human beings, or any animal that when unprovoked: 
(1)  Inflicts injury on a human being on public or private property; 
(2)  Chases or approaches a human being upon the street, sidewalks or any public grounds or the private property of another in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack; 
(3)  Causes the death of another domesticated animal or agricultural animal unless the other domesticated animal or agricultural animal was not under restraint at the time; or 
(4)  On more than one occasion causes injury to another domesticated animal or agricultural animal unless the other domesticated animal or agricultural animal was not under restraint at the time. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Any such structure shall have a secure top, and if the animal is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape either from over or from under the fence. If the enclosure does not have a floor, the sides of the enclosure shall be embedded in the ground not less than two (2) feet. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
Records of appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state or local court; records of a dog control officer as provided in OCGA Section 4-8-22; or records of an animal control officer as provided by this article. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
(Ord. No. 88-70, § I(4-25a), 11-01-88; Ord. No. 97-33, § I, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 2000-10, § I, 2-15-00; Ord. No. 2014-02, §§ I, II, 2-18-14) 
Sec. 4-1-2. - Animal control unit. 
(a)  There is hereby created an animal control unit (totally separate from and independent of the Hall County Humane Society) and it shall be staffed with such personnel as may from time to time be authorized by the city council. 
(b)  In the event that the city enters into a governmental agreement with another government agency to provide animal control services, then the animal control unit shall be the individual or individuals so designated by that governmental agreement. 
(Ord. No. 88-70, § I(4-25b), 11-01-88; Ord. No. 97-33, § II, 6-17-97) 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1. 
Sec. 4-1-3. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the animal control unit which may call such other officers and employees of the police department of the city as may be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Upon information known to or a complaint lodged with any officer or member of the animal control unit, the city manager's office or police department that any owner or possessor of a domesticated animal is in violation of this chapter, a summons shall be issued requiring the owner or possessor of such domesticated animal to appear before the judge of the municipal court on a day and time certain to stand trial for the violation of this chapter. If such violation of this chapter has not been witnessed by an officer or other employee of the city, a subpoena shall be issued to the person making the complaint requiring such person to appear on the day and time set to testify on behalf of the city. In the event that the owner or possessor of any domesticated animal is not known, and such domesticated animal is at large in violation of this chapter, upon complaint made to, or information known to the animal control unit, it shall be the duty of the unit to immediately take possession of such domesticated animal and impound it according to such rules and regulations now or hereafter prescribed by law, this Code or by the ordinances of the city for the detention, control and disposition of domesticated animals. 
(c)  Upon information known to or upon a complaint being lodged with an animal control officer, the city manager or police department that an animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous and not being kept by its owner under restraint in compliance with this chapter, the animal control officer or the police department shall issue a citation for the violation of this chapter to the owner of the animal to appear before the judge of the municipal court on a day and time certain for a hearing to determine if such animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous. If such violation has not been witnessed by an officer or other employee of the city, a subpoena shall be issued to the person making the complaint requiring such person to appear on the day and time set to testify on behalf of the city. 
(d)  Upon finding that the animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous and that the owner knew said animal was dangerous or potentially dangerous, the animal may be impounded by the animal control unit or the police department until such time the owner of the dangerous or potentially dangerous animal provides proof of compliance with the duties of the owner of dangerous or potentially dangerous animals as set forth in section 4-1-57. Any owner shall be held to know that such animal was dangerous or potentially dangerous if the animal had at any time displayed any one (1) or more of the behaviors described in the definition of dangerous or potentially dangerous animal under this chapter. 
(e)  All impounded animals shall be housed and cared for at the Hall County Humane Society facilities. 
(f)  In the event that the city enters into a governmental agreement with another government agency to provide animal control services, then the primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the animal control unit of that agency and the individual or individuals so designated by that governmental agreement. 
(Ord. No. 88-70, § I(4-25e), 11-01-88; Ord. No. 97-33, § III, 6-17-97) 
Sec. 4-1-4. - Livestock or fowl prohibited from running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any livestock or fowl belonging to him to go at large in the city or for any person who has the care or custody of any livestock or fowl to permit the same to escape and go at large, or to go into the premises of another person without the consent of such other person. 
(b)  In the event that the city enters into a governmental agreement with another government agency to provide animal control services, then the primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the animal control unit of that agency and the individual or individuals so designated by that governmental agreement. 
(Code 1958, § 4-1; Ord. No. 97-33, § IV, 6-17-97) 
Sec. 4-1-5. - Vicious animals, running at large prohibited, impounding, killing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vicious or dangerous animal to allow the same to run at large, and any person who shall allow such animal to run at large with notice or knowledge of its vicious or dangerous character, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. It shall be the duty of the city marshal or police officer having knowledge that such animal is at large to immediately impound such animal and hold it under the provisions of section 4-1-6. 
(b)  If impracticable to impound the animal, or if the delay or attempt to impound the same be attended with danger, it shall be the duty of the city marshal or police officer to kill the animal. 
(c)  In the event that the city enters into a governmental agreement with another government agency to provide animal control services, then the primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the animal control unit of that agency and the individual or individuals so designated by that governmental agreement. 
(Code 1958, § 4-2; Ord. No. 97-33, § V, 6-17-97) 
Sec. 4-1-6. - Impounding, redemption, sale of unclaimed animals. 
(a)  The chief of police shall cause to be taken up and impounded any and all animals or fowl found running at large in violation of this chapter. Whenever any animal or fowl is impounded and so remains unclaimed for twenty-four (24) hours, the city marshal shall immediately cause notice of the taking up of such animals, or fowl, with description of same, to be posted in at least three (3) conspicuous and public places within the city, with notice that the same will be sold, stating the place and time, not less than five (5) days from the posting of the notice. The owner shall be required to come forward before the sale and claim the same, and such animal or animals, or fowl, shall be delivered to the owner upon the payment of the prescribed fees. If such animals are not claimed and fees paid before the sale, then the city marshal shall proceed to sell the same to the highest bidder, for cash, and the proceeds of the sale, after paying the expense incurred, shall be deposited in the treasury of the city, to be refunded to the former owner of the animals or fowl sold, upon proof of ownership when claimed by him, provided the same is claimed within six (6) months. 
(b)  In the event that the city enters into a governmental agreement with another government agency to provide animal control services, then the primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the animal control unit of that agency and the individual or individuals so designated by that governmental agreement. 
(Code 1958, § 4-3; Ord. No. 97-33, § VI, 6-17-97) 
Sec. 4-1-7. - Payment of pound fees prior to release. 
All costs of impoundment or keeping such animals or fowl shall be paid before release to the claimant. 
(Code 1958, § 4-4) 
Sec. 4-1-8. - Hogs, keeping or raising prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or raise any pigs or hogs within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1958, § 4-5) 
Sec. 4-1-9. - Dead carcasses. 
Carcasses of cats, rats, chickens or other fowl shall be well buried by the occupant of any premises on which they may be. All other carcasses shall be reported to the public works director, his designee or the city marshal and shall not be disposed of otherwise. Such person or the chief of police shall have all carcasses in the streets or in private lots, at once removed out of the city limits and then buried or otherwise disposed of so as not to create a nuisance. All such dead carcasses shall be removed at the expense of the owners of the animal, if known, and the finance director shall collect the fee for the same as provided by law. 
(Code 1958, § 4-6) 
State Law reference— Dead Animal Disposal Act, OCGA § 4-5-1 et seq.; "dead animals" defined, OCGA § 4-5-2; methods of disposal of dead animals, OCGA § 4-5-5. 
Sec. 4-1-10. - City declared bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wildfowl or to rob bird nests or wildfowl nests. However, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the city, then such health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, bird club, garden club or humane society or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three (3) days' actual notice of the time and place of the meeting to the representatives of the clubs. 
(c)  If as a result of such meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then the birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1958, § 4-8) 
Sec. 4-1-11. - Dying or coloring certain animals and fowl for display, sale, gift, etc., prohibited. 
No person in the corporate limits of the city shall sell, offer for sale, or give away, or display living baby chicks, ducklings, or other fowl, or rabbits which have been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an artificial color. 
(Code 1958, § 4-10) 
Sec. 4-1-12. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Any person who tortures, torments, maims, mutilates, kills, beats, bruises, wounds or deprives of necessary sustenance and shelter any domestic animal, whether belonging to himself or another, shall upon conviction in the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(b)  Any person who procures another person to do any of the acts prohibited in this section shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(c)  In the event that the city enters into a governmental agreement with another government agency to provide animal control services, then the primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the animal control unit of that agency and the individual or individuals so designated by that governmental agreement. 
(Code 1958, § 4-11; Ord. No. 97-33, § VII, 6-17-97) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, OCGA § 16-12-4. 
Secs. 4-1-13—4-1-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - POULTRY AND ANIMAL YARDS 

Sec. 4-1-31. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this article, the term "poultry and animal yard" includes every enclosure, shed or structure used to house live birds, fowl, including in the term "fowl" chickens, ducks, geese and other poultry, rodents, reptiles or cattle, horses, sheep or goats, with the exception of hatcheries, pet shops, zoological gardens, animal hospitals, veterinarian clinics, poultry processing plants, and enclosures containing dogs, cats, other household pets, and fowl kept as a hobby and not for commercial purposes. 
(Code 1958, § 4-12) 
Sec. 4-1-32. - Erection and maintenance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to erect or maintain any poultry or animal yard within three hundred (300) feet of any residence except the residence of the owner, or within three hundred (300) feet of any public building. No person shall cause or allow any poultry or animal yard to become unclean, unsanitary or unwholesome, from decaying food or refuse of any kind. 
(Code 1958, § 4-13) 
Sec. 4-1-33. - Occupancy permit. 
Every person maintaining a poultry or animal yard shall obtain an occupancy permit renewable yearly from the building inspection department, provided that such yard shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1958, § 4-15) 
Sec. 4-1-34. - Commercial breeding, keeping prohibited. 
All commercial breeding and keeping of animals and poultry of any nature is hereby prohibited in all residential zones. 
(Code 1958, § 4-15.1) 
Sec. 4-1-35. - Notice of violation. 
All enclosures, including but not limited to poultry and animal yards, having one (1) or more horses, cows or any other animal or combination of animals, dogs, cats, household pets or fowl shall be kept clean, free from offensive odor, sanitary and well drained. Upon the filing of a written complaint with the city marshal, failure to properly clean and drain such enclosure within ten (10) days after being duly notified by the city shall constitute a violation of this section, and each person shall upon conviction in the municipal court be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. The notice described in this section shall be subject to sections 6-9-1 and 6-9-2. 
(Code 1958, § 4-16) 
Sec. 4-1-36. - Failure to abate violations. 
If the legal owners or the person in possession of the premises on which the violation exists shall fail to abate the violation after conviction in municipal court, then the city, by and through its agents, shall abate the violation, charge the costs thereof to the legal owner of the premises, and the legal owner of the premises shall be required to pay the cost of such abatement to the city. 
(Code 1958, § 4-17) 
Sec. 4-1-37. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7. Each day such violation exists ten (10) days after receipt of notice of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1958, §§ 4-16, 4-18) 
Secs. 4-1-38—4-1-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - CARING FOR, KEEPING OF, ETC., CERTAIN DOMESTICATED AND VICIOUS ANIMALS 

Sec. 4-1-56. - Domesticated animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal, or anyone having a domesticated animal in his possession or control, to permit such domesticated animal to be at large and not under restraint. 
(b)  Reasonable care and precautions shall be taken by the owner of any domesticated animal, or anyone having a domesticated animal in his possession or control to prevent the domestic animal from leaving the real property limits of its owner or possessor, and ensure that: 
(1)  It is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other enclosure out of which the domestic animal cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition, and that such enclosure is securely locked at any time the domestic animal is left unattended; or 
(2)  It is securely and humanely restrained by an invisible containment system with a sign posted on the property indicating that the system is in place; 
(3)  It is on a leash and under the control of a competent person; or it is off leash and obedient to and under voice command of a competent person who is in the immediate proximity of the domestic animal any time it is not restrained while on the real property limits of its owner or possessor. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or possessor of any animal to restrain or anchor any domestic animal by means of a tether, chain, cable, rope or cord, unless the tether or other restraint is being held by a competent person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal to knowingly abandon such animal within the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-70, § I(4-25c), 11-01-88; Ord. No. 2007-18, § I, 6-5-07) 
Sec. 4-1-57. - Dangerous or potentially dangerous animals. 
(a)  Animal control unit. Pursuant to OCGA Section 4-8-22(c) the duties of the dog control officer shall be vested in the director of the animal control unit. The title of such officer shall be "animal control officer." 
(b)  Dangerous animals—Generally. The animal control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous animals and dangerous animal owners within the city. 
(1)  When a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal is classified as such, or when a potentially dangerous animal is reclassified as a dangerous animal, the animal control officer shall notify the animal's owner of such classification. 
(2)  Notices to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address. Such notice shall be complete upon its mailing. 
b.  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the animal's classification or reclassification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal. 
c.  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within fifteen (15) days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the animal is a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal. 
d.  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the city council or its designee, and shall specify the name of the agency which shall conduct the hearing. 
e.  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that an animal is a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal will become effective for all purposes under this article on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing. 
f.  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the applicable agency and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the agency. 
(3)  The notice procedures provided for in this article are not an essential condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal is held to know that such animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous if the animal has at any time displayed any one (1) or more of the behaviors described in the definition of "dangerous animal" or "potentially dangerous animal" as provided in this article. 
(4)  Pursuant to OCGA Sections 4-8-22 and 4-8-24, the city council may conduct hearings provided for in this section, may designate an animal control board to conduct such hearings or may designate the board of health to conduct such hearings. Under no circumstances shall the animal control officer participate in a hearing other than to testify as to the determination that an animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous. 
(5)  When the city council or its designee receives a request for a hearing as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall schedule such hearing within thirty (30) days after receiving the request. The city council or its designee shall notify the animal owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the animal owner at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the animal shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the city council shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the city council may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the animal. 
(6)  Within ten (10) days after the date of the hearing, the city council shall notify the animal owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the animal is a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(c)  Same—Duties of owner; certificate. 
(1)  It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this city a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Subject to the additional requirements of paragraph (3) of this subsection, the animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal if the owner presents to the animal control officer or the animal control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: 
a.  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal; and 
b.  The posting of the premises where the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous animal on the property and containing a symbol designed to inform children of the presence of a dangerous animal. 
(3)  In addition to the requirements of paragraph (2) of this subsection, the owner of a dangerous animal shall present to the animal control officer evidence of: 
a.  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous animal against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous animal; or 
b.  A surety bond in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous animal. 
(4)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the animal control officer within twenty-four (24) hours if the animal is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the animal has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the animal. 
(5)  An animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. The police department shall cooperate with the animal control officer in enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(6)  An annual fee may be charged by the animal control officer, in addition to regular animal-licensing fees, to defray the cost to register dangerous animals and potentially dangerous animals as required in this article. 
(d)  Same—Outside of enclosure. 
(1)  It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(2)  It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(e)  Confiscation of animal. 
(1)  A dangerous animal shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal control officer if the: 
a.  Owner of the animal does not secure the liability insurance or bond required by this article; 
b.  Animal is not validly registered as required by this article; 
c.  Animal is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
d.  Animal is outside a proper enclosure in violation of this article. 
(2)  A potentially dangerous animal shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous animal if the animal is: 
a.  Not validly registered as required by this article; 
b.  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
c.  Outside a proper enclosure in violation of this article. 
(3)  Any animal that has been confiscated under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within twenty (20) days of the date the animal was confiscated, such animal shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(f)  Exceptions. 
(1)  An animal that inflicts an injury upon a person when the animal is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal within the meaning of this article. An animal shall not be a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal within the meaning of this article if the injury inflicted by the animal was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(2)  No owner of a dangerous animal shall be held criminally liable under this article for injuries inflicted by such owner's animal to any human being while on the owner's property. 
(g)  Animal control board. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22 as amended and section 4-1-57(b)(4) of the Code of the City of Gainesville, an animal control board for the city is hereby established. 
(1)  The animal control board shall be composed of five (5) members who, when appointed, shall be residents of the city. Residency shall be determined by the member's primary residence, home telephone location, driver's license registered address, voter registration and similar documentation. Any member who shall cease to be a resident of the city shall tender his resignation to the clerk of the city within thirty (30) days of moving. 
(2)  The animal control board shall hold hearings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24 and section 4-1-57 et seq. of the Code of the City of Gainesville. 
(3)  The appointment of members of the animal control board shall be as follows: 
Member (Post) No. 1. Nominated by the city council member from Ward 1 subject to confirmation by the full council for a term beginning on the effective date of this section and expiring December 31, 1993. Upon expiration of said term and upon nomination by the council member from Ward 1, the city council shall make subsequent appointments for three-year terms. 
Member (Post) No. 2. Nominated by the city council member from Ward 2 subject to confirmation by the full council for a term beginning on the effective date of this section and expiring December 31, 1995. Upon expiration of said term and upon nomination by the council member from Ward 2, the city council shall make subsequent appointments for three-year terms. 
Member (Post) No. 3. Nominated by the city council member from Ward 3 subject to confirmation by the full council for a term beginning on the effective date of this section and expiring December 31, 1995. Upon expiration of said term and upon nomination by the council member from Ward 3, the city council shall make subsequent appointments for three-year terms. 
Member (Post) No. 4. Nominated by the city council member from Ward 4 subject to confirmation by the full council for a term beginning on the effective date of this section and expiring December 31, 1993. Upon expiration of said term and upon nomination by the council member from Ward 4, the city council shall make subsequent appointments for three-year terms. 
Member (Post) No. 5. Nominated by the city council member from Ward 5 subject to confirmation by the full council for a term beginning on the effective date of this section and expiring December 31, 1994. Upon expiration of said term and upon nomination by the council member from Ward 5, the city council shall make subsequent appointments for three-year terms. 
(4)  No member of the animal control board of the city shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms plus an unexpired term of one (1) year or less, unless one (1) year shall have passed since the member last served on the board. 
(5)  No member of the animal control board may participate in a hearing on any matter in which such member previously participated in the classification of the dog at issue. 
(Ord. No. 88-70, § I(4-25d), 11-01-88; Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 1-7-92) 
Sec. 4-1-58. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the animal control unit to immediately notify the owner of each domesticated animal impounded if the owner of the domesticated animal is known or can be reasonably ascertained. The owner of any domesticated animal impounded may, within seventy-two (72) hours of such impoundment, reclaim such domesticated animal by the: 
(1)  Payment of the impoundment fee as charged by the Hall County Humane Society for each day that the animal was impounded, 
(2)  The cost of the rabies inoculation if required due to the animal not wearing a current rabies inoculation tag, and 
(3)  Upon proof of payment of any fine for a violation of this article. 
(b)  The animal control unit shall release to the Hall County Humane Society for adoption or euthanasia any animal unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after seventy-two (72) hours. Any person adopting an animal shall pay the required license fees, costs of rabies inoculation, impoundment fee and any other fee deemed necessary and in the case of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal, shall show proof of compliance with the duties of owners of dangerous or potentially dangerous animals. 
(Ord. No. 88-70, § I(4-25f), 11-01-88) 
Sec. 4-1-59. - Rabies vaccination. 
It shall be the duty of any owner or possessor or custodian of any domesticated animal three (3) months of age or older, when such animal is being kept in any area in the city, to procure current rabies vaccination and to affix to the collar or harness of said animal a current vaccination tag as required by section 4-1-78. 
(Ord. No. 88-70, § I(4-25g), 11-01-88) 
Sec. 4-1-60. - Guard dogs. 
Any person maintaining guard dogs in an area for the protection of persons or property shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The dog shall be: 
a.  Confined to an enclosed area adequate to insure that it will not escape; or 
b.  Under the absolute control of a handler at all times when not securely enclosed; 
(2)  The owner or other person in control of the premises upon which a guard dog is maintained shall post warning signs over or next to all exterior doors, stating that such a dog is on the premises. At least one (1) such sign shall be posted at each driveway or entranceway to said premises. Such sign shall be in lettering clearly visible from either the curb line or distance of fifty (50) feet, whichever is greater, and shall contain a telephone number where some person responsible for controlling such guard dog can be reached twenty-four (24) hours a day; and 
(3)  Prior to the placing of a guard dog on any property, the person or persons responsible for the placing shall inform the animal control unit, the city manager, the police department and the fire department, in writing, of their intention to post such dog or dogs, the number of dogs to be posted, the location where such dog or dogs will be posted, the approximate length of time such dog or dogs will be guarding the area, and the breeds, sex, age and rabies tag number of such dog or dogs. Such notice must be renewed every twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 88-70, § I(4-25h), 11-1-88) 
Cross reference— Police department, Ch. 3-2; fire department, Ch. 3-3. 
Secs. 4-1-61—4-1-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - DOGS AND CATS GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dogs, OCGA § 4-8-1 et seq.; destroying or injuring police dog, OCGA § 16-11-107; state assistance for control or elimination of wild or abandoned dogs, OCGA § 27-1-7; hunting with dogs, training of hunting dogs, OCGA § 27-3-16; killing of dogs running deer, OCGA § 27-3-49; guide dogs for handicapped persons, OCGA § 30-4-1 et seq.; control of rabies, OCGA § 31-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4-1-76. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this article, as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do any thing required by this article, as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be subject to both fine and imprisonment, as provided by section 1-1-7 of this Code, upon conviction of violation of this article. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Code 1958, § 4-29) 
Sec. 4-1-77. - Running at large prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to permit, or anyone having a dog or cat in his possession and control to permit, such dog or cat to be out of control and unattended off the premises of the owner in the city, or upon the property of another person without permission of the owner or person in possession thereof. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to an "animal under restraint" as defined in this chapter. 
(Code 1958, § 4-22) 
Sec. 4-1-78. - Collar, inoculation tag required; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog or cat to allow such dog or cat in any area in the city without a collar which shall have attached a valid and current vaccination tag as required by the laws of the state. It shall be the duty of each dog or cat owner to provide a collar with an inoculation tag for each dog or cat, except when such dog or cat is under immediate control of the owner, or is participating in a dog or cat show or exhibition. 
(Code 1958, § 4-23) 
State Law reference— Local rabies regulations, OCGA §§ 31-19-3, 31-19-9; rabies tags, OCGA § 31-19-6. 
Sec. 4-1-79. - Impoundment of dogs or cats found running at large. 
Any and all dogs or cats found running at large in violation of this article shall be immediately impounded by the city or its duly authorized officers or agents. In the event that the owner or one in possession of a dog or cat is not known and such dog or cat is upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, public places, and premises of another, any law enforcement officer or agent or employee duly authorized by the city shall be authorized to take possession of such dog or cat and impound it in accordance with the rules and regulations now or hereafter provided by law or by ordinance for the detention, control and disposition of dogs or cats impounded pursuant to such law or ordinance applicable. 
(Code 1958, § 4-24) 
Sec. 4-1-80. - Confinement of dogs or cats suspected of being rabid, when person has been bitten. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, whenever the county health office, the rabies inspector or an officer or agent of the city shall receive information that any person has been bitten by a dog or cat reasonably suspected of being rabid, the county health office, the rabies inspector or officer or agent of the city shall be required to have the dog or cat confined for a period of eight (8) days. It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge that any person has been bitten by such dog or cat to refuse to notify promptly one (1) or more of the officers mentioned in this section. All persons shall comply with the orders of officials of the county health department in the handling and treatment of such dogs or cats. Any dog or cat confined under this section shall be housed at the Hall County Humane Society or at a licensed veterinary hospital. Any expense incurred in the handling of any dog or cat, under this section, shall be borne by the owner of said dog or cat. 
(Code 1958, § 4-26) 
Sec. 4-1-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-32, § IV, adopted June 1, 1999, repealed § 4-1-81, which pertained to barking, noisy dogs, and derived from Code 1958, § 4-27. 
Secs. 4-1-82—4-1-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - PET DEALERS, KENNEL OR STABLE OPERATORS AND ANIMAL SHELTERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, Tit. 6; license fees, Tit. 10. 

Sec. 4-1-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by or under contract for the state, a county, a municipal corporation or any other political subdivision of the state for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats and other animals; any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians licensed under the Georgia Veterinary Practice Act, as now or hereafter amended, which operates for such purpose in addition to its customary purposes; and any facility operated, owned or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society or other nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. 
Humane care of animals includes, but is not limited to, proper medical treatment, adequate heat, ventilation, exercise and sanitary shelter, wholesome and adequate food and water consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Kennel or stable operator means any person who operates an establishment other than an animal shelter where dogs, cats and/or horses are maintained for boarding, holding, training or similar purposes. 
Pet dealer means any person who sells, offers to sell, exchanges, or offers for adoption dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles or other animals customarily obtained as pets in this state. However, a person who sells only animals that he has produced and raised, not to exceed thirty (30) animals a year, shall not be considered a pet shop dealer unless such a person is licensed for a business by the city or has a state sales tax number. The city council may with respect to any breed of animals decrease the thirty (30) animal per year exception in the foregoing sentence to a lesser number of any animals for any species which is commonly bred and sold for commercial purposes in lesser quantities. Operation of a veterinary hospital or clinic by a licensed veterinarian shall not constitute the veterinarian a pet dealer under this article. Pet dealer shall include not only the owner of the animals offered for sale, exchange or adoption, but also the person in charge of the premises where the animals are housed and maintained. 
(Code 1958, § 4-30) 
State Law reference— Definitions relating to animal protection, OCGA § 4-11-2; Georgia Veterinary Practice Act, OCGA § 43-50-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-1-102. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction in the municipal court of the city be punished as provided for in section 1-1-7 of this Code. Each day in which any such violation or violations shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1958, § 4-40) 
Sec. 4-1-103. - Duty to provide humane care. 
It shall be unlawful for any pet dealer, kennel or stable operator or animal shelter in the city to fail to provide humane care for the animals it offers to sell, exchange or offers for adoption. 
(Code 1958, § 4-31) 
Sec. 4-1-104. - Animals to be free of disease, injury or abnormality. 
It shall be unlawful for any pet dealer or animal shelter to sell, exchange or offer for adoption any animal unless such animal shall appear to be free of disease, injuries or abnormalities unless such injury or abnormality is disclosed in writing to the purchaser before the sale, adoption or exchange and the purchaser waives in writing any objection to the injury or abnormality. 
(Code 1958, § 4-32) 
Sec. 4-1-105. - Maintenance, construction of buildings and premises. 
(a)  All buildings and premises used by pet dealers, kennel or stable operators or animal shelters shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and shall: 
(1)  Have equipment available for proper storage or disposal of waste material to control vermin and insects. 
(2)  Take effective control measures to prevent infestation of animals and premises with parasites and vermin. 
(3)  Provide water from a source having sufficient pressure to properly clean kennels, cages, runs, equipment and utensils. 
(4)  Provide and make handwashing facilities available to workers and customers. 
(b)  All buildings and premises used by pet dealers, kennel or stable operators and animal shelters shall be constructed so as to provide adequate shelter for the comfort of the animals and shall provide adequate facilities for separation of diseased animals to avoid exposure to healthy and saleable animals. 
(c)  All buildings and premises used by pet dealers, kennel or stable operators and animal shelters shall be cleaned daily or more often if necessary with chemicals to destroy germs and bacteria and to prevent the accumulation of debris, dirt or waste. 
(Code 1958, § 4-33) 
Sec. 4-1-106. - Construction, maintenance of cages. 
Cages used by pet dealers, kennel or stable operators and animal shelters shall be constructed of a material that is impervious to urine and water and able to withstand damage from gnawing and chewing. The cages must be clean and sanitized and maintained in a relative state of thermal neutrality. All cages shall be of sufficient size to allow the animal to comfortably stand, sit and lie and offer freedom of movement. 
(Code 1958, § 4-34) 
Sec. 4-1-107. - Overcrowding prohibited. 
All animals group-housed by pet dealers, kennel or stable operators and animal shelters shall be maintained in compatible groups without overcrowding. Each animal shall have sufficient room to comfortably stand, sit and lie and have freedom of movement. 
(Code 1958, § 4-35) 
Sec. 4-1-108. - Records; contents. 
Pet dealers shall maintain records for a minimum period of six (6) months concerning the purchase, sale or transfer of its animals, and such records shall include the source of the animal, the date of purchase, the date of sale, description and sex of the animal sold, and the name and address of the purchaser. Records concerning fish and rodents are not required. 
(Code 1958, § 4-36) 
Sec. 4-1-109. - Inspection of premises and records. 
The premises and records required by this article of pet dealers, kennel or stable operators and animal shelters shall be open for inspection by authorized employees and agents of the city during reasonable hours. 
(Code 1958, § 4-37) 
Sec. 4-1-110. - Notice, correction of violations. 
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be notified in writing of such violation and such written notice shall provide a reasonable time, but not less than three (3) nor more than thirty (30) days, for the satisfactory correction thereof unless such violation is causing irreparable harm to the health and welfare of any animal. If such violation is causing irreparable harm to the health and welfare of any animal, the animal shall be impounded by the city and delivered to the Hall County Humane Society. If such violation is corrected within thirty (30) days from the date the animal is impounded, same shall be returned to its original owner upon the payment by the owner of the costs of feeding and boarding the animal, and if not corrected within such thirty-day period, the animal shall be disposed of in accordance with the rules and policies of the Hall County Humane Society covering abandoned animals. 
(Code 1958, § 4-38) 
Sec. 4-1-111. - Appeal. 
Any person who receives a written notice pursuant to section 4-1-110 may appeal the decision to the city manager. Such appeal shall be taken within three (3) days from the date such person receives the notice pursuant to section 4-1-110 by notifying the clerk of the city in writing and specifying the grounds of appeal. The city manager shall within five (5) days after the receipt of the notice of appeal fix a date and time for the hearing of the appeal and after due notice to the parties at interest have a hearing on the appeal within ten (10) days of the date the notice of appeal was received by the city clerk and decide the same within a reasonable time. The city manager shall have the authority to affirm or deny the violations of this article. If the city manager affirms the violations, the person found to be in violation shall have the same number of days to correct such violation or violations as was set forth in the original notice, and such time shall run from the date of the decision by the city manager. If the violation or violations are not corrected within the specified time and animals have been impounded, same shall be disposed of pursuant to section 4-1-110. If the city manager determines that the provisions of this article have not been violated, the person who received the notice of the violation or violations shall have no further duty as a result of such notice and any animal impounded pursuant to section 4-1-110 shall be returned to its owner within twenty-four (24) hours of the decision of the city manager that no violations of this article have occurred. 
(Code 1958, § 4-39) 
Secs. 4-1-112—4-1-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - RAT CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 7-1. 
State Law reference— Pesticide control, OCGA § 2-7-50 et seq.; use and application of pesticides, OCGA § 2-7-90 et seq.; Dead Animal Disposal Act, OCGA § 4-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4-1-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business building means any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy for transmission of business, for rendering of professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares and merchandise or for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories and all outhouses, sheds, barns and other structures or premises used for business purposes. 
Occupant means the individual, partnership or corporation that has the use of or occupies any business building or a part or fraction thereof whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of a vacant building or any portion of a business building the owner, agent or other person having custody of the building shall have the responsibilities of an occupant of a building. 
Owner shall mean the actual owner of the business building, whether individual, partnership or corporation, or the agent of the building or other person having custody of the building or to whom rent is paid. In the case of business buildings leased with a clause in the lease specifying that the lessee will be considered in such cases as the "owner," he is so considered for the purpose of this article. 
Rat harborage shall mean any condition which provides shelter or protection for rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or outside of a structure of any kind. 
Vent-stoppage or rat-proofing means a relatively inexpensive form of rat-proofing to prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings, from the exterior or from one (1) business building to another. It consists essentially of the closing of all openings in the exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roofs and foundations that may be reached by rats from the ground, by climbing or by burrowing, with material impervious to rat-gnawing. 
(Code 1958, § 12-1) 
Sec. 4-1-132. - Business buildings to be rat-proof. 
It is hereby provided and required that all business buildings in the city shall be rat-proofed, freed of rats and maintained in a rat-proof and rat-free condition under the direction and supervision of the health officer. 
(Code 1958, § 12-2) 
Sec. 4-1-133. - Notice to rat-proof building, failure to comply. 
Upon receipt of written notice from the health officer the owner of any business building specified therein shall take immediate measures for rat-proofing the building, and that unless such work and improvements have been completed by the owner in the time specified in the written notice, in no event to be less than fifteen (15) days, or within the time to which a written extension may have been granted by the health officer, then the owner shall be deemed guilty of an offense under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1958, § 12-3) 
Sec. 4-1-134. - Notice of infestation in business buildings; subsequent measures instituted by occupant; when health officer authorized to eradicate. 
Whenever the health officer notifies the occupant of a business building that there is evidence of rat infestation of the buildings, such occupant shall immediately institute appropriate measures for freeing the premises each occupies of all rats, and unless suitable measures for freeing the building of rats are instituted within three (3) days after receipt of notice and unless continuously maintained in a satisfactory manner until the building is free of rats, the health officer is hereby authorized and directed to free the buildings of rats and to levy a monthly charge against the occupant or occupants to cover the costs of labor, materials, and equipment necessary for eradication measures carried out each month. 
(Code 1958, § 12-4) 
Sec. 4-1-135. - Occupants to maintain premises in rat-proofed condition and repair breaks, exception. 
The occupants of all rat-proofed and business buildings are required to maintain the premises in a rat-proofed condition and to repair all breaks or leaks that may occur in the rat-proofing unless such breaks or leaks develop as the result of natural deterioration of the building. 
(Code 1958, § 12-5) 
Sec. 4-1-136. - Inspections; authority of health officer to serve notices. 
The health officer is empowered to make such unannounced inspections of the interior and exterior of business buildings, as in his opinion may be necessary to determine full compliance with this article, and the health officer shall make periodic inspections at intervals of not more than forty-five (45) days of all rat-stopped buildings to determine evidence of rat infestation and the existence of new breaks or leaks in their rat-proofing and when any evidence is found indicating the presence of rats or openings through which rats may again enter business buildings, the health officer shall serve the owners or occupants with notices to abate the condition found. 
(Code 1958, § 12-6) 
Sec. 4-1-137. - Removal of rat-proofing and failure to restore and making new openings prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful under the provisions of this article for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber or other person to remove the rat-proofing from any business building for any purpose and fail to restore same in satisfactory condition or to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats. 
(Code 1958, § 12-7) 
Sec. 4-1-138. - Requirements for storage of feed. 
All food or feed kept within the corporate limits of the city for feeding chickens, cows, pigs, horses and other animals shall be kept and stored in rat-free and rat-proof containers, compartments or rooms unless kept in a rat-proof building. 
(Code 1958, § 12-8) 
Sec. 4-1-139. - Disposal of garbage, refuse and dead animals. 
Within the corporate limits of the city all garbage or refuse consisting of waste animal or vegetable matter upon which rats may feed, and all small dead animals shall be placed and stored until collected by the garbage collection service in covered containers of a type prescribed by the health officer according to existing conditions. It is unlawful for any person to dump or place on any premises, land or waterway, any dead animals or any waste vegetable or animal matter of any kind. 
(Code 1958, § 12-9) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, Ch. 4-3. 
Sec. 4-1-140. - Placing food or trash so as to afford harborage for rats prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or throw any food, or trash in any building or premises in the city so that same shall or may afford food or harborage for rats. 
(Code 1958, § 12-10) 
Sec. 4-1-141. - Buildings constructed or repaired to be rat-proof. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, repair or remodel any building, dwelling, stable or market, or other structure whatsoever, unless such construction, repair, remodeling or installation shall render the building or other structure rat-proof in accordance with the regulations prescribed herein and hereunder provided that only such repairs, remodeling or installation as effect the rat-proof condition of any building or other structure shall be considered as subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1958, § 12-11) 
Sec. 4-1-142. - Occupancy of building containing foodstuffs without complying with regulations prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person hereafter to occupy any building or structure wherein foodstuffs are to be stored, kept, handled, sold, held or offered for sale without complying with the rat-proof regulations prescribed herein and hereunder for existing buildings and structures. 
(Code 1958, § 12-12) 
Sec. 4-1-143. - Compliance with article provisions prerequisite to issuance of business license. 
No license from the city to conduct or carry on a business will be issued to any person until the requirements of this article have been complied with. 
(Code 1958, § 12-13) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, Tit. 6. 
Sec. 4-1-144. - Rat-proofed buildings to be maintained without order from health officer. 
When a building or other structure shall have been rat-proofed in accordance with the regulations prescribed herein and hereunder, the owner shall, without a specific order of the city health officer and regardless of need for remodeling, repair or installation, maintain such building or structure in a rat-proof condition. 
(Code 1958, § 12-14) 
Sec. 4-1-145. - Authority of health officer—To enforce health department regulations. 
The health officer is authorized to enforce regulations as prescribed by the city health department containing specifications covering designs which are inherently rat-proof, the use of approved rat-proofing materials, the employment of standard rat-proof methods of construction and installation, and such other matters as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. Specifications and regulations as prescribed under this article may be obtained at the office of the health officer. 
(Code 1958, § 12-15) 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1. 
Sec. 4-1-146. - Same—To make inspection during construction. 
The health officer is authorized to make inspection or to cause inspection to be made during the course of and upon completion of such construction, repair, remodeling or installation, to insure compliance with the provisions of this article and of the regulations prescribed hereunder. 
(Code 1958, § 12-16) 
Sec. 4-1-147. - Buildings used for specified purposes to be rat-proofed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy, lease, rent or control any building such as store, office, warehouse or any other building or structure for purpose of conducting a business unless such building or structure is rat-proof in accordance with the regulations prescribed herein and hereunder. 
(Code 1958, § 12-17) 
Sec. 4-1-148. - Violation excused when compliance impossible because of inability to secure labor or materials; procedure. 
In the event any person is unable to comply with the provisions of this article or regulations promulgated herein or hereunder because of the inability to secure labor or materials, violations shall be excused if such person shall, within two (2) days of receipt of notice from the health officer of any such violation, contract with the joint board of health for such board, or any person designated by it, to do or have done the necessary work or act for eliminating the hazards constituting such violations and shall pay to such board of health, in advance, the contract cost for accomplishing such work or act. 
(Code 1958, § 12-18) 
Sec. 4-1-149. - Penalties for violation of article. 
In addition to any penalties provided in section 1-1-7 or methods for the collection of costs incurred in the enforcement of this article or regulations promulgated herein or hereunder, the proper authorities of the city are empowered, upon certificate from the health officer to issue against the person and the property of any owner or occupant; a fi. fa. in the amount expended by the board of health in eliminating hazards, constituting violations of this article or regulations herein or promulgated hereunder upon the property of such owner or occupant. Said fi. fa. shall be issued, executed, prosecuted, levied and sales conducted thereunder as in the case of fi. fa. for the collection of ad valorem taxes of the city. 
(Code 1958, § 12-19) 
CHAPTER 4-2. - CEMETERIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, adopted April 6, 2004, amended Ch. 4-2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 4-2, §§ 4-2-1—4-2-16, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1958 Code, §§ 7-1—7-9, 7-11—7-15, 7-17, 7-18; and Ord. No. 91-30, § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 1991. 
State Law reference— Dead bodies, OCGA § 31-21-1 et seq.; interment of deceased indigents, OCGA § 36-12-5; receipt of cemetery or burial lots in trust, annual returns, commissions, OCGA § 36-37-4; municipal corporation as trustee of funds donated to cemetery, OCGA § 36-37-5; Georgia Cemetery Act of 1983, OCGA § 44-3-130 et seq.; authority of coroners, etc., to disinter bodies, OCGA § 45-16-45. 

Sec. 4-2-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cemetery means the Alta Vista Cemetery, including additions, and other cemeteries which shall be defined as any parcel of land dedicated to the interment of human remains, including earth interments, mausoleum, crypt, columbarium or any combination of these, not owned by the city. Any private cemetery located within the city shall be a perpetual care type and comply with The Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, if applicable. Said private cemetery shall file a copy of its annual State of Georgia registration renewal, if applicable, with the clerk's office no later than September 1st of each year along with a filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year payable to the City of Gainesville. No individual family cemeteries will be allowed within the city limits of Gainesville. 
Committee means the cemetery committee as selected under the terms of this chapter. 
Rules means the rules and regulations as may be from time to time adopted by the council. 
Trust means the trust created by this chapter. 
Trustees means the trustees as selected in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04) 
State Law reference— Definitions relating to cemeteries, OCGA § 44-3-131. 
Sec. 4-2-2. - Care and maintenance plans. 
Perpetual care and maintenance for graves in Alta Vista Cemetery shall be provided by the city, a portion of the fee for which shall be included in the purchase price of a lot. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04) 
Sec. 4-2-3. - Rules and regulations—Authority to adopt. 
The city council may from time to time adopt, amend or repeal such rules governing Alta Vista Cemetery, including, but not limited to, rules governing interment, maintenance, monuments and marking, construction of walks, walls, etc., price of lots and annual and perpetual care and maintenance, planting shrubbery and flowers, and such other rules which may be deemed wise in the judgment of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04) 
Sec. 4-2-4. - Same—May be repealed or changed. 
Rules to govern Alta Vista Cemetery from time to time adopted by the city council and may be repealed or changed thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04) 
Sec. 4-2-5. - Same—To govern Alta Vista Cemetery. 
All lots in Alta Vista Cemetery shall be governed by the rules in force as adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04) 
Sec. 4-2-6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-2-7. - Trust—Creation; composition; authority; funds. 
There is hereby created a trust for the Alta Vista Cemetery to be known as the cemetery trust. 
(1)  The trust shall consist of five (5) trustees, being the five (5) council members of the city, and such council members shall serve as trustees during their term as council member. 
(2)  The trust and the trustees shall have all the rights, powers, privileges, duties and authority accorded to trusts and trustees under the laws of the state and the charter of the city. 
(3)  Funds received by the trustees, whether as provided in this chapter or by gifts, donations or otherwise, shall be deposited to the credit of the trust according to the terms of this chapter and the terms of such gifts, donations, etc., and invested in lawful trust investments as prescribed by the laws of the state. 
(4)  All funds and properties, including the proceeds there from, of such trust shall be used in accordance with the charter and the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  The trustees may from time to time transfer proceeds from the trust to the general funds of the city to be used only for care, maintenance, improvements and land acquisition for the Alta Vista Cemetery. 
(6)  The trustees may designate one (1) or more of the trustees to act for such trust for the purpose of transferring funds and properties by check, draft or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of trustees, OCGA § 53-13-50 et seq. 
Sec. 4-2-8. - Same—Percentage of payments committed. 
A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the purchase price of the lots in Alta Vista Cemetery shall be committed to the trust. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04) 
Sec. 4-2-9. - Sale of lots. 
(a)  The number of spaces that may be purchased by an individual shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) spaces. 
(b)  In the event that a purchaser of a lot in the Alta Vista Cemetery desires to resell such lot, he must offer in writing the same to the city at the current selling price of lots, and the city shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of such offer in which to purchase the lot. In the event the city does not purchase the lot in thirty (30) days, the owner shall be free to sell the same to any buyer he may select under the terms, conditions and prices decided between them. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2004-67, § I(1), 9-7-04) 
Sec. 4-2-10. - Cemetery committee, established; composition; duties; powers of advisory only. 
There is hereby established a cemetery advisory committee which shall consist of five (5) members appointed pursuant to section 3.11 of the Charter of the City of Gainesville, Georgia, to serve without pay for a three-year term. In the event a vacancy occurs, the mayor shall fill such vacancy by appointment to complete the unexpired term pursuant to section 3.11 of the Charter. The cemetery advisory committee shall be limited to advisory powers and shall meet semi-annually to devise plans, suggest rules and regulations and perform such other duties as the council may request from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2013-23, § I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 4-2-11. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-2-12. - Interments within the city limits. 
(a)  Interments within the City of Gainesville shall be in Alta Vista Cemetery or in a private cemetery as provided in section 4-2-1. 
(b)  Only one (1) interment, of any kind, shall be permitted per space for spaces purchased in Alta Vista Cemetery after September 15, 2004. 
(c)  Interment in the Gainesville Mill Cemetery is prohibited as of September 15, 2004, unless express written permission is granted by the City of Gainesville, City Manager's Office. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2004-67, § I(2), 9-7-04) 
Sec. 4-2-13. - Burial or exhuming, permit required. 
No person shall dig any grave, or bury, or attempt to bury, exhume or remove any corpse in Alta Vista Cemetery without notice to and permission of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04) 
State Law reference— Permit for disposition of dead body, OCGA § 31-10-20. 
Sec. 4-2-14. - Opening graves restricted. 
No grave shall be opened for the purpose of interments or disinterments in Alta Vista Cemetery except by the manager of the cemetery or employees working under the manager of the cemetery and/or city approved contractors working for funeral directors. All contractors shall meet the minimum specifications adopted, amended or repealed under section 4-2-3 concerning rules and regulations—authority to adopt. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04) 
Sec. 4-2-15. - Monuments to have secure foundation. 
Every person erecting, or causing to be erected, any monument or gravestone within Alta Vista Cemetery, shall pour a concrete foundation a minimum of four (4) inches thick and at least one hundred twenty (120) percent the size of the base of the monument to provide a good firm foundation, so that such gravestone or monument, when thus erected, will have a firm and secure foundation, preventing the same from falling, sinking or leaning. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04) 
Sec. 4-2-16. - Prohibited acts. 
The following acts are prohibited in Alta Vista Cemetery: 
(1)  Reckless driving. 
(2)  Discharging firearms with the exception of a military service. 
(3)  Opening the gates and leaving them open after passage through them. 
(4)  Injuring or defacing in any way the trees, flowers, shrubbery, graves, tombstones or monuments, seats, buildings or structures of any kind in the cemeteries. 
(5)  Committing a nuisance or depositing trash or refuse matter in the cemeteries. 
(6)  Use of cemetery roadways for vehicular traffic not directly associated with cemetery visitation. 
(7)  Use of the cemetery for pedestrian traffic not directly associated with cemetery visitation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-18, § I, 4-6-04) 
CHAPTER 4-3. - SOLID WASTE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, adopted Sept. 21, 2010, amended Ch. 4-3 in its entirety as set out herein. The former Ch. 4-3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2005-09, § I(Att. A), adopted April 19, 2005; Ord. No. 2008-10, §§ I—III, adopted April 1, 2008. 

Sec. 4-3-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the proper disposal of garbage and the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To specifically prohibit any and all littering on public or private property in the city; and 
(2)  To prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by improper garbage disposal and litter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 4-3-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, term and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 
Biomedical waste means that term as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22 on January 1, 2010. 
Business means any person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity which exerts substantial efforts within the city, engages in, causes to be engaged in, and/or represents or holds out to the public to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain or benefit, either directly or indirectly. 
City is the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Commercial enterprise means for the purpose of economic gain. 
Commercial establishment means a business or other organization that buys and/or sells goods, makes products, or provides professional services. For the purposes of this chapter, a commercial enterprise shall not include single-family rental dwellings or multi-family dwellings. 
Commercial hauler means any person who collects and/or transports solid waste for a fee, as a business, or as an adjunct to a business. 
Commercial solid waste means discarded items from a commercial establishment as defined herein, including, but not limited to, waste material from industrial processes, manufacturing processes, slaughter houses, packing plants, poultry processing plants or similar industries, and large quantities of condemned foods. Commercial solid waste also includes waste material from the construction, remodeling and repair operations on houses, commercial buildings, multiple dwelling and other structures, such as concrete, bricks, plaster, stone, earth, lumber, roofing materials, gutters, shavings and sawdust. 
Construction/demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, asbestos, asbestos containing waste, wood, brick, metal, concrete wallboard, paper cardboard, inert waste, landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Contract representative(s) means a person, persons or entity that has a contract, other than a franchise agreement, with the City of Gainesville for the collection, conveyance or disposal of solid waste generated by or accumulated from single-family dwellings in the city. 
Curbside means a location near the street, behind the curb line and not blocking a sidewalk, where trash receptacles are readily accessible to collection vehicles. 
Customer means an individual or entity that pays the monthly solid waste fee. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Enclosed structure is any structure that has a roof and at least two (2) closed sides. 
Franchisee means a person, persons or entity granted a franchise by the city who, under written agreements, for compensation by those receiving services, does the work of collecting and transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and similar locations. 
Garbage means domestic wastes composed of meat, vegetable, and fruit scraps and other discarded items ordinarily generated as by-products of a private residence. 
Hazardous waste means that term as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-62 on January 1, 2010. 
Litter means any misplaced or improperly discarded solid waste. 
Multi-family dwelling means any building which is arranged, designed or used for living quarters for two (2) or more families on a permanent or long-term basis. 
Person means an individual, and shall also include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships or any other form of business organization, including a commercial hauler. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
Public works department means the city department responsible for roads, drainage, traffic, airport, sanitation, the cemetery and engineering. 
Receptacle means any container approved by the public works department for use in the temporary storage, collection and disposal of garbage or recyclables. 
Recyclables shall mean those items known to be made from or contain materials deemed desirable for reuse or remanufacture. Recyclables include, but are not limited to, paper, glass, aluminum, plastic and corrugated cardboard. 
Refuse means discarded items that have not been bagged or containerized and/or will not fit into the receptacle, are not yard trimmings, are not prohibited items according to section 4-3-9 and do not require a special fee for pick-up according to section 4-3-8. 
Single-family dwelling means any building which is arranged, designed or used for living quarters for one (1) family on a permanent or long-term basis. 
Solid waste means any discarded putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except water-carried body waste and recovered materials and shall include garbage, rubbish, refuse, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture and appliances, metal, tin cans, glass, crockery, or dunnage; ashes; street refuse; dead animals; sewage sludges; animal manures; industrial waste, such as waste materials generated in industrial operations; residue from incineration; food processing waste; demolition waste; abandoned vehicles; dredging waste; construction waste; and any other waste material in a solid, semi-solid or liquid state not otherwise defined. 
Yard trimmings means waste resulting from normal yard maintenance, such as weeds, grass and hedge trimmings, leaves, brush, pine straw, tree limbs and similar items. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 2011-20, §§ I—III, 12-20-11; Ord. No. 2013-17, § I, 9-17-13) 
Sec. 4-3-3. - City responsible for sanitation services generally. 
(a)  All solid waste generated by or accumulated from single-family dwellings in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city through its employees, designated agents or contract representatives. The city shall also be the solid waste provider for all single-family dwellings on private streets and in gated communities built on lots that have not received final plat approval as of the effective date of this section. 
(b)  All solid waste generated or accumulated by multi-family dwellings, including condominiums and townhomes, in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city through its employees, designated agents or contract representatives, unless such service is not provided by the city as determined by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  All solid waste generated or accumulated by commercial establishments in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of in accordance with section 4-3-4. 
(d)  The city will collect garbage, refuse, recyclables and yard trimmings in accordance with a schedule as established from time to time by the city and kept on file in the public works department. 
(e)  This article shall not prohibit the producers of industrial solid waste or the owner of premises upon which industrial solid waste has accumulated from collecting, transporting and disposing of such waste, subject to pertinent laws and regulations, if such service is not provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 2011-20, § IV, 12-20-11; Ord. No. 2013-17, § I, 9-17-13) 
Sec. 4-3-4. - Commercial operations and haulers. 
(a)  Commercial establishments. 
(1)  All commercial establishments within the city shall arrange for proper solid waste collection, conveyance, and disposal from the city or an approved franchisee. 
(2)  All solid waste containers shall be maintained on private property except where permission is granted by the city council to utilize public alleys, streets or sidewalks. 
(3)  All commercial establishments shall maintain solid waste containers in a sanitary condition free from odor and shall prevent the overflow or scattering of solid waste on the premises, nearby properties or public streets and places. 
(4)  Provisions of this section shall not apply to persons who, as an incidental part of providing construction or demolition services, and using vehicles, dumpsters or roll-off containers which they own or lease, remove construction or demolition debris from the sites at which they are performing such services. This provision shall not be construed to relieve such persons of any requirements under federal or state law. 
(b)  Commercial haulers. 
(1)  No individual, partnership, corporation, commercial hauler or other entity may collect and dispose of solid waste for a fee within the city without obtaining a franchise from the governing authority of the city. 
(2)  Commercial haulers shall comply with all city ordinances, the provisions set forth in this chapter, and the franchise agreement with the city. Any violations by the franchisee of any city ordinance, the provisions of this chapter or any provision of the franchise agreement may result in suspension or revocation of the franchise agreement. 
(3)  Franchises granted by the city are non-transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2011-20, § V, 12-20-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-20, § V, adopted Dec. 20, 2011, amended § 4-3-4 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 4-3-4 pertained to commercial and industrial operations and derived from Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, adopted Sept. 21, 2010. 
Sec. 4-3-5. - Collection days designated. 
Garbage shall be collected from customers in the city twice weekly, except for city holidays, or when conditions exist where collection is deemed hazardous by the public works director. Refuse, recyclables and yard trimmings shall be collected from customers in the city once weekly, except for city holidays, or when conditions exist where collection is deemed hazardous by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 4-3-6. - Preparation and storage of garbage and recyclables for collection. 
(a)  Preparation. 
(1)  All garbage shall be placed in plastic bags. Plastic bags shall be securely tied at the top. Garbage placed in the plastic bag must not exceed the capacity of the bag causing it to tear open. Garbage placed in receptacles unbagged will not be collected. Bags that are wet, torn, or unsecured will not be collected 
(2)  All garbage must be stored in garbage receptacles with a properly fitted lid that is to remain closed except for filling, emptying or cleaning. Excessive garbage in the receptacle that prevents the lid from closing, garbage that is piled on top of the receptacle, or garbage that is placed outside of the receptacle will not be collected. 
(3)  The amount of garbage to be collected shall not exceed ninety-six (96) gallons per collection. Garbage exceeding a quantity of ninety-six (96) gallons will not be collected, even if it is bagged and placed in a receptacle. Customers may choose to pay an additional monthly fee for collection of up to an extra ninety-six (96) gallons according to the fee schedule in title 10 of this Code. 
(4)  Recyclables shall be placed in a receptacle, as provided by the city. 
(5)  Receptacles shall be ready for pick-up no later than 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day. 
(b)  Receptacles. 
(1)  Each occupied dwelling unit or household shall provide at least one (1), but not more than three (3), garbage receptacles to store garbage prior to collection by the public works department. Receptacles shall not exceed a total combined capacity of ninety-six (96) gallons. 
(2)  Receptacles shall be constructed of rust-proof, moisture-proof material and shall be equipped with a properly fitted cover and handles or grips to allow for safe and convenient handling. 
(3)  Receptacles shall be maintained in a working and sanitary condition, free from odor and shall remain completely covered at all times except for filling, emptying and cleaning. Receptacles shall be filled in such manner as to allow emptying by one (1) person and shall be maintained so as to prevent the overflow or scattering of garbage, refuse or recyclables. 
(4)  Each occupied dwelling unit or household will be provided one (1) recycling receptacle by the city. The receptacle will be and shall remain the property of the city. Recycling receptacles are for recyclable materials only and are not to be used to transport or store garbage, refuse, yard trimmings or any other items. 
(c)  Placement of receptacles. 
(1)  Garbage receptacles shall be placed either curbside or within ten (10) feet of the house and visible from the driveway. Recycling receptacles shall be placed curbside for collection. All receptacles shall be placed on or in front of the property from which they originated for collection. 
(2)  Receptacles shall be accessible without the need for walking or carrying a receptacle over, under or around any yard or property obstacle. No garbage shall be collected where garbage receptacles cannot be reached by sanitation personnel without unlocking or opening a door, gate or other similar obstacle; encountering hazardous conditions (i.e., unrestrained animals); or otherwise being denied reasonable access by parked vehicles, yard tools and equipment, or other similar objects. 
(3)  Receptacles shall not be located within enclosed structures, which includes, but is not limited to, the dwelling unit, garage, carport, or shed. 
(4)  Receptacles shall not be located within a fenced area, unless the fence is specifically designed for and solely contains the receptacles and is in compliance with subsection (1) above. 
(5)  Garbage contained in sunken or underground receptacles will not be collected by the city. 
(6)  Receptacles that are placed curbside shall be removed from the curb the same day as the contents are collected. 
(7)  For multi-family dwelling units that are collected by the city, if receptacles are not placed curbside or directly in front of the unit, receptacles must be located within a central location for collection. The central location must be approved by the public works director or his designee. 
(8)  The contents of receptacles not meeting these placement standards will not be collected. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 4-3-7. - Preparation and storage of refuse for collection. 
(a)  All persons utilizing city pickup of refuse or yard trimmings shall place such refuse or yard trimmings on their premises located so as to be easily accessible to street pickup. Refuse and yard trimmings shall not be placed over or next to fixed items such as fire hydrants, telephone or electrical boxes, mailboxes or anything that could be damaged by equipment or personnel picking up said items. Refuse shall be placed immediately behind the sidewalk. If there is no sidewalk, items and materials shall be placed immediately behind the curb or off the pavement and shall not be located as to impede or obstruct either pedestrian or vehicular traffic or the flow of surface water or block drains. 
(b)  The City of Gainesville will not be responsible for repairing, replacing or reimbursing for items that are removed or damaged by the city as a result of being placed curbside in such a manner that it appears that the items are intended for removal by the city or the items are not visible as a result of being mixed with other items placed curbside. 
(c)  No customer shall place for collection limbs or cuttings greater than five (5) feet in length or fifty (50) pounds in weight. Yard trimmings shall be kept separate from other debris and not exceed the load equivalent of one (1) cubic yard per week and not exceed four (4) cubic yards per dwelling per month. Limbs and cuttings in excess of this amount shall be subject to the provisions of section 4-3-8. 
(d)  Refuse shall not exceed the load equivalent of one (1) cubic yard per week and not exceed four (4) cubic yards per dwelling per month. Refuse in excess of this amount shall be subject to the provisions of section 4-3-8. 
(e)  Grass trimmings, small shrubbery trimmings, pine needles, etc., shall be bagged. 
(f)  Leaves shall be placed in plastic bags from the months of February through September for collection at curbside. During the months of October through January, leaves shall be placed in neat piles immediately behind the curb on curbed streets and immediately adjacent to the roadway on uncurbed streets. In no event shall they be placed in the gutters or drainage ditches. Leaf piles shall not contain any other garbage, trash, recyclable materials or debris such as rocks, bricks or concrete. 
(g)  All needles, broken glass or similarly sharp or pointed objects must be disposed of in containers that are rigid, puncture-resistant and leakproof, and which are taped closed or tightly lidded to completely contain the contents therein and prevent any spillage or puncture. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 2011-20, § VI, 12-20-11) 
Sec. 4-3-8. - Items and materials requiring additional fees for collection. 
(a)  Special pickups of appliances, furniture, white goods, electronics, or other similar items that require the use of a dump truck, flatbed truck or boom arm loader, or have special disposal requirements will be picked up on a special fee basis only. A special service fee will be assessed to the customer according to the fee schedule established and kept on file in the public works department. Customers shall make arrangements with the public works department for pickup. Special pickup items shall not be placed on the curb prior to 12:00 p.m. the day before the pickup date. Customers shall not place these items curbside without making prior arrangements for pickup. 
(b)  Special pickups or garbage in excess of ninety-six (96) gallons shall result in an excessive disposal fee that will be assessed to the customer according to the fee schedule established and kept on file in the public works department. This fee shall not apply to customers that pay the monthly fee for an additional collection of ninety-six (96) gallons, provided that the garbage collected does not exceed ninety-six (96) gallons. 
(c)  Refuse or yard trimmings placed curbside that exceed the allowed capacity established in section 4-3-7 shall be subject to a special service fee assessed to the customer according to the fee schedule established and kept on file in the public works department. Customers shall make arrangements with the public works department for special pickup of refuse or yard trimmings exceeding the allowed capacity. 
(d)  Customers that fail to make arrangements for special pickup of items placed curbside within five (5) working days of placing the items shall be deemed to have abandoned the items. Items may be collected by the city and a special service fee, according to the fee schedule established and kept on file in the public works department, plus any additional costs incurred by the city, shall be assessed to the customer on the customer's water bill. The customer shall pay the fee in accordance with the water bill payment policies established by the city. 
(e)  Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an emergency, an immediate and/or grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may immediately be abated or otherwise remedied summarily. The special service fee, and any additional costs incurred by the city, shall be assessed to the customer on the customer's water bill. The customer shall pay the fee in accordance with the water bill payment policies established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 2011-20, § VII, 12-20-11) 
Sec. 4-3-9. - Items and materials prohibited. 
(a)  The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building materials, dirt, broken concrete, bricks, rock or debris resulting from repairs, major cleanups (this includes, but is not limited to, cleaning out of basements, attics, storage areas, or major cleanups from move-ins or move-outs), remodeling, or construction waste (plumbing fixtures, including, but not limited to, sinks, bath tubs, shower stalls, toilets, cabinets, doors, windows, roofing debris, lumber, siding, landscape timbers, crossties, carpet and/or floor coverings). Such material must be disposed of by the contractor, tenant, or owner of the property, unless it is on a special fee basis by agreement with the public works director or his designee. 
(b)  The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes, or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers, grading contractors or building contractors, except on a special fee basis by agreement with the public works director or his designee. 
(c)  For rental properties, garbage, refuse, yard trimmings or other solid waste originating from the property during the cleanup between tenants shall be the responsibility of the landlord and/or the property owner. The following shall apply to garbage, refuse, yard trimmings or other solid waste originating from the property of a landlord cleaning up between tenants: 
(1)  Following an eviction, any property, garbage, refuse, belongings, or other items shall be placed on some portion of the landlord's property, immediately behind the sidewalk or if there is no sidewalk, immediately behind the curb or off the pavement and shall not be located as to impede or obstruct or divert either pedestrian or vehicular traffic or the flow of surface water or block drains. 
(2)  After execution of a writ of possession, such property shall be regarded as abandoned. Any property, garbage, refuse, belongings, or other items placed curbside following an eviction shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the physical eviction by the property owner. If the property is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours, the city may commence removal at the expense of the property owner and the property owner shall be deemed in violation of this Code. 
(d)  The following items, products, or materials will not be collected and it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to place such items, products, or materials curbside or in any receptacle, or container for collection: rubber tires, wheels, automotive parts, acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids, dangerous or corrosive material of any kind, hazardous or bio-medical waste or any waste requiring special disposal procedures by the Rules of Solid Waste Management of the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources ch. 391-3-4. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 4-3-10. - Solid waste plan required for building permit. 
The city shall not issue a building permit for a multi-family dwelling, condominium or commercial establishment until the public works director or his designee gives his approval to proposed plans for the storage and disposal of solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 2011-20, § VIII, 12-20-11) 
Sec. 4-3-11. - Billing procedure. 
The monthly solid waste collection fee for each of the premises to which the city supplies water service shall be billed and collected in the same manner and at the same time as water service is billed and collected. Multi-family dwellings shall be billed for a total number of units, whether units are occupied or unoccupied, unless the unit is not receiving water service. In the event that a structure does not receive a water bill, then monthly solid waste collection fee shall be billed and collected separately in the same manner, as if the premises received a water bill. Such charges, and additional special service fees, are in the amounts fixed in title 10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 2011-20, § IX, 12-20-11) 
Sec. 4-3-12. - Unauthorized use of dumpsters and prohibiting scavenging. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or otherwise leave solid waste in dumpsters that are leased and paid for private use, except by permission of the owner or lessee. This prohibition includes dumpsters on government property. Only dumpsters marked "For Public Use" shall be used by the public and it shall be unlawful to import household trash to these dumpsters. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge or remove items from dumpsters, garbage receptacles or recycling receptacles. 
(c)  The owner of each dumpster shall display one (1) sign in easy to read print, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Notice that the unauthorized and unlawful use of the dumpster is a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Gainesville. 
(2)  Warning that violators will be prosecuted. 
(d)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall on conviction thereof be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-20, § X, 12-20-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-20, § X, adopted Dec. 20, 2011, amended § 4-3-12 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 4-3-12 pertained to nonpayment of fees deemed violation requiring termination of collection and water service and derived from Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, adopted Sept. 21, 2010. 
Sec. 4-3-13. - Litter control. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public, private property or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk adjacent to their business, all off-street parking areas, all loading and unloading areas, and all landscaped areas associated with their business premises free of litter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person utilizing any vehicle, moving or parked, to cause any paper, wastes, cartons, rubbish, feathers, gravel, earth, trimmings, limbs or garbage of any kind to be littered, thrown, deposited or scattered upon any street, sidewalk or public place or any private property. Precautions, as are necessary, to contain transported materials, including covering of open trucks, shall be utilized to prevent such littering and scattering. 
(d)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, aircraft, or other conveyance in violation of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this section. 
(e)  Whenever any litter is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this section is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of the person or entity thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person or entity, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person or entity has violated this section. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump waste unless authorized to do so by law or by a duly issued permit: 
(1)  In or on any public highway, roads, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; 
(2)  In or on any waters within the city; or 
(3)  In or on any private property, unless prior consent of the owner has been given and unless such dumping will not adversely affect the public health and is not in violation of any state or local law, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 2011-20, § XI, 12-20-11) 
Sec. 4-3-14. - Disposal of dead animals. 
The disposal of dead animals shall be in compliance with section 4-1-9. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 4-3-15. - Disposal of scrap tires. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all scrap tires on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to cause or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in the city, including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof or any waters in the city. Scrap tires shall not be disposed of on any public or private property in the city unless such scrap tires originate in the city and: 
(1)  The property is designated by the city and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for the collection or disposal of scrap tires and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)  The scrap tires are placed into a container installed specifically for such property; and 
(3)  The property has a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification numbers, approvals and/or permits issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) when required. 
(c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in Chapter 391-3-4 et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., and Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-3-4 et seq., applicable to scrap tires, except where requirements of this chapter are more stringent. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a residential zone to accumulate any amount of scrap tires on or around property, which they own or occupy. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 4-3-16. - Nonpayment of fees deemed violation requiring termination of collection and water service. 
Any customer failing or refusing to pay the monthly solid waste collection fee provided for in this chapter, after having been duly billed for same by the city, shall have all solid waste collection services and water service provided by the city to the premises for which the monthly charges are past due shall be terminated and discontinued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-20, § XII, 12-20-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-20, § XII, adopted Dec. 20, 2011, amended § 4-3-16 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 4-3-16 pertained to unauthorized use of dumpsters and prohibiting scavenging and derived from Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, adopted Sept. 21, 2010. 
Sec. 4-3-17. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter shall on conviction thereof be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(b)  Any person charged with a violation of any section or provision of this chapter shall be given a written notice and instructions from the office of the city public works director or his designee as to the required remedy for such violation. Failure to comply with the requirements of such written notice and instructions of the city public works director or his designee shall result in the termination of services by the public works director or his designee and shall, upon conviction in the municipal court be punished as provided in section 1-1-7. 
(c)  Reinstatement of city solid waste collection shall only be provided after the person has fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  In addition to the fine set out in section 1-1-7 of this Code, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city and: 
(1)  At the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(2)  At the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(3)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 4-3-18. - Enforcement. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-33, § I, 9-21-10) 
CHAPTER 4-4. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Business license fees, Tit. 10; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-4; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 5-1; subdivisions, Ch. 8-2; closing of streets during civil emergency, § 3-1-25; peddling on streets, § 3-5-2; offenses against public health generally, § 3-5-12; depositing solid waste in street, § 4-3-10; placing of refuse for pickup, § 4-3-11; sewer connections in streets, § 5-1-100; water line extensions, § 5-2-31 et seq.; placing banner, etc., across streets, § 6-9-4; parades, § 6-9-6; design standards for subdivisions, § 8-2-66 et seq.; street access under zoning ordinance, § 9-1-11. 
State Constitution reference— Power of General Assembly to provide by law for the control and regulation of outdoor advertising devices adjacent to certain highways, Art. 3, § 6, para. 2. 
State Law reference— Obstructing highways, streets, sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; eminent domain, O.C.G.A. Title 22; highways, bridges and ferries, O.C.G.A. Title 32; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; obstructing, encroaching on or injuring public roads, leasing of property by department of transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1; legislative authority required for municipal grant of right to obstruct street, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipal streets, alleys and sidewalks generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; state grants for street-lighting facilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-4-1. - Street specifications. 
The city shall not accept any new street within its corporate limits unless and until the requirements of streets and drainage of Chapter 8-2 and its appendices are met. 
(Code 1958, § 19-1) 
Sec. 4-4-2. - Blocking, flooding or otherwise impairing use of streets, permission required. 
(a)  No person shall block, flood or otherwise interfere with or impair the use of any public street, road or thoroughfare in the city without first having secured permission from the city council. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with or impair the use of any public street, road or thoroughfare in the city by allowing dirt, silt, sediment or debris to be tracked or deposited into such street from a parcel within the city. 
(c)  Any person giving or transmitting any order or instruction to block, flood or otherwise impair the use of any public street, road or thoroughfare in the city without first having secured permission of the city council shall be guilty of the violation of this section. 
(d)  Each day that any such street, road or thoroughfare is blocked, flooded or the use thereof impaired, shall be a separate and distinct offense and shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7. 
(Code 1958, § 19-2; Ord. No. 2008-18, § I, 6-17-08) 
State Law reference— Legislative authority required for municipal grant of right to obstruct street, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10. 
Sec. 4-4-3. - Cutting or digging into—Regulated. 
No person shall dig into, cut into or otherwise cause any impairment of any public road, street, alley or sidewalk in the city without a permit as specified under section 4-4-5 from the city public works director. 
(Code 1958, § 19-3) 
Sec. 4-4-4. - Same—Application to city. 
Any person desiring that public roads, streets, alleys or sidewalks in the city be dug into, cut into or otherwise altered or impaired, shall make application to the city public works director as specified under section 4-4-5. 
(Code 1958, § 19-4) 
State Law reference— Excavating or blasting near underground gas pipes and utility facilities, OCGA § 25-9-1 et seq.; excavations up to boundary line, right of lateral support of soil, OCGA § 44-9-3. 
Sec. 4-4-5. - Standards for utility cut permitting. 
The public works director shall review applications for conformance to the Utility Accommodations Policy and Standards of the Georgia Department of Transportation, as well as city standards and policies before issuing a permit. A permit does not grant a utility an exclusive right to use of the right-of-way. If the utility installation interferes with the safe use of the right-of-way or road construction improvement, then the utility shall remove, relocate or repair its facility to remove such interference, upon notification by the public works director. 
Sec. 4-4-6. - Removal of gravel, earth or rock, permission required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or scrape up or carry away gravel, dirt, earth, rocks or sand from any street, lane, sidewalk, square or park of the city, or make any changes in the sidewalks or streets, without the permission of the city council. 
(Code 1958, § 19-7) 
Sec. 4-4-7. - Intrusions, prohibited; removal. 
No person shall so construct or have constructed, or keep, have or maintain any fence, gate, doors, house, steps or other structure so as to intrude on any street or sidewalk of this city. The public works director may remove such intrusion at the expense of the owner of the property from which the same extends, and the cost of the same collected from the owner. 
(Code 1958, § 19-8) 
Sec. 4-4-8. - Obstructions prohibited. 
No person shall obstruct the public squares, streets, sidewalks or crossings of the city. 
(Code 1958, § 19-10) 
State Law reference— Legislative authority required for municipal grant of right to obstruct street, OCGA § 36-30-10. 
Sec. 4-4-9. - Assemblages obstructing passage. 
It shall be unlawful for persons to assemble in a crowd so as to in any manner obstruct the free passage of the streets or sidewalks in the city. Each person forming a part of such assembly, after notice by any officer or police officer of the city to disperse, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 19-16) 
Sec. 4-4-10. - Adjacent excavations. 
All persons owning property which is immediately adjacent to any street or sidewalk, and which is below the level of such street or sidewalk, so as to make it dangerous for passersby, and all persons having unenclosed lots, open wells, cellars or other excavations shall place secure guards along or around such dangerous places. 
(Code 1958, § 19-17) 
Sec. 4-4-11. - Barbed wire fences. 
No person shall erect or maintain within the corporate limits, on or adjoining a street, any fence composed partly or wholly of barbed wire, except as necessary for security purposes, and then only after the prior written consent and approval of the chief building inspector has been given. 
(Code 1958, § 19-18) 
Sec. 4-4-12. - Cellar doors—Causing obstruction prohibited. 
No cellar door shall be so constructed or maintained which extends more than four (4) feet into the sidewalk of any street in this city, and any cellar door occupying or obstructing more than four (4) feet shall be closed by order of the chief building inspector. 
(Code 1958, § 19-19) 
Sec. 4-4-13. - Same—Manner of keeping. 
Cellar doors shall be kept in perfect order. The chief building inspector shall notify the owner or occupant of any building with cellar door in bad condition to repair the same within five (5) days. If not repaired in that time, the chief building inspector shall cause the necessary repairs to be made at the expense of the owner or occupant. All cellar doors shall be kept closed at night and during the day, except when in actual use, so as not to obstruct the free passage over the whole width of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1958, § 19-20) 
Sec. 4-4-14. - Trees or vegetation; destruction prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to injure or destroy any trees or vegetation on the streets, sidewalks, public squares, parks, cemeteries or other property of the city, except as authorized by the city public works director. 
(Code 1958, § 19-22) 
Cross reference— Recreation and parks, Ch. 1-7; cemeteries, Ch. 4-2. 
Sec. 4-4-15. - Display or sale of merchandise. 
No person shall use any portion of the sidewalks of the city for the purpose of displaying or selling goods or merchandise of any description, except upon compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  For the purpose of encouraging and promoting trade and industry within the corporate limits of the city, the city marshal may issue a permit to a licensed business in this city to use for promotional purposes the sidewalk immediately adjacent to or in front of the building occupied by the licensed business. Display shall occupy only that part of the sidewalk in front of the licensed business and shall not extend parallel in either direction beyond the outside walls of the building in which the business is located. 
(2)  A clear and unobstructed path of the sidewalk of at least forty-eight (48) inches wide shall be maintained at all times. 
(3)  Such permit shall be limited to a period of three (3) days for occupancy of the sidewalk. 
(4)  Applicant shall submit detailed plans of the promotion for the approval of the city marshal. 
(5)  Only twelve (12) such permits each calendar year shall be issued to any one (1) applicant. 
(6)  Businesses located within the central business district shall be exempt from obtaining a sidewalk permit during scheduled and or city sanctioned special events. The insurance requirements as specified in paragraph (7) shall also apply during said city sanctioned events and it shall be the responsibility of the business owner to maintain and show proof of said insurance upon the request of the city marshal or his designee. 
(7)  The applicant shall procure and shall maintain comprehensive general liability and broad form property damage insurance as shall protect [the] city from claims for damages for bodily injury, including accidental death, as well as from claims for property damages which may arise from obstruction or use by the applicant, whether such operations are by the applicant or by any subcontractor or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by either of them. The amount of insurance shall not be less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(8)  Applicants for permits shall make application for the permit at least seven (7) days prior to the effective date of the permit. 
(9)  Displays shall only be allowed on the sidewalk during the hours that the licensed business is open and is actually conducting business. 
(10)  Streets may not be used for the purpose of displaying or selling goods or merchandise of any description except during scheduled and or city-sanctioned special events in which the streets have been officially closed during said event. 
(Code 1958, § 19-23; Ord. No. 2010-32, § I, 9-21-10) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, Tit. 6; zoning, Tit. 9; building regulations, Ch. 7-1. 
Secs. 4-4-16—4-4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 4-4-26. - Duty of tenant or owner to clean. 
The tenant of each occupied lot and the owner of each unoccupied lot shall, at his own expense, keep the sidewalks in front of the same clean and free from trash or litter at all times. 
(Code 1958, § 19-11) 
Sec. 4-4-27. - Safe condition and trimming shade trees duties of owner; paving within fire limits; condemnation. 
(a)  The owner of each lot in the city shall keep the sidewalk along the same in good and safe condition for the use of the public at his own expense, and shall maintain them at such width and character as may be provided by the city council, and shall keep all shade trees along the same so trimmed as not to annoy the passersby. The sidewalks in front of all property within the fire limits shall be paved and kept paved and in good repair with tiling, cement or flagstones, or other material by permission of the city manager, in a smooth, even condition, by the owners thereof, at their own expense, and when any tiling or curbstone is being laid by a contractor or other person, the same shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the public works director. If, in the opinion of the public works director, the work, or the material used, should be condemned, he shall so notify the contractor or other person. 
(b)  The contractor or other person shall have the right to appeal to the city council in writing, within five (5) days, after notice from the public works director and shall be heard, and the decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Code 1958, § 19-12) 
Cross reference— Fire limits, § 7-1-15. 
Sec. 4-4-28. - Repair done by city at owner's expense. 
(a)  Whenever any sidewalk is not in the condition in which it is required to be kept by this article, and when prompt action is necessary for the safety of the public, the city manager shall issue a notice to the owner of the property adjacent to the same, informing him of the defects therein, and direct him as to what work is required to be done. Such notice shall be served upon the owner or his agent by the city marshal or deputy; but if the owner is not within the city and has no agent present, the notice shall be posted on the property. 
(b)  If work is not commenced within five (5) days after such service or posting, or if commenced is not completed in a reasonable time, such work shall be done at the expense of the owner by the city manager. 
(Code 1958, § 19-13) 
Sec. 4-4-29. - Owner ordered to put down sidewalk, failure to comply; work done by city. 
(a)  The city council may, in its discretion, or when circumstances require it, order the owner of real estate in the city abutting the sidewalks of the city, and at the expense of such owner, to grade, pave, macadamize, put down curbing and cross drains or otherwise improve such sidewalk. 
(b)  Whenever the city council shall order or notify any of the abutting real estate owners to grade, pave, macadamize put down cross-drain or otherwise improve the sidewalks, as in their discretion may seem best. If such work is not commenced within fifteen (15) days and carried to completion, then the city council shall proceed to have the work done at the expense of the owner or owners. 
(Code 1958, § 19-14) 
Sec. 4-4-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-06, § II, adopted Mar. 3, 2010, repealed § 4-4-30 in its entirety. The former § 4-4-30 pertained to improper use of and derived from the Code of 1958, § 19-15. 
Sec. 4-4-31. - Awnings, signs and other structures over sidewalks. 
(a)  No awnings, signs and other structures shall be erected over the sidewalks of the city, unless the awning is constructed with iron frames and metal or cloth cover, and with the supports at the outer edge of the sidewalk to be not lower than eight (8) feet, and to be built in a safe and substantial manner, and no sign or other obstruction shall be allowed to hang across any sidewalk in the city. 
(b)  Any person who shall erect or have erected any other description of awning or sign, and any person who shall have or allow to remain in front of property owned or occupied by him, any awning or sign of any other description, after being notified by the chief building inspector to remove the same, shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code, and the same shall be removed by the order of the chief building inspector, at the expense of the owner of the same or the person erecting the same, and the cost of the same collected as provided by law. 
(Code 1958, § 19-21) 
Secs. 4-4-32—4-4-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - CURBS; SIDEWALKS; DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 4-4-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Inner curbing means only that portion of the curbing required herein along driveways and sidewalks and not constituting the curbing which borders and marks the margin of the street designated and constructed for vehicular traffic. 
Street curb means the portion of concrete curbing and structure which borders and marks the margin of the street designated and constructed for vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1958, § 19-60) 
Sec. 4-4-47. - Improvements and permit required. 
(a)  Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct, alter, remove and/or replace any curb, curb and gutter, sidewalk or driveway on public property within the city without first having obtained a permit from the public works director. All such construction, reconstruction, alteration, removal or replacement shall be under supervision of the public works director and in accordance with the specifications hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Plan; application. Before a permit required by subsection (a) above shall be issued, the abutting property owner or his duly authorized agent shall submit an application therefor in writing with a plan made a part of such application showing the location, design and layout of the proposed improvement. 
(c)  Issuance of permit. When such written application and plan has been duly submitted and the fee is paid, the public works director shall issue a permit for such improvements, provided the plan showing the location, design, layout and specification shall conform with the basic standards, specifications, details and designs hereinafter made and provided; and, provided further, that such application has been approved by the public works director. 
(d)  Fee. A fee as provided in Title 10 shall be charged by the public works director at the time any application for a permit as herein required is made for residential driveways or sidewalks or for commercial driveways or sidewalks, and such sum shall be paid into the general fund of the city. However, where the general contractor constructs and pours his own driveways or sidewalks provided for herein, there shall be no necessity for a separate permit fee for such purposes; provided further, however, the actual pouring for such driveways or sidewalks shall be done at a time when the public works director is making his regular inspection of the improvements being erected thereon. 
(Code 1958, § 19-60) 
Sec. 4-4-48. - Layout and design. 
The design, layout and plans for the construction, reconstruction, alteration and/or replacement of all sidewalks, curbs, driveways, both private and commercial, shall conform and be constructed according to the design and layout, as described herein and as approved by the city engineer. 
(1)  Driveway, nonresidential. Driveways for other than residential or dwelling house use shall be constructed of three thousand (3,000) pounds-per-square-inch portland cement concrete at least six (6) inches in thickness. 
(2)  Residential driveway, no sidewalk. On residential driveways where no sidewalk exists, a six-inch thick concrete apron shall be constructed from the curb line three (3) feet in depth. Where sidewalks exist a six-inch thick concrete apron shall be constructed to a point three (3) feet beyond the back edge of the sidewalk. Where no curb and/or gutter exists no concrete apron will be required. 
(3)  Driveways, sidewalks. Where a driveway of any kind of material is constructed across the sidewalk space, it shall conform to the sidewalk grade as established by the city engineer. 
(4)  Replacing sidewalks. Where a driveway of any kind of material is constructed across an existing sidewalk, said sidewalk shall be removed and replaced with portland cement concrete for the full width of the driveway and for a distance of at least twelve (12) inches on both sides of such walk. This portion shall be not less than six (6) inches in thickness. 
(5)  Driveway, concrete street. Where paving in the public street is of concrete, and a concrete driveway is constructed, a one-inch bituminous premolded expansion joint shall be placed approximately three (3) feet from the edge of the concrete paving and normal to the center line of the driveway. 
(6)  Driveway, nonresidential; width. The width of the driveways for other than a residential or dwelling house shall not exceed fifty (50) feet at the throat. Where two (2) or more adjoining driveways are provided for the same property, a safety island of not less than ten (10) feet at the outer or street side of the sidewalk shall be provided. Not more than two (2) such driveways shall be allowed to any one (1) owner for any one (1) piece of property on any one (1) street for each one hundred (100) feet of continuous frontage thereof. 
(7)  Residential driveway; width. The width of the driveways for a residential or dwelling house shall be not less than nine (9) feet or more than twenty (20) feet at the throat, except those residences or dwelling houses which are located on a major thoroughfare in which case the width of the driveway shall not be less than nine (9) feet or more than fourteen (14) feet at the throat. 
(8)  Width of driveway at curb line. The width of the driveway opening at the curb line shall not exceed the width of the driveway at the throat plus twenty (20) feet, nor be less than the width of the driveway at the inner or property edge of the sidewalk plus ten (10) feet. In no instance should the radius be less than three (3) feet at curb corners, and this only when the driveway is flared, or more than ten (10) feet, unless otherwise authorized by the public works director. 
(9)  Driveways, grading. All driveways shall be so graded between the gutter and the sidewalk that it will not be necessary to materially change the established grade of either and will not elevate or depress any portion of either. No part of the driveway shall extend beyond the curb line in such a manner as to change the grade of the gutter or obstruct the free flow of water in the gutter. Where elevations or depressions are necessary in the parkway strip between the curb and walk, the parkway shall be graded on both sides of the driveway to a distance sufficient to create a gradual ascent or descent. The driveway shall be constructed in such a manner as to prevent water from the gutter entering the driveway. 
(10)  Curb and gutter. Combined curb and gutter and separate curbing shall be entirely removed for the full width of the driveway opening at the curb line. If an existing joint in the curb is within five (5) feet of the end of the driveway opening, remove the existing curbing, etc., to the joint, otherwise cut the combined curb and gutter or separate curbing, making a neat edge at right angles to the edge of the pavement and vertical. Integral curbing, which is that type placed with the pavement and molding as an integral part of it, must be removed for the full depth from the top of curb to the bottom of the pavement. The edge must be cut as above described. No combined curb and gutter, straight curb or integral curb shall be removed within five (5) feet of a public crosswalk. 
(11)  Residential driveway; gutter elevation. On a residential drive the grade of the drive at the property line or twelve (12) feet from the curb line, whichever is greater, shall not exceed eight (8) degrees from the gutter elevation. For uphill driveway, the change in grade in any ten-foot section shall not exceed twelve (12) percent and for downhill driveways the change in grade shall not exceed eight (8) percent in any ten-foot section. 
(12)  Driveway across open ditch. When driveways cross open ditches in the parkways, culverts shall be installed. Such culverts shall be of such size and shall be constructed of such material as determined by the city engineer, depending on the conditions existing. In no instances shall the size of opening be less than that obtained by a twelve-inch diameter pipe. The length of culvert shall be determined by the following method: For ditch depth of two (2) feet or less the culvert shall extend not less than five (5) feet beyond both edges of the driveway where it crosses the ditch. For each additional foot depth of ditch add two (2) feet to the above figure, except that no culvert shall be less than twenty (20) feet long and except that where headwalls are constructed at the ends of the culvert the length shall be determined by the public works director. 
a.  Where existing catch basins or storm inlets are in the area of the proposed driveway the catch basins or inlets shall be relocated in accordance with instructions from the public works director at the property owner's expense. 
b.  All driveways constructed or reconstructed over, across or upon any public street or public parkway in the city shall be kept and maintained at all times in accordance with the provisions hereof by the persons so constructing, reconstructing or using the same as an adjunct or appurtenance to lands or properties immediately adjacent thereto. 
(Code 1958, § 19-61) 
Sec. 4-4-49. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Property in corner of intersecting streets. On property situated at the corner of intersecting streets, sidewalks shall extend to the street curb line of the intersecting street. Sidewalks may be required on both the side and front streets when the need thereof for pedestrian traffic is apparent. No driveway entrances shall be permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of the street right-of-way line except to facilitate access to residential and commercial units on minor street intersections where a driveway or curb cut will not substantially interfere with traffic. Total vehicular volume entering the intersection from all approaches must not exceed an average of forty (40) vehicles per hour for any eight (8) hours of an average day and a line of sight stopping distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet must be available on all approaches. 
(b)  Sidewalks adjacent to off-street parking. Where sidewalks are to be adjacent to an off-street parking area, a concrete inner curb must be built three (3) feet from property line to separate the parking area from the sidewalks. This inner curb must be at least six (6) inches in width and extend a minimum of six (6) inches above the driving surface and a minimum of six (6) inches below the driving surface. A permanent barrier or fence equivalent to this curb may be used in lieu of the concrete curb, after approval by the city engineer. 
(c)  Construction of step or off-set. No step or offset shall be constructed in any sidewalk outside property lines, except where certain conditions necessitate such step or offset and then only at the instance of written instruction from the city engineer. Where such step or offset is likely to occur, the contractor shall notify the city engineer before constructing same. 
(d)  Backing into street from parked position. No driveway or curb cuts shall be permitted which will permit or encourage the backing of vehicles in such a manner as to back directly into a street from a parked position; except to facilitate residential units on a minor street where parking stalls may be provided as an open curb cut; providing that there is a sidewalk provided in front of the stall, and this sidewalk runs parallel to the right-of-way for a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet on either side of the stalls except, where the sidewalk reaches an intersecting street or driveway. 
(Code 1958, § 19-62; Ord. No. 92-52, § 1, 12-1-92) 
CHAPTER 4-7. - STORMWATER AND ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— For additional provisions relating to stormwater management, the user's attention is directed to chapter 9-13-12 of the Unified Land Development Code, which is housed in a separate publication. 

Sec. 4-7-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Designate a stormwater management ordinance administrator which shall implement the provisions of these ordinances, and 
(2)  To assure the continued, efficient operation of the city stormwater system by specifically prohibiting illicit discharges and illegal connections and specifically: 
a.  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
b.  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
c.  Require owners of stormwater management systems to maintain the system such that said system functions as originally designed; 
d.  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
e.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § I, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 4-7-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, term and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this chapter into the city's separate storm sewer system, which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Approved stormwater discharge means a discharge of rainwater into the city's separate stormwater system approved in advance of connection by the public works department. 
City means the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Drainage means a general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping; commonly applied herein to surface water. 
Drainage system means the surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams, marshes, swales, and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the man-made element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, detention facilities, and the storm sewer system. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 4-7-3. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Municipal (city's) separate storm sewer system (MS4) means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Owner means the person in whom is vested the ownership, dominion, or title of property. This term shall also include a tenant, any agent of the owner, or tenant including a developer. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, dirt, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; excessive heat; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Public works department means the department of the city responsible for roads, drainage, traffic, airport, sanitation, the cemetery and engineering. 
Runoff means the portion of precipitation on the land which reaches the drainage system. Also known as stormwater runoff. 
Sediment means solid material, both inorganic and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity; the product of erosion. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation, as determined by the public works department. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management ordinance administrator means the public works department of the city. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a premise. 
Stream means a natural body of running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § I, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 4-7-3. - Prohibition of illicit discharges 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to throw, drain, run or otherwise discharge to any component of the city's separate storm sewer system or to cause, permit or suffer to be thrown, drained, run, or allow to seep or otherwise discharge into such system all matter of any nature excepting only such stormwater or surface water as authorized in this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the discharger to provide to the public works department with the appropriate certifications that discharges to the city separate storm sewer system meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The public works department may exempt the following discharges from the prohibition provision of subsection (a) unless such discharges are identified as possible pollution sources: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, and unpolluted ground water infiltration. 
(2)  Unpolluted pumped ground water. 
(3)  Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and street rinse water. 
(4)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting. 
(5)  Other unpolluted water. 
(6)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § I, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 4-7-4. - Prohibition of illegal connections. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, company, corporation, and/or entity to connect any pipe, open channel, any other conveyance system that discharges anything except approved stormwater discharges, based on the exemptions listed in subsection 4-7-3(b), to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Connections to the separate storm sewer system which are in violation of this article must be disconnected. The owner of the property where the connection originates shall be responsible for redirecting such connections to an approved location. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § I, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 4-7-5. - Owner to maintain stormwater management system. 
The owner of a stormwater management system is to maintain such system in functional and working order as to control the quality and quantity of water as originally designed and constructed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § I, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 4-7-6. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § I, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 4-7-7. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility is a violation of this chapter. 
(7)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § I, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 4-7-8. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city's separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile, e-mail, or in person no later than twenty-four (24) hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three (3) business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § I, 6-17-08) 
Sec. 4-7-9. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed as provided in subsection (c) by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city. The notice of appeal must be received in writing by the city clerk's office within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city's administrative hearing officer, as provided in chapter 1-8, shall take place within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within thirty (30) days of the decision of the administrative hearing officer upholding the decision of the city, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within thirty (30) days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken as provided in subsection (c), within thirty (30) days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within thirty (30) days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate, after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the municipal court of the city to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. 
The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § I, 6-17-08) 
CHAPTER 4-8. - STREET LIGHT ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 4-8-1. - Conformance with standards. 
(a)  Existing public streets—Above ground power: Street lights shall be installed on existing utility poles at a spacing no closer than two hundred (200) lineal feet with one hundred (100) watt minimum fixtures. 
(b)  Existing public streets—Underground power: Street lights shall be installed on fiberglass poles in conformance to all of the standards herein provided. 
(c)  Proposed public streets: The owner, developer or other person developing a subdivision providing street light services shall be required to conform to all of the standards provided in section 9-5-8 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2002-59, § I, 11-19-02) 
Sec. 4-8-2. - Districts other than single-family residential. 
Street lighting in districts other than single-family residential shall be permitted only with the approval from the city engineer subject to the safety, economic and other factors involved, and only upon final approval by the city council, and upon compliance with the standards. 
(Ord. No. 2002-59, § I, 11-19-02) 
Sec. 4-8-3. - Cost of service for creation. 
The governing authority of the city does hereby declare that the cost of service for creation of street light districts or street lighting hereafter created, shall be a "service" as authorized by the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2002-59, § I, 11-19-02) 
Sec. 4-8-4. - Responsibility for costs; application and administrative fees; retirement of existing contacts. 
The cost of installing street lights in the new street light district(s) hereinafter created shall be borne by the residents, lot owners and property owners receiving that service. The charge therefore shall be determined by the city council and be a pro rata share of installation costs charged to the city, plus an annual fee as determined by the city council to cover administrative costs. 
(Ord. No. 2002-59, § I, 11-19-02) 
Sec. 4-8-5. - Tax lot or parcel defined; costs for nonresidential lots. 
Tax lot or parcel is hereby defined as any single tract of land which falls within any of the zoning classifications, as defined by the zoning and planning ordinance of the city, and as shown on the city land lot maps; provided, however, that in areas zoned for purposes other than single-family residential, different criteria may be adopted by the city council for the payment of installation costs. 
(Ord. No. 2002-59, § I, 11-19-02) 
Sec. 4-8-6. - Payment date; delinquencies. 
The due date for the payment of street lighting assessment charges as herein provided shall be the same date of each year as tax bills are due to the city tax commissioner. Failure to pay shall subject the responsible party to the same liens and penalties provided for failure to pay other real estate taxes and will result in the delinquency of the entire account and not be deemed paid until all real estate taxes are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2002-59, § I, 11-19-02) 
Sec. 4-8-7. - Billing, accounting, collecting and receiving monies. 
The billing, accounting, collecting, and receiving of the moneys herein provided is hereby declared to be the responsibility of the finance department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-59, § I, 11-19-02) 
Sec. 4-8-8. - Petition for creation of a special taxing district for street light installation in subdivisions served by underground power. 
(a)  Any lot owner in the city may present a request for creation of a special taxing district for street lights to the city engineer. Upon receipt of the request, the city engineer shall determine the appropriate boundaries for a special taxing district for street lights that will serve the lot owner presenting the request and neighboring lot owners. The city engineer shall then prepare a plat showing this proposed special taxing district for street lights. The requesting lot owner shall then circulate a petition for the creation of the proposed special taxing district for street lights among the lot owners in the proposed district. If fifty-one (51) percent of the lot owners in the proposed district sign the petition in affirmation for the creation of a special taxing district for installing new street lights, the petition shall be presented to the city council. The city council shall conduct two (2) public hearings for the purpose of determining whether or not to create the proposed special taxing district for street lights. Safety and economic factors shall be the prime consideration in making such determination. The public hearings shall be advertised one (1) time in the official organ of Hall County, Georgia, giving notice of the hearings, at least fifteen (15) days before the public hearings. The city clerk shall verify the signatures on the petition prior to advertising the public hearings. 
(b)  Special conditions: The council may create special street light districts without a petition from the majority of land owners in areas where special conditions as to safety, security, land topography, economic and other factors may be involved. These special taxing districts provide for special street lighting under such terms and conditions as may be determined by the city council, any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding; provided, however, that in such instances, two (2) public hearings shall be held by the city council after advertisement in the official organ of the city one (1) time at least fifteen (15) days before conducting such public hearings. 
(Ord. No. 2002-59, § I, 11-19-02) 
Sec. 4-8-9. - Right of appeal. 
Any person or agency dissatisfied with any decision or action of the city engineer shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city council within ten (10) days from the date of such decision or action. 
(Ord. No. 2002-59, § I, 11-19-02) 
Title 5 - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1; fiscal affairs, Tit. 2; public works and health, Tit. 4; licenses, permits and business regulations, Tit. 6; planning, Tit. 8; schedule of fees, Tit. 10; tampering with utility property, § 3-5-16. 
State Law reference— State grants for public purposes, OCGA § 36-40-20 et seq. 

CHAPTER 5-1. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-63, § I, adopted Dec. 1, 1998, repealed Chapter 5-1 and replaced it in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Chapter 5-1 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for more information. 
Cross reference— Pollution and contamination, Ch. 3-6; solid waste, Ch. 4-3; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 4-4; water, Ch. 5-2. 
State Law reference— Acquisition and construction of water and sewage systems, OCGA § 36-34-5; state grants for sewerage services, OCGA § 36-40-20 et seq.; industrial waste treatment, OCGA § 36-60-2; public utilities, OCGA Title 46. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1-1. - Purpose and policy. 
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater collection and publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the City of Gainesville and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et.seq.) (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the operation of the POTW; 
(3)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; 
(4)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW; 
(5)  To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations; 
(6)  To enable the city to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject; and 
(7)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW. 
This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. The chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires industrial user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-2. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the public utilities director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the public utilities director may be delegated by the public utilities director to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Absolve means to excuse; to free from an obligation or the consequences of guilt or liability. 
Accidental discharge or spillage means a release of wastewater, occurring or arising by chance or unexpectedly, to the sewerage system or to a natural or man-made outlet. 
Acidity means the quantitative capacity of aqueous solutions to react with hydroxyl ions, as measured by titration with a standard solution of a base to a specified end point. 
Administrative action (a fine or order) means an enforcement action authorized by the control authority's legal authority which is taken without the involvement of a court. 
Administrative fine means a punitive monetary charge unrelated to actual treatment costs which is assessed by the control authority rather than a court. 
Administrative order means a document which orders the violator to perform a specific act or refrain from an act. For example, the order may require users to attend a show cause meeting, cease and desist discharging or undertake activities pursuant to a compliance schedule. 
Admissible evidence means evidence which can be presented in court. 
Advanced waste treatment means wastewater treatment beyond the secondary or biological stage that includes removal of nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen and a high percentage of suspended solids. 
Aeration means to circulate oxygen through a substance, as in wastewater treatment where it aids in purification. 
Aeration tank means a tank which serves as a chamber for injecting air into water. 
Aerobic means life or processes that depend on the presence of oxygen. 
Affidavit means a sworn statement in writing under oath before an authorized magistrate or officer. 
Affirmative defense means a user may have a favorable, legal argument to an enforcement action if the criteria as outlined in section 5-1-24 of this chapter is met. 
Algae means plants which grow in sunlit waters and which are a food for fish and small aquatic animals and put oxygen in the water. 
Alkalinity means the capacity of water to neutralize acids, as determined by the water's content of carbonates, bicarbonates, hydroxides and occasionally borates, silicates and phosphates. 
Approval authority means the State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. The approval authority is responsible for approval and oversight of control authority pretreatment programs, including an evaluation of the effectiveness of local enforcement. 
Approved state program means a state or interstate permit program which meets the requirements of Section 402(b) of the Act and which has been submitted to and approved by EPA under its NPDES permit regulations and under Section 402(c) of the Act. 
Arbitrary or capricious allegation means an assertion that a decision or action taken by the control authority was unreasonable or not founded upon sound judgment. 
Authorized representative of a user means any one (1) of the following: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean: 
a.  A responsible corporate officer, which includes a president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions; 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures; 
(2)  If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or proprietor, respectively; 
(3)  If the industrial user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee; 
(4)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in paragraphs (1), (2) or (3) of this section if: 
a.  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in paragraphs (1), (2) or (3), 
b.  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
c.  The written authorization is submitted to the City of Gainesville. 
(5)  If an authorization under paragraph (4) of this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of paragraph (4) of this section must be submitted to the City of Gainesville prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
Bacteria means single-celled microorganisms that lack chlorophyll. Some cause diseases, others aid in pollution control by breaking down organic matter in air and water. 
Bacterial analysis means the examination of water and wastewater to determine the presence, number and identification of bacteria. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Biodegradable means any substance that decomposes quickly through the action of microorganisms. 
Biological oxidation means the way that bacteria and microorganisms feed on and decompose complex organic materials. Used in self-purification of water bodies and activated sludge wastewater treatment. 
Biological wastewater treatment means forms of wastewater treatment in which bacterial or biochemical action is intensified to stabilize, oxidize and nitrify the unstable organic matter present. 
Board of health means the county board of health or an authorized agent or representative. 
Buffer means any of certain combinations of chemicals used to stabilize the pH values or alkalinities of solutions. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building inspector means the chief building inspector of the City of Gainesville or Hall County or his authorized agent or representative. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
Burden of proof means the duty of providing a disputed assertion or charge in court. 
By-pass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
Categorical industry means a category of significant industrial users which by nature of its process meets the requirements identified in categorical standards. 
Categorical standards means the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment Standards as referenced in the Clean Water Act and outlined in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471. 
Certified means giving certain factual knowledge of and attesting to the validity of the preparation of all the information in all correspondence to the control authority. 
Cease and desist order means an administrative order directing an industrial user to immediately halt illegal or unauthorized discharges. 
CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations. 
cfs means cubic feet per second, a measure of the amount of water passing a given point. 
Chain-of-custody means a written record of sample possession for all persons who handle (collect, transport, analyze, dispose of) a sample, including names, dates, times. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of the oxygen required to oxidize organic and oxidizable inorganic compounds in water. 
Chlorinator means a device for adding chlorine gas to sewage to kill infectious germs. 
City means the City of Gainesville, represented by its elected officials or their authorized agents or employees. 
City council means the city council of the City of Gainesville or its authorized agent or representative. 
City engineer means the staff professional engineer responsible for the street department and providing professional engineering services to other departments of the city. 
Civil litigation means a lawsuit filed in a civil court. If the court rules that the defendant user violated the law the court may impose civil penalties, injunctions or other equitable remedies and/or cost recovery. 
Civil penalty means a punitive monetary award granted by a court to the control authority against a noncompliant user. 
Coliform organism means an organism found in the intestinal tract of humans and animals, its presence in water indicates pollution and potentially dangerous bacterial contamination. 
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
Commercial user means all users of the POTW other than residential users (including, but not limited to business, industry and organizations) producing a wastewater discharge that may be subject to federal, state, or local wastewater regulations. 
Compatible pollutant means BOD, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, and such additional pollutants as are now or may be in the future specified and controlled in this city's NPDES permit for its wastewater treatment works where such works have been designed and used to reduce or remove such pollutants. 
Complete waste treatment system means a complete waste treatment system consisting of all the treatment works necessary to meet the requirements of Title III of the Act, involved in: 
(1)  The transport of wastewaters from individual homes or buildings to a plant or facility where treatment of the wastewater is accomplished; 
(2)  The treatment of the wastewater(s) to remove pollutants; and 
(3)  The ultimate disposal, including recycling or reuse, of the treated wastewater(s) and residues which result from the treatment process. 
One (1) completed waste treatment system would normally include one (1) treatment plant or facility, but also may include two (2) or more connected or integrated treatment plants or facilities. 
Compliance order means an administrative order directing a noncompliant industry to achieve or restore compliance by a date specified in the order. 
Compliance schedule means a schedule of required activities (also called milestones) necessary for a user to achieve compliance with all pretreatment program requirements. 
Composite sample means a combination of individual samples of water or wastewater taken at selected intervals to minimize the effect of the variability of the individual samples. Composite samples may be flow or time proportional. 
Consent agreement means a legally enforceable agreement between the city and the noncompliant user designed to restore the user to compliance status. 
Consent decree means a court supervised settlement agreement, the violation of which may be considered contempt of court. 
Constituents means the combination of particles, chemicals or conditions which exist in the nondomestic wastewater. 
Contaminated nonprocess wastewater means any water which may, during manufacturing or processing, come into incidental contact with any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste product by means of: 
(1)  Rainfall runoff; 
(2)  Accidental spills; 
(3)  Accidental leaks caused by the failure of process equipment, which are repaired within the shortest reasonable time not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours after discovery; and 
(4)  Discharges from safety showers and related personal safety equipment. 
Provided, that all reasonable measures have been taken to prevent, reduce and control such contact to the maximum extent feasible, and to mitigate the effects of such contact once it has occurred. This definition may also include boiler blowdown or cooling water which contains any pollutant other than heat. 
Contribute means the addition, discharge or introduction of any substance into the POTW as hereinafter defined. 
Control authority means the city's director or his duly authorized representative or agent. 
Conventional pollutants means pollutants described as biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), pH, fecal coliform bacteria, oil and grease (O&G), total phosphorus (P), total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN) and such additional pollutants as are now or may in the future be specified and controlled in the city's NPDES permit for its wastewater treatment works where said works have been designed and used to reduce or remove such pollutants. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Criminal intent means a state of mind which is a necessary element of all crimes. Criminal intent may be general (intent to perform an act) or specific (intent to break a law). 
Criminal negligence means negligence of such a character, or occurring under such circumstances, as to be punishable as a crime (such as a flagrant and reckless disregard of the safety of others or willful indifference to the injury likely to follow). 
Criminal prosecution means a criminal charge brought by the city against an accused violator. 
Daily discharge means the amount of a pollutant present in a facility's effluent as measured during a calendar day or any twenty-four-hour period which reasonably represents the calendar day for the purposes of sampling. 
Defendant means the party against whom relief or recovery is sought. 
Deposition means a discovery device by which one (1) party addresses verbal questions to the other party or to a witness for the other party. Depositions are conducted under oath outside the courtroom, usually in the office of an attorney. A transcript is made of the deposition which may be used as evidence at trial. 
Detergent means: 
(1)  Any of a group of synthetic, organic, liquid or water-soluble cleaning agents that are inactivated by hard water and have wetting and emulsifying properties but, unlike soap, are not prepared from fats and oils, and 
(2)  A substance that reduces the surface tension of water, including foaming agents and surfactants. 
Deterrent value means a threat of reprisal which is sufficient to discourage the user from future violations. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of a pollutant or the discharge of pollutants to a natural or man-made outlet. 
Director means the director of the public utilities department of the City of Gainesville, including the wastewater facilities, treatment works and water pollution control operations, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Discharge means the release of wastewater to the sewerage system or to a natural or man-made outlet. 
Discharge of a pollutant and discharge of pollutants means: 
(1)  Any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to navigable waters from any point source, or 
(2)  Any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft when being used as a means of transportation. 
This definition includes discharges into waters of the United States from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality or other party that do not lead to treatment systems; and discharges through pipes, sewers or other conveyances, leading into treatment systems owned in whole or in part by a third party other than a state or municipality. 
Discovery means a variety of pretrial devices used by one (1) party to obtain relevant facts and information about the case from the other party. 
Dissolved oxygen (DO) means a measure of the amount of oxygen available for biochemical activity in a given amount of water. Adequate levels of DO are needed to support aquatic life. Low dissolved oxygen concentrations can result from inadequate waste treatment. 
Domestic wastewater means sewage produced by residential or commercial users that is not considered process wastewater or contaminated nonprocess wastewater providing parameters not in excess of the following: BOD two hundred fifty (250) mg/L; TSS two hundred fifty (250) mg/L; fats, oil and grease one hundred (100) mg/L; total phosphorus seven (7) mg/L; TKN forty (40) mg/L; arsenic four-tenths (0.4) mg/L; cadmium four hundred forty-seven thousandths (0.447) mg/L; chromium two and fifty-four hundredths (2.54) mg/L; copper three hundred seventy-six thousandths (0.376) mg/L; cyanide five hundredths (0.05) mg/L; lead one hundredth (0.01) mg/L; mercury twenty-five one hundred-thousandths (0.00025) mg/L; molybdenum five and five hundred seventy-eight thousandths (5.578) mg/L; nickel two and seven hundred ten thousandths (2.710) mg/L; selenium two hundredths (0.020) mg/L; silver ten and seven hundred ninety-four thousandths (10.794) mg/L; and zinc one and eighty-five hundredths (1.85) mg/L. 
Double jeopardy means the prohibition against a second prosecution after a trial for the same offense. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Effluent means waste material, such as smoke, liquid industrial refuse or sewage, discharged into the sewer system or environment; generally referring to water pollution. 
Effluent limitation means any restriction established by a state or the EPA on quantities, rates and concentrations of chemical, physical, biological and other constituents that are discharged from point sources into navigable waters or waters of the contiguous zone. 
Emulsified grease means grease in a colloidal state such that it remains dispersed throughout the liquid and will not separate by gravity until the colloidal agent is inactivated. 
Enabling legislation means a state law or charter which creates and empowers a control authority. 
Environment means the sum of all external conditions affecting the life, development and survival of organisms. 
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as designation for the regional administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
EPD means the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division or its duly authorized representative. 
Excessive contaminant penalty means a financial charge imposed on the user when a contaminant exceeds the violation level for that parameter. Excessive contaminant penalties are designed to recapture the economic benefit of noncompliance and deter future violation. 
Falsification means the user's intentional alteration of a record, an account or any document, so as to render it untrue to the control authority. 
Fat, oil grease (F.O.G.) means that material which may be extracted from the acidified sample as prescribed in 40 CFR, Part 136 and others. Such materials include fats, oils, waxes and related compounds of animal, vegetable or mineral origin. 
Fecal coliform bacteria means a group of organisms found in the intestinal tracts of people and animals. Their presence in water indicates pollution and possible dangerous bacterial contamination. 
Fees means a schedule of charges imposed to recover treatment costs (not punitive in nature). 
Felony means a crime punishable by imprisonment for greater than one (1) year (depending on state law). 
Fine means a punitive monetary charge for a violation of the law. Often used synonymously with "penalty," although the term "fine" generally implies the use of administrative rather than civil (judicial) procedures. 
Flammable means a substance which will burn readily or quickly. 
Floatable grease means grease in such a state that it is insoluble in the liquid waste and will separate from the liquid by gravity in properly designed grease separation facilities. 
Floc means a clump of solids formed in sewage by biological or chemical action, in order to enhance the settleability of the pollutant solids. 
Food processing industry means a permitted user engaged in the production of food or food products, and having a wastestream similar to domestic wastewater in respect to nonconventional pollutants. Where analyses of wastewater or historical data indicate the presence of nonconventional pollutants, the director may impose nonconventional limits on food processing industry. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Good faith effort or progress means prompt and vigorous pollution control measures undertaken by the discharger which shows that extraordinary efforts (not a "business-as-usual" approach) have been made to achieve compliance. 
gpm means gallons per minute, a measurement of water flow. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Grand jury means a body of citizens whose duties consist of determining whether probable cause exists that a crime has been committed, and whether an indictment should be returned against a named defendant. 
Grease means fat, oil, grease (F.O.G.). 
Harm means a user's discharge which contains constituent(s) that inflict(s) injury or loss, hurt or damage to the POTW, its personnel or the environment. 
Hazardous substance means any substance designated under 40 CFR Part 116 pursuant to Section 311 of the Act. 
Heavy metals means metallic elements like mercury, chromium, cadmium, arsenic and lead with high molecular weights. Even at low concentrations they can damage living things and tend to bioaccumulate in the food chain. 
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks utilized to store, treat or transport waste. 
Inadmissible means evidence not allowed to be presented in court. 
Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a "compatible pollutant" as defined in this section. 
Indirect discharge means the discharge or introduction of nondomestic wastewater from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Indictment means a written accusation of criminal conduct by a grand jury. 
Industrial means industrial user. 
Industrial discharge permit means a document issued by the control authority to industrial and significant industrial users of the POTW designed to meet the objectives as stated in section 5-1-1 of this chapter. 
Industrial user means any commercial user of a publicly owned treatment works which discharges up to the equivalent of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of process wastewater and/or contaminated non-process wastewater and is issued a wastewater discharge permit, such that in the opinion of the director may have a significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from the treatment works. 
Industrial wastewater means nondomestic wastewater. 
Influent means the wastewaters arriving at the city's wastewater treatment plants for treatment. 
Injunction, injunctive relief means a court order which restrains or compels action by the user. 
Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW's treatment processes, operations or sewer system which may contribute to a violation of any requirement of its NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act, or any criteria guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solids Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Water Act (Act), the Toxic Substances Control Act or more stringent State criteria (including those contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
Interrogatories means a discovery device consisting of written questions submitted by one (1) party to the other party or witness. 
Judicial action or case means an enforcement action that involves a court. (The action may either be civil or criminal in nature). 
Jurisdiction means the extent of authority of a governmental entity's power to make and enforce laws. 
Legal authority means the source of a control authority's jurisdiction and regulatory powers. 
Libel suit means a suit against a person who is responsible for a written statement that allegedly conveys an unjustly unfavorable impression of another person. 
Litigation means an enforcement action brought in a judicial (court) forum. 
May means permissive (See "Shall"). 
Metered water means the amount of all sources of water, including wells, consumed by the sewer customer. 
MGD means millions of gallons per day. MGD is a measurement of water flow. 
mg/L means milligrams per liter and shall mean ratio by weight—interchanged with ppm. 
Misdemeanor means a crime punishable by imprisonment of less than one (1) year (depending on state law). 
National categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act which applies to nondomestic users. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) means the program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into navigable waters pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
Neutralization means the reaction of acid or alkali with the opposite reagent until the concentrations of hydrogen and hydroxyl ions in the solution are approximately equal. 
New source means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(1)  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other structure is located, or 
(2)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source, or 
(3)  The production of wastewater generating processes of the building structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria as described above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
Construction of a new source as defined here has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(1)  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
a.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(2)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation in this definition. 
Nitrification means the conversion of nitrogenous matter into nitrates by bacteria. 
Nondomestic user means commercial user. 
Nondomestic wastewater means wastewater from commercial users as distinct from domestic wastewater, includes process wastewater and contaminated nonprocess wastewater. 
Nonfood processing industry means a permitted user engaged in the production of goods and materials other than food or food products, having a wastestream subject to nonconventional pollutants limits as determined by the director. 
Nongovernmental means any user of the treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, as amended, published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, except those public agencies classified in Division J. Public Law 92-500, and its amendments, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, shall take precedence in the event of conflicting interpretations. 
Nonpermitted user means a commercial user of a POTW which discharges up to the equivalent of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of process wastewater or contaminated nonprocess wastewater and in the opinion of the director may not have a significant impact on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from the treatment works. The guidelines are contained in section 5-1-1 of this chapter. 
Nonpoint source means a source of pollution which is not a point source, such as farm or forest land runoff or urban storm water runoff. 
Nonsettleable solids means wastewater matter that will stay in suspension for an extended period of time. 
Notice of noncompliance (or notice of violation) means a control authority document notifying an industrial user that it has violated pretreatment standards and/or requirements. Generally used when the violation is relatively minor and the control authority expects the violation to be corrected within a short period of time. 
Nutrients means elements or compounds essential to growth and development of living things, including carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, potassium and phosphorus. 
Other pollutants means those pollutants found in water or wastewater except as identified as conventional pollutants including, but not limited to, metals, volatile organics and pesticides that wastewater treatment plants have not been designed to treat. Incompatible pollutants are other pollutants. 
Outlet means any outlet, natural or man-made, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
Penalty means a monetary or other punitive measure, usually associated with a court action. For purposes of this chapter, the term is used synonymously with fine. 
Permitted user means a commercial user having a wastewater discharge from industrial process, trade, institution or business as distinct from domestic sewage. These are regulated under federal, state or local discharge limits and are permitted as such on the basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard. A permitted user is either: 1) an industrial user, or 2) a significant industrial user. Guidelines are contained in section 5-1-1 of this chapter. 
Person or owner shall mean any individual; sole proprietor; firm; company; joint stock company; association; society; corporation; group; partnership; copartnership; trust; estate; governmental or legal entity; or their authorized representatives, agents or assigns as defined earlier under "authorized representative of a user." The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by context. For enforcement remedies as outlined in section 5-1-21, the president of a company, corporation, firm, association, society or group will be responsible for any violations. If there is no president, then the individual in charge of the day-to-day operations of the company, corporation, firm, association, society or group will be responsible for any violations. A sole proprietor or individual shall be responsible for violations of sole proprietorships or individually-owned users, respectively. All partners of a partnership shall be responsible for violations of the partnership. The city may use its discretion for punishment if an authorized representative meeting the earlier definition's requirements has been designated. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. A stabilized pH will be considered as a pH which does not change beyond the specified limits when the waste is subject to aeration. pH shall be determined by standard methods as outlined in 40 CFR, Part 136. 
Phosphorus means an essential food element that can contribute to the eutrophication of water bodies. Total phosphorus is also included in this definition. 
Plaintiff means a person or organization seeking remedy from a court. For purposes of this chapter, the plaintiff is the City of Gainesville. 
Plea bargain means an agreement between a prosecuting attorney and a criminal defendant whereby the defendant pleads guilty to a lesser charge and/or a reduction of sentence in exchange for cooperation in investigating or prosecuting the crime (e.g., waiving a trial). 
Point source means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. It does not mean: 
(1)  Sewage from vessels; or 
(2)  Water, gas or other material that is injected into a well to facilitate production of oil or gas, or water derived in association with oil or gas production and disposed of in a well, if the well is used either to facilitate production or for disposal purposes is approved by authority of the state in which the well is located, and if such state determines that such injection or disposal will not result in the degradation of ground or surface water resources. 
Pollution means the presence of matter or energy whose nature, location or quantity produces undesired environmental effects. 
POTW means publicly owned treatment works. 
ppm means parts per million; a way of expressing minute concentrations. In air, ppm is usually a volume/volume ratio; in water, a weight/volume ratio. For small concentrations suspended or dissolved in water, ppm may be used interchangeably with milligrams per liter. 
Pretreatment means the application of physical, chemical and biological processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in or alter the nature of the pollutant properties in wastewater prior to discharging such wastewater into the publicly owned wastewater system, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a commercial user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standard (or national categorical pretreatment standard) means any regulation established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in accord with Sections 307(b) and 307(c) of the Clean Water Act (Act) (33 USC 1347) which contains pollutant discharge limits which apply to a specific category of industrial users. 
Priority pollutant means any contaminant in water which is identified as being toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic or is chemically similar to compounds identified as such by the EPA. The list includes one hundred twenty-nine (129) compounds and such other compounds as may be added from time to time. 
Process wastewater means any water which, during manufacturing, processing, or commercial use comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste product and is discharged either directly or indirectly into the sewerage system. 
Prohibited substances means those waters, wastes and/or wastewaters which are not allowed into the city's sewerage system as described in section 5-1-67 of this chapter. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Proprietary information means information about a commercial chemical, product or process which is considered to be confidential business information or a trade secret by an industrial or commercial user because if divulged, the information could put the industrial or commercial user at an unfair competitive disadvantage with competitors in the same industry. 
Publicly owned treatment works (or POTW) means a wastewater treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (PL 92-500) which is owned, in this case, by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to such treatment works, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. The term shall also mean the City of Gainesville, a governmental body which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Raw sewage means untreated wastewater. 
Residential user means a housing customer who discharges a wastewater not in excess of the parameters defined for domestic wastewater. 
Reportable noncompliance means criteria for identifying when a control authority should be reported in the NPDES quarterly noncompliance report for failure to implement its approved pretreatment program. 
Request for admission means a discovery device where a written statement of fact concerning the case is submitted to the adverse party and which that party is required to affirm or deny. Those statements that are admitted will be treated by the court as having been established and need not be proved at trial. 
Request for production means a discovery device which requests the opposing party to produce some document or thing which may tend to resolve an issue in dispute in the case. 
Sample means a representative portion of a wastewater discharge. The analytical results may be used by the control authority for compliance monitoring, surcharges, and/or other actions as necessary. See composite sample and grab sample. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sanitary waste means domestic wastewater. 
Search warrant means a document issued by a magistrate or judge which authorizes government entry into private premises to either observe compliance with applicable laws or collect evidence of noncompliance. 
Self monitoring means sampling and analysis of wastewater performed by the permitted user. 
Settleable solids means wastewater matter which either settles to the bottom or floats to the top of a quiescent clarifier. 
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
Sewage (or wastewater) means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Sewerage means the entire system of sewage collection, treatment and disposal. The term also applies to all effluent carried by sewers. 
Sewerage systems means the sanitary sewers, pumping stations, force mains and treatment plant(s) and appurtenances. 
Shall means mandatory (See "May"). 
Show cause order means an administrative order directing a noncompliant user to appear before the control authority, explain its noncompliance and show cause why more severe enforcement actions against the user should not go forward. 
Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  Any commercial user that: 
a.  Discharges twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of wastewater; 
b.  Contributes a wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; 
c.  Contains in its waste a priority pollutant in amounts as defined in standards issued under Section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act; 
d.  Impacts, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works as found by the control authority, in connection with the issuance of a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit to the public owned treatment works receiving the waste; or 
e.  Is designated as such by the City of Gainesville on the basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
f.  Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
Significant noncompliance means a violation which meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is a part of a pattern of noncompliance beginning with a noncompliant sample and extending from the date of collection of that sample forward for a period of six (6) months: 
a.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits sixty-six (66) percent or more of measurements exceed maximum limits. 
b.  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations thirty-three (33) percent or more of measurements that exceed maximum limit by factors below: 
1.  Conventional pollutants by a factor of 1.4, 
2.  Nonconventional pollutants by a factor of 1.2. 
(2)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(3)  Any violation of effluent limit that the city believes has caused interference, slug, pass-through or endangered health; 
(4)  Any discharge that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or environment and has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Is considered by the city to adversely affect the operation or implementation of the city's pretreatment program. 
Significant violation means significant noncompliance. Users in significant violation shall be listed in the city's most circulated newspaper. 
Significant violator means any commercial user, industrial user or significant industrial user or their designee which meets at least one (1) of the qualifications of significant violation. 
Single-family dwelling means a dwelling unit occupied by a single family. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Has a pH less than three (3) or greater than eleven (11). 
(2)  Contains two and one-half (2.5) times the maximum daily concentration of pollutants as specified in this chapter or additional pollutants that may be specified in an industrial pretreatment permit. 
(3)  Is discharged at a rate two and one-half (2½) times the flows during normal operations that may be listed in an industrial pretreatment permit, unless a maximum instantaneous discharge is established in the user's permit. 
Due to the nature of a slug discharge, grab samples may be used for the purpose of compliance sampling for any pollutant parameters. 
Spill means a release of wastewater, occurring or arising by chance or unexpectedly, to the sewerage system or to a natural or man-made outlet. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) means the classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987. 
Standard methods means those sampling and analysis procedures established by and in accordance with EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended or the "Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. In cases where procedures vary, the EPA methodologies shall supersede. 
Standard of strict liability means liability which attaches without regard to the user's "negligence" or "intent" to violate. Noncompliant users will be found liable for pretreatment violations if the control authority proves that a violation occurred. 
Statute of limitations means a law which prescribed the period within which an enforcement action may be pursued by the control authority. 
Stipulation means a voluntary agreement between opposing parties as to facts or issues in controversy. 
Storm drain (or storm sewer) means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source. 
Surcharge means the charge for treating pollutant loadings above domestic sewage concentrations. 
Suspended solids (SS) means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," latest editions, as published by the American Public Health Association and others, and referred to as filterable residue. 
Termination of service means the discontinuation of either: 
(1)  Water service by a formal notice of termination to the user; or the turning off of water; or removal of the water meter of a noncompliant user, or 
(2)  Sewer service by a formal notice of termination to the user; or physical blockage of the sewer connection; or other actions as may be necessary to prevent the discharge of wastewater to the sewer from a noncompliant user. 
Testimony means a solemn declaration made by a witness under oath in response to interrogation by a lawyer or public official which is used as evidence. 
The Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977, and as may be amended from time to time (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.). 
Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN) means the combination of ammonia and organic nitrogen. 
Total phosphorus (TP) means an essential food element that can contribute to the eutrophication of water bodies. 
Total solids means the sum of dissolved and undissolved constituents in water or wastewater, usually expressed as milligrams per liter. 
Total suspended solids (TSS) (or suspended solids (SS)) means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering prescribed and is determined as prescribed in 40 CFR 136 or "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", latest edition, as published by the American Public Health Association, and others, and referred to as filterable residue. 
Toxic pollutants means sixty-five (65) classes of pollutants included in the Clean Water Act (Act) of 1977, and under Section 307, such other pollutants as the administrator of EPA or director of the city determines to be harmful to organisms when discharged into waters. Upon review of these sixty-five (65) classes of pollutants, the administrator has designated one hundred twenty-nine (129) specific compounds as priority pollutants. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided and produces no adverse environmental impact. 
Upset means unintentional and temporary noncompliance by a facility or a process within a facility. 
USC means United States Code. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the introduction of wastewater in the city's POTWs and has beneficial use of the sewerage system. 
User charge means a charge levied on users of a treatment works, or that portion of the ad valorem taxes paid by a user, for the user's proportionate share of the cost of the operation and maintenance (including replacement) of such works. 
Violation means an exceedance by any amount of any maximum daily concentration or categorical limit or rule or regulation in this chapter. 
Waste means unwanted materials left over from manufacturing processes or refuse from places of human or animal habitation. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences and/or commercial buildings, and/or industrial plants and/or institutions, together with any groundwater and/or surface water and/or storm water that may be present. 
Wastewater discharge permit means a document issued by the control authority to industrial and significant industrial users of the POTW designed to meet the objectives as stated in section 5-1-1 of this chapter. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away or treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant." 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
Water pollution means the addition of enough harmful or objectionable material to damage water quality. 
Water pollution control agencies of jurisdiction means the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) operating under authority of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division operating under the authority of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, as amended, each of which agencies is empowered to adopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary to carry out the intent of these respective laws. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 2004-54, § I, 7-20-04) 
State Law reference— Definitions relating to water pollution, OCGA § 12-5-22. 
Sec. 5-1-4. - Protection from damage; dumping of certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited; forfeiture of involved vehicles. 
(a)  Protection from damage. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewerage system. Any person violating this section shall on conviction thereof be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(b)  Dumping of certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewer prohibited; forfeiture of involved vehicles. No person, firm or corporation shall place, dump, dispose of, or cause to be placed, dumped or disposed of in a natural outlet or sanitary sewerage system or cause said discharge to be conveyed directly to the sanitary sewerage system or otherwise of the city, any contents or matter of or from any septic tank, wastewater water holding tank, grease trap, or other container serving the purpose of a septic tank, wastewater holding tank or grease trap, which contents or matter is made up wholly or partly by the sanitary sewer, kitchen or toilet waste from any residential source or commercial or industrial waste from business processes from any commercial or industrial facility. 
(c)  [Violations.] Any person, firm, or corporation violating subsection (a) of this section shall upon conviction in the municipal court be punished according to the provisions of section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(d)  [Forfeiture of vehicles.] Any motor vehicle, trailer, and all other articles and contrivances utilized in the hauling, transporting, dumping, placing, or disposition of any contents or matter in any public sewer in violation of subsection (b) of this section are declared to be contraband and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation, and forfeiture according to the terms, provisions, conditions, and procedure set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-10-11, as far as such terms and procedures can be made to apply. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-5. - Authority to enter property to inspect and sample. 
The director, the director of EPD, the regional administrator of EPA, and/or their authorized representatives, agents, or employees bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties subject to this chapter at any time without prior notice for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing and copying any records required to be kept in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
The director or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. These individuals shall have access to all areas which are potentially relevant to the wastewater discharge, including chemical storage areas. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-6. - Authority to use negotiated easement. 
(a)  The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identifications shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, damage, fine, penalty or fee occasioned the city by reason of such violation or violations, including, but not limited to, any fee, penalty or fine assessed against the city by any state or federal agency as a result of such violation or violations. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-7. - Charges generally. 
All users of the public sewerage system shall pay such service charges, surcharges, connection fees or other charges for the use of same as are now or hereafter provided by Title 10 of this Code or by other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-8. - Authority to enforce. 
The public utilities director and other duly authorized employees of the city shall have the authority to enforce all provisions of this chapter and ordinance, including necessary enforcement actions. 
The public utilities director shall serve as the final authority regarding disputes over utility service bills, except where otherwise noted herein. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 99-67, § I, 10-5-99) 
Secs. 5-1-9—5-1-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 5-1-21. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Industry to notify city of violation. When any person violates any provision of this chapter, except section 5-1-4, such person shall immediately notify the director or the director's designee or the POTW utilized by the user of such violation and immediately correct the violation or discontinue the use of water service and sewer service of the city. Any enforcement action taken based on information gained from this provision shall be enforceable under sections 5-1-21, 5-1-22(a) and (b), and 5-1-23 of this chapter. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Whenever the director finds that any user has violated or is violating this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director or his agent may serve upon said user a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(c)  Excessive contaminant penalties. At the point where a users discharge exceeds the violation level for a particular pollutant, excessive contaminant penalties are imposed on the user. Excessive contaminant penalties are designed to recapture the economic benefit of noncompliance and deter future violations. These penalties escalate with the degree of violation and are based on contaminant level and amount of discharge. 
(d)  Consent agreement. The director is hereby empowered to enter into consent agreements, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such agreements will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the agreement. Consent agreements shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (f) and (g) below and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(e)  Show cause hearing. The director may order any user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of this ordinance, wastewater discharge permits, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Compliance order. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate the ordinance, wastewater discharge permit or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance by the addition and/or correct operation and maintenance of adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amounts of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Compliance schedules. Consent agreements and compliance orders may contain compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards. The following conditions shall apply to compliance schedules: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for meeting pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
(2)  No increment in a compliance schedule shall exceed nine (9) months. 
(3)  No later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the control authority including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such reports to the control authority. 
(gg)  Cease and desist orders. When the director finds that a user is violating this chapter, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements. 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. 
(h)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user that is found to have violated any provision of this chapter, its wastewater discharge permit, and orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement may be fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the director shall have such other collection remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees. 
(3)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten (10) percent of the unpaid balance and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one and one-half (1.5) percent per month. A lien against the individual user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties. 
(4)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the director to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten (10) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the director shall convene a hearing on the matter within ten (10) days of receiving the request from the industrial user. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment together with any interest accruing thereto shall be returned to the industrial user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions such as notices and orders to the fine. 
(5)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(i)  Emergency suspensions. The director may immediately suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit of a user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, as referenced in subsection 5-1-21(k)(2) of this chapter. The director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment, as referenced in subsection 5-1-21(k)(2) of this chapter. Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit and/or its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection and/or discontinuance of the water service to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in subsection (j), below, are initiated against the user. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the director prior to the date any show cause or termination hearing under subsections (e), above, and (j), below, and within three (3) days. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(j)  Termination of discharge. In addition to those provisions in subsection (i), above, and subsection 5-1-151(f) any user that violates the following conditions of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits, orders issued hereunder, or any applicable or state and federal law, is subject to discharge termination. 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions. 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge. 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge. 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling. 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in article 4 of this chapter. 
Noncompliant users will be notified of the proposed enforcement action and may show cause under subsection (e) above of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. A terminated permit under any of the above provisions shall mean the user shall not discharge process wastewater into the city's sewerage system. 
(k)  Authority to disconnect service. 
(1)  The director, city manager or mayor shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter by the discontinuance of water service and sewer service in the event any person shall continue to violate the provisions of this chapter after receiving oral or written notice of the violation from the city. 
(2)  Whenever the director, city manager or mayor determines that a person is violating or has violated any provision of this chapter, except for section 5-1-4, and determines that the violation of this chapter will cause immediate damage or harm to the sewers, sewerage treatment process, environment, equipment or treatment facilities of the city, or that the violation endangers the public health, safety or general welfare of the community, the director, city manager or mayor shall have the power and authority to immediately revoke, orally or in writing, the sewerage permit of the person violating any provision of this chapter and terminate that person's water service and sewer service. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by having a sewerage permit revoked by the director, city manager, or mayor shall have the right to appeal the revocation to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken within five (5) days from the date of the revocation by notifying the clerk of the city in writing and specifying the grounds of appeal. The city council shall, within five (5) days after the receipt of the notice of appeal, fix a date and time for the hearing of the appeal and after due notice to the parties at interest, have a hearing on the appeal within ten (10) days of the date the notice of appeal was received by the city and decide the same within a reasonable time. 
(4)  The director, city manager or mayor shall have the power and authority to reinstate the sewerage permit and allow the use of the city's water and sewer service if the person who had been violating the provisions of this chapter shall discontinue and cease such violations. 
(5)  Any user who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon oral notification by the city and within ten (10) days of such violation or violations furnish the director a written report concerning such violation or violations, which report shall specifically detail the cause of the violation or violations and the steps implemented by the person to assure that the violation or violations will not occur in the future. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after the receipt of notification. This section shall not restrict the authority of the director provided under subsection 5-1-151(f) of this chapter (Code 1958, § 18-53). 
(l)  User to receive due process. Noncompliant users will be notified of the proposed enforcement action, with the exception of subsections (i) and (k)(2), above, and may show cause under subsection (e), above, why the proposed action should not be taken within five (5) days from the date of the action by notifying the city clerk in writing and specifying the grounds of appeal. Any enforcement action taken based on information gained from this provision shall be enforceable under sections 5-1-21, 5-1-22(a) and (b), and 5-1-23 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-22. - Judicial remedies. 
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder, or if any person violates other provisions of this chapter, the director, mayor or city manager, through the city attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Municipal Court for Gainesville, Georgia. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director, mayor, or city manager, through counsel may petition the court through the city's attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the city. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Any user which has violated or continues to violate this chapter, any order or wastewater discharge permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement may be liable to the director, mayor or city manager, for a civil penalty of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per violation per day for as long as the violation continues. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. In addition to the above described penalty and damages, the director may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. In addition, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any judgment, expense, loss, damage, fine, penalty or fee occasioned by the city by reason of such violation or violations, including, but not limited to, any fee, penalty or fine assessed against the city by any state or federal agency as a result of such violation or violations. 
(2)  In determining the amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice requires. The director shall have such remedies to collect these fees as it has to collect other sewer service charges. 
(3)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  Any person that violates any provision of this chapter, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(2)  Any person that introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or be subject to imprisonment for six (6) months. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  Any person that knowingly falsifies information as described in section 5-1-197 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or both. 
(4)  In the event of a second conviction, a person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or both. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions in articles 2 and 8 are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. 
(e)  Penalty for violation; generally. Any person found to be violating any provision of this ordinance shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-7 or as provided within this article of the Code of the city and/or as allowed under 40 CFR 403.8 and/or 403.12. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-23. - Supplemental enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this ordinance, any orders or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Liability insurance. The director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this ordinance, any order, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(c)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance, orders, or wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(d)  Public nuisances. Any violation of this ordinance, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director or his designee. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance. 
(e)  Informant rewards. The director is authorized to pay up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a user. In the event that the information provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty levied against the user, the director is authorized to disperse up to five (5) percent of the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(f)  Contractor listing. Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards may be terminated at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-24. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Treatment upsets. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical, state and/or local pretreatment standards and/or requirements, including wastewater discharge permit conditions, because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the permitted user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical, state and/or local pretreatment standards and/or requirements if the requirements of subparagraph (3) below are met. 
(3)  Any permitted user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the permitted user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
c.  The permitted user has submitted the following information to the POTW and treatment plant operator within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps are being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the permitted user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Permitted users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical, state and/or local pretreatment standards and/or requirements. 
(6)  The permitted user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical, state and/or local pretreatment standards and/or requirements upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(b)  General/specific prohibitions. A permitted user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in articles 3 and 4 of this ordinance if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: (1) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the industrial user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference, or (2) no local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(c)  Treatment bypasses. 
(1)  A permitted user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements, including permit conditions, to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subparagraphs (2) and (3) below of this section. 
(2)  a.  If a permitted user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least ten days before the date of the bypass if possible. 
b.  A permitted user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards and/or requirements to the POTW within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the permitted user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(3)  a.  Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement action against a permitted user for a bypass, unless; 
1.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; and 
2.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance. 
b.  The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the two conditions listed above in paragraph (3)a. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Secs. 5-1-25—5-1-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-1-40. - Discharge of certain materials and wastes. 
Generally, wastewater acceptable for treatment is sewage with: 
(1)  BOD 5 of two hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter or less. 
(2)  Suspended solids of two hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter or less. 
(3)  Fat, oil, grease of one hundred (100) milligrams per liter or less. 
(4)  Total phosphorus of seven (7) milligrams per liter or less. 
(5)  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen of forty (40) milligrams per liter or less. 
(6)  Any wastewater accepted with effluent contaminants in excess of the limits of subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) of this section shall be charged a surcharge to be computed as described in sections 10-1-17 and 10-1-19. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 01-70, § I, 12-18-01) 
Sec. 5-1-41. - Discharges to the environment. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to the environment, including any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any wastewater, other polluted waters or polluting substances, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 01-70, § II, 12-18-01) 
Sec. 5-1-42. - Unlawful construction. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Code 1958, § 18-4; Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-43. - Owners required to connect. 
The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at the owner(s) expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer where available, and elevation permits, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within two hundred (200) feet of the property line except where approved and adequate facilities now exist and are operating properly. Approval by the building inspector or by the Hall County Health Department is required. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-44. - Violation of article provisions and penalty therefore. 
Any person permitting or causing the emptying of any waste prohibited by this article into the sewer system of the city shall be guilty of violating this article, and shall be punished in accordance with article 2. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Secs. 5-1-45—5-1-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - INCOMPATIBLE USES OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 5-1-66. - Unpolluted waters not to be discharged to sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer unless specifically allowed by written consent of the director. 
(b)  Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the director, and the state EPD to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. Discharge to a natural outlet is subject to the conditions of an NPDES permit to be issued to the discharger by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-67. - Discharge of prohibited substances. 
(a)  General prohibitions. A user may not introduce into a POTW any pollutant(s) which cause pass through or interference. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in paragraph (b) of this section apply to each user introducing pollutants into a POTW whether or not the user is subject to any other national, state, or local pretreatment requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters, wastes and/or wastewaters to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, which may create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty (60) degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewerage treatment process or system; constitute a hazard to humans or animals; by pass through or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. This restriction includes, but is not limited to, discharges by any user of the collection and treatment system such that specific pollutants at the influent to the sewage treatment plant do not exceed concentrations specified below. The user discharge concentration limits, listed below, shall be the limits required on industrial discharge permits. Such limits may therefore be used as a guide in pretreatment facility design and operation. In the event that the plant influent level is exceeded or a disruption of the sewage treatment plant process occurs due to an excessive level of one (1) or more controlled substances, the director may alter the user discharge concentration sufficiently to protect the plant and its receiving stream. Such modification shall apply to all users. In the event of toxicity being found in a POTW, the director may at his discretion require industrial users to participate in a toxicity reduction evaluation in accordance with the provisions of the city's POTW's NPDES permits. The maximum concentration values are as specified in the table, but the table is not limited to only these pollutants. Concentrations apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the sewerage system. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. At the director's discretion, the director may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration-based limitations below. 
Maximum Daily Concentrations  Permitted Users of Flat Creek WRF  (mg/L) 

 
Maximum Daily Concentrations  Permitted Users of Linwood WRF  (mg/L) 

 
(3)  Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, ground paper products, paper dishes, cups, egg shells, fibers, lint, rubber, latex, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(5)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in any amount. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than six (6) or greater than nine and five-tenths (9.5) or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the sewage works. 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW as outlined in section 5-1-138. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 01-70, § III, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2004-54, § II, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 2005-20, § I, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 5-1-68. - Discharge of certain other materials, wastes and practices. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the director that such wastes will harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, reduce sludge quality or will otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director shall be guided by Public Law 92-500 and the Clean Water Act, their amendments, and the regulations promulgated thereunder and will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius), or in such quantity that the temperature at the treatment works influent exceeds one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fat, oil or grease of animal, vegetable or mineral origin; whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred and twenty five (125) mg/L or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (zero (0) and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (¾) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the chief building inspector. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established, as necessary for the POTW to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(5)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations. 
(6)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers' earth, lime slurries and lime residue) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant overload on the sewage treatment works or significantly increase the operating cost thereof. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein. 
(7)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent thereby violating the city's NPDES permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten (10) percent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life. 
(8)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  In addition to the materials previously listed, any other materials or rates of discharge which may be defined by state or federal agencies of jurisdiction as being incompatible with existing or proposed sewage works, treatment facilities or treatment processes. 
(11)  Any wastes or sewage that contains more than ten (10) milligrams/liter by weight of hydrogen sulfide, sulfites, sulfur dioxide or oxides of nitrogen. 
(12)  Limitations on wastewater discharges. No person shall discharge, convey or permit or allow to be discharged or conveyed to a public sewer any wastewater containing pollutants of such character or quantity that will: 
a.  Not be susceptible to treatment by the treatment system; 
b.  Interfere with the process efficiency of the treatment system, or reduce the sludge quality; 
c.  Constitute a hazard to human or animal life, or to the stream or watercourse receiving the treatment plant effluent; 
d.  Violate any federal, state, or local standard or pretreatment requirement (as those terms are defined in 40 CFR, 403.3(j), 403.3(k)) applicable to the specific industrial users; 
e.  Cause the treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit or applicable receiving water standards of the state, local or federal government. 
(b)  No statement in this chapter or in this section is intended or may be construed to prohibit the appropriate agency from adding, deleting or changing specific requirements or from making specific requirements more restrictive where wastes are determined to be harmful or destructive to the facilities of the sewerage system, or to create a public nuisance, or to cause the discharge from any treatment facility operated by the city to violate effluent or stream quality standards imposed or as may be imposed by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-69. - Action required by director. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 5-1-67 or 5-1-68 of this chapter, and/or which in the judgment of the director may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage system, processes, equipment, sludge quality or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or the environment or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing fees or sewer charges or such charges as may be set from time to time by the city council under the provisions of section 5-1-188 of this chapter; and/or 
(5)  Take such other appropriate action as may be found necessary to meet POTW pretreatment program requirements established in or pursuant to 40 CFR Section 403.8(f) and/or other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Secs. 5-1-70—5-1-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 5-1-86. - Permission required to make connections. 
No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the chief building inspector for residential or commercial services and industrial services. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-87. - Classes of building sewer permits. 
(a)  There are two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
(b)  In either case, the owner(s) or his authorized representative shall make application on a form furnished by the city, which application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information required by the city. In addition to the building sewer permits described here, all significant industrial users and/or other users, as determined by the director or other sections of this chapter shall obtain an industrial discharge permit as described in article 7. 
(c)  The director may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. When required, this information shall be signed and sealed by a Georgia registered engineer. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period. 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters. 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality. 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control. 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location. 
(6)  Details and descriptions of wastewater pretreatment facilities. 
(7)  Details and descriptions of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the city sewer. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-88. - Installation costs borne by owner(s). 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-89. - Separate sewer connections for every building. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city shall not be liable for any damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-90. - Old sewer connections to meet requirements. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the chief building inspector, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-91. - Construction to conform to Code. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All work shall conform to all applicable regulations of the federal occupational safety and health administration. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials and Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, as amended, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-92. - Sewer to be below basement floor. 
Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-93. - Storm drains not to be connected to sanitary sewer. 
No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the director for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-94. - Sewer connections to conform to Code. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials and the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, as amended. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the described procedures and materials must be approved before installation. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 7-1. 
Sec. 5-1-95. - Cleanout required at point of connection. 
(a)  A sanitary sewer cleanout shall be installed on all building sewers as near to the point at which city maintenance begins as is possible. This point shall be the curb line, the right of way line, the property line, or the easement line, whichever is applicable. Such cleanout shall be six (6) inches in diameter and shall have a brass cleanout plug. 
(b)  The installation and cost of such cleanout shall be borne by the owner(s) and/or developer(s) at the time of development. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-96. - Chief building inspector to test connection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the chief building inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the chief building inspector or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-97. - Safety precautions during construction. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded by the owner with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored by owner in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-98. - Persons to make connections—Specified. 
All sewer connections or "taps" shall be made exclusively by personnel of the city. No person shall make or install any sewer connection or "tap" into the sewer system of the city except personnel of the city.) 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Cross reference— Plumbing Code, § 7-1-166, et seq. 
Sec. 5-1-99. - Same—Penalty and license revocation for violation. 
Any person other than personnel of the city installing or making any connection or "tap" into the sewer system of the city shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code and in addition shall have his plumber's license, or other business license, under which he is operating, revoked. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-100. - Connections—To lines laid in streets; responsibility for chokes. 
(a)  Sewer connections or "taps" hereinafter made by the city to sewer lines laid in the streets shall run from the sewer line to the curb line of the street. When such connections or "taps" are made on outfall or interceptor sewer lines, or any sewer line other than one laid in the street, such "tap" shall extend for a distance of not more than twenty (20) feet from the line connected with or "tapped". 
(b)  The property owners or persons using sanitary sewer service shall be responsible for repairs due to sewer chokes when the sewer choke is beyond the curb line of the street or twenty (20) feet from the line connected with or tapped, whichever distance is closest to the sewer line. The city will make repairs and charge the cost thereof to the property owner or person using sanitary sewer service. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 4-4. 
Sec. 5-1-101. - Same—Fittings, equipment, and supervision. 
(a)  All connections to sewer pipes comprising the sewer system of the city shall be made with an insertion type "Y" or "T" fitting under the supervision of the director. 
(b)  All fittings and other equipment used in such connections shall be approved by the director before use in making any connection. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-102. - Same—Refusal to make proper connections. 
No person shall, after having been duly ordered by the city council, upon recommendation of the city engineer, refuse or neglect to make proper connection between property owned and a public sewer, or to use same for sewerage purposes. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-103. - Size of sewers, grade and location of manholes. 
The city shall designate the size of all sewers, the grade and location of all manholes. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-104. - Easements for construction. 
Property owners using sanitary sewer service, as herein prescribed shall furnish all right-of-way easements needed for sewer construction for his use thereof. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-105. - Location of mains or conduits. 
No person shall hereafter lay any main pipe for water or sewage, or any conduit for any purpose, in any street within four (4) feet on each side of the center line of any sewer, unless with the permission of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Secs. 5-1-106—5-1-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 5-1-131. - Where public sewer unavailable. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 5-1-43, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter and other county or state requirements. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-132. - Private system—Permit required. 
Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the building inspector. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as is deemed necessary by the building inspector or health department. A permit and inspection fee, as provided in Title 10 of this Code, shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-133. - Same—Installation to be approved. 
A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed and approved by the chief building inspector. The building inspector shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the building inspector when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-134. - Same—Compliance with all regulations. 
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of state and federal water pollution control agencies of jurisdiction and with the local board of health. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the front footage of the lot is less than seventy-five (75) feet and the area of the lot is less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. Prior to issuing a permit for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities, such facilities must meet all regulations governing such systems as required by the city's planning and zoning regulations and Hall County Health Department regulations. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet or to any well. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-135. - Same—To be connected to public sewer. 
At such time a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section 5-1-43, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within ninety (90) days after notification by the building inspector or by the health department that the operation of the private facility is no longer acceptable, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-136. - Same—Owner to operate and maintain. 
The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-137. - No conflict with board of health requirements. 
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-138. - Private wastewater disposal into publicly-owned septic tank receiving station. 
(a)  Permit and bond required. No person shall discharge wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facility without a written permit signed by the director or his designated representative. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, analyses, specifications and any other information as deemed necessary by the director or any state or federal regulatory agency. All persons at the time of obtaining a written permit to discharge wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facility shall post a cash bond as provided in Title 10 of this Code. 
(b)  Designated area for private wastewater disposal. No person shall discharge wastewater at any point of the sewerage system of the city except at the publicly owned treatment works or storage facilities at times specifically designated by the director. 
(c)  Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged wastewater from sources other than single-family dwellings or equivalent domestic sewage located in Hall County, Georgia. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, water or waste if it appears likely in the opinion of the director that such wastes will harm either the sewers, sewerage treatment process and/or equipment or the environment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; prevent the use or disposal of sludges by processes as may be selected in the future; will endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance; or cause the treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit or applicable receiving water standards. Some of the substances prohibited are: any pumpings from grease, sand or oil interceptors and any substances prohibited by Public Law 92-500, all amendments thereto and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(d)  Action required by the director. If in the opinion of the director the private wastewater to be discharged into the publicly owned septic tank receiving station is from a source located outside of Hall County, Georgia, or may have deleterious effect on the sewerage works, processes, equipment, receiving waters, or the environment or would otherwise create a hazard to human or animal life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
(1)  Reject the waste and require the removal of the wastewater by the person who discharged the wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facility within twenty-four (24) hours after oral or hand-delivered written notice, and if the wastewater is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the person receives such notice, the wastewater shall be removed by the city at the person's expense. 
(2)  Require a complete analysis of such wastewater to determine compatibility with current treatment processes at the expense of the person who proposes the discharge of the wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facility. 
(3)  Require additional payment to cover the added costs of processing and treating the waste not covered by existing fees or sewerage charges as may be enacted from time to time by the city council under provisions of section 5-1-188. 
(4)  Immediately revoke, orally or in writing, the sewerage permit of the person violating any provision of this chapter and terminate that person's future use of the publicly owned treatment works or storage facility. 
(e)  Fees charged. 
(1)  All persons using the publicly owned treatment works or storage facilities shall pay such charges for the use of same as are now in effect or as may hereinafter be enacted by the city council. 
(2)  All persons discharging wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facilities shall pay a fee as provided in Title 10 of this Code. 
(3)  No person shall discharge wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facilities without having purchased a book of coupons which shall be used to pay the fees for the discharge of the wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facilities. The director shall receive sufficient coupons to pay the fee for discharging wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facilities. 
(f)  Collection of costs or expenses. The director shall notify the person in writing of all additional costs or expenses owed by the person to the city under subsection (d) hereof, and the person shall pay such costs or expenses to the city within thirty (30) days of the date that the written notice is mailed. If the costs or expenses are not paid within such thirty (30) days, the director shall pay the costs or expenses out of the person's posted cash bond and the person shall post a new cash bond under subsection (a) hereof and shall not discharge wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facilities until a new cash bond is posted pursuant to subsection (a). 
(g)  Identification of wastewater source. No person shall discharge wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facilities, without having supplied the following information to the director: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or tenant of each residential single-family dwelling from which wastewater is collected; 
(2)  The number of gallons of wastewater collected from said residential single-family dwelling; 
(3)  Any other information deemed necessary by the director. 
(h)  Exceptions by council. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city council and private waste collectors subject to payment therefor by the private waste collectors. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Secs. 5-1-139—5-1-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT SYSTEM 

Sec. 5-1-151. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permit required. 
(1)  All significant industrial users and other industrial users as determined by the director proposing to connect to or discharge into any part of the wastewater treatment system must first obtain a discharge permit therefor. All existing significant industrial users and other industrial users connected to or discharging to any part of the city system must also obtain a wastewater discharge permit. 
(2)  Extra jurisdictional industrial users permit required. 
a.  Any existing significant industrial user and other industrial user located beyond the city limits shall submit a wastewater discharge permit application, in accordance with subsections (b) and (c) below, within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter. New significant industrial users and other industrial users located beyond the city limits shall submit such applications to the director thirty (30) days prior to any proposed discharge into the POTW. 
b.  Alternately, the director may enter into an agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction in which the significant industrial user or other industrial user is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of Gainesville's approved pretreatment program requirements against said industrial user. Such intermunicipal agreement shall contain an agreement to pass at least as stringent a sewer use ordinance as in effect in the City of Gainesville and for the chapter to remain essentially similar to the city's chapter. The chapter shall be used to identify and regulate significant industrial users and industrial users, issue permits, inspect and sample industries, review reports from industries, notify industry of any violations and take enforcement action upon noncompliant industries. The City of Gainesville shall take direct enforcement action against the user should the contributing jurisdiction fail to do so in an effective and timely manner. 
(b)  Permit application. All significant industrial users and other industrial users shall discharge wastewater only in accordance with the conditions of their wastewater discharge permit. All applications must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the user. "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the director an application on the form prescribed by the director. The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the director may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(c)  Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests, resampling requirements and reporting schedule; 
(4)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(5)  Requirements for retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge; 
(6)  Requirement of penalties for falsifying information; 
(7)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(8)  Requirement for written standard operating procedures for all pretreatment facilities; 
(9)  Requirements for notification to the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Requirements for the installation of facilities or procedures to prevent and control accidental discharge or spills at the user's premises; 
(11)  Requirement for notification of any bypasses around treatment systems; 
(12)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges; 
(13)  Requirement of a written spill prevention/contingency plan; 
(14)  Requirements for notification of any ordinance violations; 
(15)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a public sewer; 
(16)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(17)  Compliance schedules; 
(18)  Statement of duration; 
(19)  Statement of nontransferability; 
(20)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
Prior to issuing a discharge permit, a draft permit will be sent to the user (certified mail-return receipt requested) which will show the conditions and discharge limitations. The user will be allowed fifteen (15) days to show cause why in the user's opinion the conditions of such permit should not be required. 
(d)  Duration of permits. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three (3) years. A permit may be issued for a period of less than three (3) years, or may be stated to expire on a specific date. If the user is not notified by the director thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall automatically be extended for one (1) month. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the director during the life of the permit, as limitations or requirements are modified and changed as outlined in subsection (f). The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance and shall be subject to the appeal provisions contained in subsection (f). A user becoming subject to national categorical pretreatment standards shall apply for a new permit on the effective date of said standards. 
(e)  Transfer of a permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. In the event of any change in control or ownership of facilities from which the authorized discharges emanate, the industrial user shall notify the succeeding owner or controller of the existence of the wastewater discharge permit by letter, a copy of which shall be forwarded to the City of Gainesville. Upon such notification, the City of Gainesville will issue a new permit to the succeeding owner or controller. 
(f)  Authority to modify, suspend, and/or revoke service permits. The director may modify, suspend or revoke an issued sewer permit in whole or in part during its term for failure or refusal of the permittee to carry out the requirements of this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, compliance order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits may be modified for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
b.  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
c.  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
d.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
e.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
f.  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
g.  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
h.  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; 
i.  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons: 
a.  Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
b.  Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed condition pursuant to section 5-1-193; 
c.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
d.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
e.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
f.  Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records; 
g.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
h.  Failure to pay fines; 
i.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
j.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
k.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
l.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility; 
m.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
If within ten (10) days following receipt of notice of such proposed modifications, suspension or revocation from the director, there is no objection by the permittee in writing, said action becomes final. If the permittee files with the director an objection in writing within the specified ten-day period, such permittee shall be granted a conference with the director to discuss the proposed modifications, suspension or revocation and to attempt to reach some agreement upon them. In the event that agreement is not reached, the director shall notify the permittee in writing that he proposes that the modifications, suspension or revocation become final within three (3) days if the permittee does not object in writing. If the permittee does not object in writing, the proposed modifications, suspension or revocation shall become final. If the permittee does object in writing by filing an objection with the director and the city council, the permittee shall be granted a hearing before the city council within ten (10) days of filing of the objection. The city council shall decide whether the proposed modifications, suspension or revocation of the director shall become final. The director may immediately suspend or revoke an issued sewer permit in whole or in part without the notice provisions set forth in the preceding paragraph, provided the director concludes that the permittee has violated the provisions of this chapter and that the continued violation would constitute a hazard to human or animal life, or the environment or to the stream or watercourse receiving the treatment plant effluent, or would not be susceptible to treatment by the POTW, or which otherwise may create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance. Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit. A terminated permit under any of the provisions set forth in this chapter shall mean the user shall not discharge process wastewater into the city's sewerage system. 
(g)  Wastewater survey. Any commercial user may be required to complete a wastewater survey questionnaire as requested by the director. 
(h)  Slug control plan. On a biennial basis the city conducts a survey to determine the need for industrial users to develop a program to control slug discharges. A slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. If the city decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures for follow-up written notification within five (5) days; 
(4)  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-152. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Requests for exemption from concentration requirements by commercial users who discharge less than ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day into the sewerage system will be considered upon written application to the director demonstrating conclusively that compliance with stated concentration standards is technically or economically infeasible and that the discharge, if exempted, will not interfere with normal operations within the sewerage system. Commercial users of the sewerage system shall not be exempted from the total poundage limitation discharge requirements, applicable surcharges, and/or federal pretreatment standards. 
(b)  A final decision regarding requests for exemptions will be rendered in writing by the director. Exemptions shall be subject to annual review and renewal by the director, or more frequently at the discretion of the director. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-153. - Classification of permitted users as food processing industry and nonfood processing industry. 
For the purpose of allocating wastewater discharge parameters, the director may classify permitted users as either food processing industry or nonfood processing industry based on the nature of the user's process and history of wastewater discharge data. Nothing in this chapter may prevent the director from imposing discharge limits on any user more stringent than those outlined in section 5-1-67 as stated in subsection 5-1-68(b). 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Secs. 5-1-154—5-1-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 8. - INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT 

Sec. 5-1-176. - Pretreatment facilities requirements. 
Permitted users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in sections 5-1-67 and 5-1-68 above within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans and drawings showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-177. - Use by poultry processing plants. 
(a)  No person engaged in the processing of poultry within the area served by the city's sewerage system shall discharge any poultry processing wastewater into the city sewerage system without such wastewaters having been screened to remove therefrom suspended solids such as, but not limited to, feather, grit and offal, as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Provision shall be made for the disposal of solids removed by the screening devices. Solids so removed shall not be placed in the city sewer system. 
(c)  Before the installation of any screening device, two (2) complete sets of plans and specifications of the proposed work shall be submitted to the director for his review and approval (as referenced in section 5-1-186 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Cross reference— Animals, Chapter 4-1. 
Secs. 5-1-178, 5-1-179. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-1-180. - Use by textile plants. 
(a)  No person engaged in the processing of textile products or fibers shall empty any sewage or waste from such textile processing plant into the sewer system of the city without: 
(1)  Screening said waste through a screen sufficiently fine to remove such fibers from the effluent; 
(2)  Equalizing the flow of its waste into the city sewer system to a point, whereby the rate of flow into the sewer shall not be greater than the rate of flow of potable water from the city's water system into the plant; 
(3)  Securing the prior approval of the director before introducing dyes into the sewer system. 
(b)  The following materials are incompatible to the operation of the city's treatment plant and shall not be permitted to be introduced into the city's sewer system: 
(1)  Nonbiochemical degradable fibers. 
(2)  Latex or latex compounds. 
(3)  Rubber or rubber compounds. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-181. - Pretreatment design parameters. 
Unless a special agreement as provided for in section 5-1-188 of this chapter exists, pretreatment as mentioned in section 5-1-69 shall mean the following: 
(1)  Removal of all prohibited materials and correction of all unacceptable conditions mentioned in sections 5-1-67 and 5-1-68 of this chapter. Pretreatment systems or units shall be designed such that the following pollutants are not exceeded: 

 
based upon representative samples of the discharge to the city sewers, taken on days of normal plant operation, with tests being performed as detailed in 40 CFR 136, including, but not limited to, "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", latest approved edition, published by the American Public Health Association and others. 
(2)  The user discharge concentration limits listed in subsection 5-1-67(2) shall be the limits required on wastewater discharge permits. Such limits may therefore be used as a guide in pretreatment facility design and operation. If the user exceeds these limits or is found in violation of this chapter, the user is in a state of violation. In the event that the POTW influent level is exceeded or a disruption of the sewage treatment plant process occurs due to an excessive level of one (1) or more controlled substances, the city council may alter the user discharge concentration sufficiently to protect the plant and its receiving stream. Such modifications shall apply to all users. In the event of toxicity being found in a POTW, the director may at his discretion require industrial users to participate in a toxicity reduction evaluation in accordance with the provisions of the city's POTW's NPDES permits. 
(3)  Control over quantities and rates of discharge referred to in subsection 5-1-69(3) as applied to major contributors means that the daily plant discharges shall be spread as uniformly as possible over the entire twenty-four-hour period. In no case shall the discharge in one (1) continuous eight-hour period exceed fifty (50) percent of the total twenty-four-hour discharge nor shall any amount of waste at a rate of flow, into the sewer system, be in excess of the rate of flow of potable water delivered from the city's water system into the plant. 
(4)  The pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, and the design for installation of plants and equipment for the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, shall be subject to the review and approval of the director and the chief building inspector and shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. Any subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flow control facilities shall not be made without due notice to and prior approval of the director. 
(5)  All users shall comply with the pretreatment standards as set forth in 40 CFR, Part 403. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 01-70, § IV, 12-18-01) 
Sec. 5-1-182. - Fat, oil, grease, and sand interceptors required and maintained. 
(a)  Except where more complete pretreatment may be required, fat, oil, grease and/or sand interceptors shall be provided at all service stations, commercial or industrial food-handling establishments, feed mills, and at any other commercial or industrial establishment or any institution at which such devices are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease and/or oil in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director and shall be maintained by the owner. The owner shall provide to the director or his designee, upon demand, proof, which consists of a completed and legible manifest as included in subsection (c) of this chapter, and/or frequency of interceptor cleaning. The frequency for maintaining these interceptors shall at the minimum be as follows based on the classifications listed. 

 
(b)  Pumping requires the complete removal of the entire contents of the trap with no reintroduction of any portion of the waste into the trap. The city may seek additional enforcement action under O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2. 
(c)  A grease trap waste hauler must obtain a grease trap waste disposal manifest prior to removal or transporting waste for disposal. It is the grease trap owner's responsibility to ensure the hauler possesses said manifest prior to pumping or the owner is in noncompliance with this chapter and shall be subjected to all applicable fines and penalties included herein. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 2005-20, § II, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 5-1-183. - Owners to maintain pretreatment and flow-equalizing facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-184. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-1-185. - Suitable location required for sampling and other purposes. 
(a)  When required by the director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying nondomestic wastewater shall install a suitable control manhole, vault or other structure in the building sewer in which the city may install such meters, sampling facilities and other appurtenances as necessary to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastewater. 
(b)  Such structure as indicated, in subsection (a) shall: 
(1)  Be accessibly and safely located; 
(2)  Be protected against vandalism; 
(3)  Provide an accessible water source; 
(4)  Use, when possible, a cover or lid which is easily removed and is of reduced weight; 
(5)  Be supplied with suitable electrical current for the metering and sampling equipment to be installed; 
(6)  Provide suitable lighting; 
(7)  Provide adequate enclosure; 
(8)  Have unrestricted accessibility to the city and its appointed personnel; and 
(9)  Be constructed in accordance with standard details approved and provided by the director. 
(c)  The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained and kept free from any build-up or debris to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(d)  In addition, the sample station shall be located to provide for easy access by city personnel and must be located where it can be reached directly from the public right-of-way. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the director may allow an exception be granted on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 2004-54, § III, 7-20-04) 
Sec. 5-1-186. - Industrial wastewater monitoring and reporting. 
(a)  Certification statement. All permitted user reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the permitted user: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(b)  Discharge reports 
(1)  Baseline monitoring reports application. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a categorical determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1)—(5). New industrial users and new sources (as defined in 40 CFR, Section 403.3(k)) shall also submit such reports to the director as required under 40 CFR, Section 403.12(b)(1)—(5). New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(4), (5). 
The report shall contain the information listed in subparagraphs (1) through (7) of 40 CFR, Section 403.12(b): 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
(a)  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
(b)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be sampled and analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 5-1-187 of this chapter. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
This requirement includes a baseline monitoring report (BMR) to be submitted to the city at least ninety (90) days prior to discharge of any pollutants to the POTW. 
(2)  Periodic monitoring reports. All permitted industry shall submit a discharge report as provided in 40 CFR, Section 403.12(g) and (h). The report shall be submitted on at least a biannual basis during the months of June and December or more frequently as directed by the city. These reports shall be based on sampling and analyses performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with subsection (c). If a permitted user subject to the reporting requirements of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city, using the procedures prescribed in subsection (d)(2), the results of the monitoring shall be included in the report. 
Any permitted user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall, at least, submit to the director during the months of June and December a discharge report indicating the nature, concentration and flow of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in 40 CFR 403, (or amendments thereto which may be promulgated from time to time). Collection and testing of wastewater samples used for compliance monitoring must be in accordance with section 5-1-187 of this chapter. 
At the discretion of the director and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the director may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. Such reports shall be submitted more frequently if required in the pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirements or required as part of the enforcement response program or deemed necessary by the director. 
(3)  All permitted users shall promptly notify the director by phone with a subsequent written report in advance if possible, of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge (change in chemical constituents or liquid materials), including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12 (p) and subsection 5-1-186(b)(5) of this chapter, which are or may be discharged and which potentially may interfere with the operation of the public treatment system. This notification is also required in instances of potential problems, i.e., slug loads. 
(4)  In all events, the reports required under this section, shall meet the requirements of 40 CFR, Section 403.12, (b) through (g). 
(5)  The permitted user shall notify the city, the EPA regional waste management division director, and the state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All permitted users shall provide the notification no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this paragraph needs to be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12(j) and subsection 5-1-186(b)(3) of this chapter. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b), (d), and (e), and subsections 5-1-186(b)(2), (5), and (6) of this chapter. 
Discharges are exempt from the above requirements of subsection 5-1-186(b)(5) during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). 
Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. 
Subsequent months during which the permitted user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification unless specifically required by the director. 
In case of any new regulation under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the city, the EPA regional waste management waste division director and the state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
In the case of any notification made under subsection (b)(6), the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(6)  Categorical pretreatment standard compliance. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater in the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing the following information: 
a.  The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the city from each of the following: 
1.  Regulated process streams; and 
2.  Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of § 403.6(e). 
The director may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations. 
b.  The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required) by the standard of the city for regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations outlined in subsection 5-1-186(b)(1). 
c.  A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the permitted user and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the City of Gainesville in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
(7)  The reports required under this section shall carry the signature of an authorized representative certifying data accuracy and pretreatment standard compliance and/or appropriate operation and maintenance measures to ensure future compliance. 
(8)  Permitted users shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records and information required to be retained under this chapter. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this chapter, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. For each measurement or sample collected and analyzed for compliance purposes, a record of the following information shall be maintained: 
a.  The exact place, date, time and person who performed the sampling; 
b.  The exact place, date, time and person who performed the required analyses; 
c.  The analytical techniques or methods used; 
d.  All bench data derived for the purpose of calculating test results; and 
e.  The results of all required analyses. 
(c)  Records and monitoring. 
(1)  All permitted users who discharge or propose to discharge wastewaters to the wastewater treatment system shall maintain such records of production and related factors, effluent flows and pollutant amounts or concentrations as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter, wastewater discharge permit and any applicable state, local or federal pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  Such records shall be made available upon request by the director after reasonable notice. All such records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or Georgia Environmental Protection Division upon demand. A summary of such data indicating the permitted user's compliance with this chapter shall be prepared as requested and submitted to the director after reasonable notice. 
(3)  The owner or operator of any premises or facility discharging industrial wastewater into the system shall install at their own cost and expense suitable monitoring equipment to facilitate the accurate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes as required by the director. Such equipment shall be maintained in proper working order and kept safe and accessible at all times. 
(4)  The monitoring equipment shall be located and maintained on the user's premises outside of the building. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the city council may allow such facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area. 
(5)  When more than one (1) user can discharge into a common sewer, the director may require installation of separate monitoring equipment for each user. When there is a significant difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the director may require that separate monitoring facilities be installed for each separate discharge. 
(6)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the director's requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications. 
(d)  Inspection, sampling and analysis. 
(1)  Compliance determination. Compliance determinations with respect to city code prohibitions and limitations may be made on the basis of either instantaneous grab samples or composite samples of wastewater unless specified in an industrial discharge permit. Composite samples may be taken over a twenty-four hour period, or over a longer or shorter time span, as determined necessary by the director to meet the needs of specific circumstances and may require records of flow monitoring and measurement when deemed necessary by the director. When evaluating the compliance status of an industrial user or a significant industrial user, the POTW uses all samples which were obtained through appropriate sampling techniques and analyzed in accordance with the procedures established in 40 CFR Part 136. When the city splits a sample with a user, the city uses the results from each of the split samples providing the sample has been properly collected, preserved and analyzed, as referenced in subsection 5-1-186(d)(5) of this chapter. When such a split sample produces two (2) different analytical results, an average of the results from the split samples is determined and use of the resulting average number determines the compliance status of the industrial user. If one (1) or both of the analytical split sample results is determined to be invalid, the city recalculates the compliance status of the user using all valid results. 
(2)  Analysis of industrial wastewaters. Laboratory analysis of industrial wastewater samples shall be performed in accordance with section 5-1-187 of this chapter. In the case where a concentration limit contained in a wastewater discharge permit is lower than lab detection limits, the lowest reportable detection limit shall be in accordance with lab detection limits as specified by GA EPD in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 136. 
(3)  Sampling frequency. Sampling of industrial wastewater for the purpose of compliance determination with respect to city code prohibitions and limitations will be done at such intervals as the director may designate. Each permitted user will sample at least two (2) times each year as described in 40 CFR 403. Additional sampling may be required by the director. The city may require a permitted user to conduct a 129-priority pollutant scan at least once every three (3) years or at the time there is a process change that, in the opinion of the director, would warrant such a scan. The city will conduct at least one (1) unannounced sampling of industrial wastewaters for compliance purposes from each permitted user. 
(4)  Resampling frequency. If sampling performed by a permitted user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis of the pollutant(s) in violation and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation, except the user is not required to resample if: 
a.  The city performs sampling of the user at least once per month. 
b.  The city performs sampling of the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(5)  Laboratory accreditation. All analysis submitted to the city for the purpose of compliance determination and other purposes as the director deems necessary, shall be performed by a laboratory having been accredited by a recognized third party laboratory accreditation organization if no federal or state accreditation program is available. If a laboratory is not accredited, then the laboratory must demonstrate to the city's satisfaction that quality assurance and quality control measures are at least as stringent as those used by the city's laboratory. 
(e)  Facility operation. The user shall at all times maintain in good working order and operate as efficiently as possible all treatment or control facilities, including inspection and sampling of systems installed or used by the user to achieve compliance with all terms and conditions of this chapter. When required by the director the user shall provide for adequate documentation of pretreatment controls, such as standard operating procedures manual and/or quality control programs. 
(f)  Confidentiality. The director shall provide appropriate confidentiality in handling and monitoring all collected information so as to avoid the disclosure, accidentally or purposefully, of trade secrets deemed vital to each industrial discharger under surveillance by this program. Public access to such information shall be limited as provided in 40 CFR, Section 403.14. 
(g)  Ordinance supersession. Upon the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial subcategory, the national standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter. The director shall notify all affected significant industrial users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Section 403.12. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-187. - Method to be used for sampling and testing. 
(a)  All sampling, measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with 40 CFR 403., 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto, and the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole to the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. In case of laboratory procedural conflict, 40 CFR 136 takes precedence. When 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the director determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the director. 
(b)  The samples collected shall be representative of daily operations. At least four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, F.O.G., sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, a continuous 24-hour composite sample collected during production hours must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. If conditions warrant, additional consecutive 24-hour sampling periods may be required by the city. The director may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any user that demonstrates that flow-proportional sampling is infeasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
(c)  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with all pretreatment standards and requirements. Where an alternative concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-188. - Exceptions by the city council. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city council and any industrial concern whereby industrial wastewater of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. The city council shall never knowingly enter into any such special agreement or arrangement which violates any provision of the federal general pretreatment regulations for existing or new sources of pollution (40 CFR 403) or any of the federal industrial pretreatment categorical standards. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-189. - Sewer flow metering. 
It is the industry's responsibility to maintain accurate flow measurements at all times and under all flow conditions, and to provide such information as required by the city to demonstrate that this requirement is being met. If the industry cannot prove to the city's satisfaction that accurate flows are being maintained at all times, then the city shall base all wastewater treatment charges, surcharges or penalties on the consumption metered on the city water meter as detailed in section 10-1-18. If the city has reason to believe that metered consumption does not reflect the total volume of wastewater being discharged, the city reserves the right to use it's own flow monitoring data or historical data, as deemed necessary by the director, to determine wastewater discharge. No allowances for adjusted sewer flows will be allowed unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the director. To allow for sewer billing adjustments, all plans, specifications and equipment shall be submitted to and accepted by the city. The industry shall allow thirty (30) days for the city's review and comments. When a user has an alternate water supply or other source of water such that the volume of wastewater generated is greater than the volume of metered water purchased, the city may require that a flowmeter be installed. When deemed necessary by the director or entered into agreement by the director and user, the city may maintain flow measurement equipment with all costs borne to the industrial user. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-190. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated. Therefore, certain users are now or shall become subject to categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 and specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged into the POTW. All users subject to a categorical pretreatment standard may also be subject to the local limitations established in subsection 5-1-67(b) or by the State of Georgia. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for existing sources which hereafter become subject to such standards shall be effected within three (3) years following promulgation of the standards unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the standard. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for new sources shall be required upon promulgation of the standard by the environmental protection agency. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed ninety (90) days), new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-191. - Dilution prohibition. 
No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-192. - Potential problem discharges. 
(a)  Protection from potential problem discharges. 
(1)  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. At the discretion of the director and in accordance with subsection 5-1-151(h), procedures and facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or operator's own cost and expense. 
(2)  Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be approved by the director before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify his facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Notification of potential problem discharges. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load which may cause potential problems for the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 5-1-67 of this chapter), it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, cause and duration of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter. 
(3)  Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter. 
(4)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the permitted user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (b)(1), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(5)  Any enforcement action taken based on information gained from this provision shall be enforceable under sections 5-1-21, 5-1-22(a) and (b) and 5-1-23 of this chapter 
(c)  Slug discharges. 
(1)  The city may use instantaneous grab samples for the determination of a slug discharge as defined in section 5-1-3 of this chapter. 
(2)  The analytical results may be used by the control authority for enforcement actions as deemed necessary by the director. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-193. - Notification of changed conditions. 
Each permitted user is required to notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. For purposes of this requirement flow increases of ten (10) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed significant. Responsibilities of the director include: 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under subsection 5-1-151(b). 
(2)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under subsection 5-1-151(c) or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under subsection 5-1-151(f). 
(3)  The director shall respond to the user's notice prior to the user implementing the planned changed condition(s). 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-194. - Combined wastewater formula. 
Where process effluent is mixed prior to treatment with wastewaters other than those generated by the regulated process, fixed alternative discharge limits may be derived by the city, as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a), or by the user with written concurrence of the city. These alternative limits shall be applied to the mixed effluent. Derivation and monitoring locations are to be conducted as outlined in 40 CFR 403.6(e). All expenses incurred in development and use of the formula shall be the requesting user's responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-195. - Net/gross calculations. 
Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the presence of pollutants in the user's intake water in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-196. - Certification of operators. 
Any permitted user that provides pretreatment shall comply with the rules of the Georgia State Board of Examiners for Certification of Water and Wastewater Treatment Plant Operators and Laboratory Analysts concerning individuals engaged in such activities. (Georgia Rules & Regulations Chapter 750). At the discretion of the director, more stringent certification requirements may be imposed based on the industrial user's previous operation or potential to impact the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-197. - Falsifying information. 
Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall be in violation of this ordinance and subject to the fines, penalties and punishment provided for in article 2 and other penalties as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-198. - Annual publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance. 
The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the industrial users and significant industrial users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Sec. 5-1-199. - Downgrade of significant industrial users classification. 
The director may, at his discretion, downgrade a user from a significant industrial user standing, including standards, requirements and reporting status reductions, or elimination of any and/or all standards and requirements of this ordinance based on an evaluation of all information available from the user's past records. The user may at any time the director deems necessary be returned to significant industrial user standing. 
(Ord. No. 98-63, § I, 12-1-98) 
Secs. 5-1-200—5-1-214. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 9. - COMMERCIAL WASTE 

Sec. 5-1-215. - Purpose. 
Excessive amounts of fats, oils and grease, grit, sand and other solid or viscous materials can cause blockage and obstruction in the sanitary sewer and treatment systems, causing untreated wastewater to overflow into the environment. Much of the waste material that has the potential to cause blockage or obstruction originates from commercial facilities, such as food preparation and vehicle maintenance facilities. This article sets forth minimum and uniform requirements for the treatment and disposal of commercial waste into the sanitary sewer system, and the transportation and ultimate disposal of commercial waste sludge and byproducts. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To minimize the discharge of pollutants associated with commercial waste discharged into the sanitary sewer system that may interfere with normal operation of the system; and 
(2)  To assure that the sludge and byproducts removed from commercial waste treatment systems are transported and disposed of in accordance with Chapter 391-3-6-.24 of the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, § III, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 5-1-216. - Definitions. 
All terms used in this article shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions and abbreviations as set forth in this section, or in any other section of this article: 
City means the City of Gainesville, represented by its elected officials, or their authorized agent or employees. 
Commercial facilities means a treatment facility constructed and intended to produce commercial, domestic, or industrial wastewaters, including facilities intended to collect, transport, and treat storm water runoff. 
Commercial wastes means: 
(1)  Non-toxic, non-hazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities; or 
(2)  Grease interceptor contents generated by a commercial food operation or institutional food preparation facility, including without limitation, fats, grease, and food scraps; or 
(3)  Any oil waste residue produced from vehicle maintenance or washing that discharge to an oil-water separator or sand trap. 
Commercial waste discharge permit is a wastewater discharge permit issued to commercial facilities by a local governing authority. 
Commercial waste transporter permit is a permit issued by a local governing authority for an individual tank truck. 
EPD means the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division or its duly authorized representative. 
F.O.G. means fats, oils, and grease. 
F.O.G. separator means a structure or device designed to collect and retain oils, grease, and fatty substances usually found in kitchen or similar wastes. 
Grease interceptor means a structure or device designed to collect and retain oils, grease, and fatty substances usually found in kitchen or similar wastes. 
Grease trap refers to a F.O.G. separator. 
Grit trap means a structure or device designed primarily for the accumulation and removal of grit. 
Hazardous waste means any waste that has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulation promulgated by the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-11. 
LGA means local governing authority. 
Local governing authority means the governing authority of a county or municipality; or the designee of any county or municipality in this state. The local governing authority for a county would typically be the county board of commissioners and for a municipality would typically be the city council. 
mg/L means milligrams per liter. 
Oil-water separator means a structure or device designed primarily to collect and retain oily substances. 
Originator means the owner or operator of the grease or F.O.G. interceptor, grit trap, oil-water separator, or sand trap from which commercial wastes are removed. 
Registration means acceptance by the EPD of a transporter. 
Registered commercial waste transporter is a business/owner registered by the State of Georgia, Environmental Protection Division and whose tank trucks are permitted by a local governing authority. 
Sand trap means a receptacle designed for the accumulation and removal of sand, grit, rocks and other similar debris. 
Septic waste means the contents of a septic tank. 
Transporter means any person or firm, which owns or operates one (1) or more waste tank trucks that receive or dispose of commercial waste in this state. 
Tank truck means any vehicle that removes and transports commercial wastes. 
User means any person who contributes, causes, or permits the introduction of wastewater into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, § III, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 5-1-217. - Coverage and exclusions. 
This article applies to any facility that generates commercial waste, to any person who removes commercial wastes, to any person who processes commercial wastes, and to any person who accepts commercial wastes for final disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, § III, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 5-1-218. - Requirements. 
(a)  Responsibility. It is the responsibility of the originator to assure that commercial wastewater is properly treated and discharged into the sewer system. Any commercial waste, sludge, and byproducts from the originator's facility shall be transported by a permitted transporter, and disposed of at an EPD approved commercial waste processing and disposal facility. The originator of commercial waste shall not allow a transporter to remove waste from their facility without a current commercial waste transporter permit issued by an LGA. 
(b)  Permitting process. There are two (2) types of permits required under this article: Commercial waste discharge permit (originator) and commercial waste transporter permit. The permits for the originator and transporter are issued by the LGA under this article. However, prior to obtaining a commercial waste transporter permit, the transporter must first register as a transporter of commercial waste with the EPD and obtain a transporter registration number. This registration number must be included in the permit number issued by the LGA. Specific details related to permits are covered later in this article. 
(c)  Manifest required. All originators, transporters, and processing and disposal site operators, involved in the removal, transport, and disposal of commercial wastes and commercial waste sludge and byproducts, shall participate in proper maintenance of manifests. This manifest will require signatures from the originator, transporter and disposer in order to maintain and establish accountability. The approved manifest is a multi-copy form. 
(1)  The originator shall: 
a.  Sign the received manifest form and maintain such record for a period of three (3) years. 
b.  Keep a copy of all manifests for a period of three (3) years on site and shall make available for inspection by the city. 
(2)  The transporter shall: 
a.  Utilize a manifest for each location being serviced. 
b.  Sign the transporter portion of the manifest and leave a copy of the manifest with the originator. 
c.  Present the manifest to the disposal operator to complete and sign the disposal section, and shall leave one (1) copy of the manifest with the disposal site operator. 
d.  Send a completed copy of the manifest to the city within fifteen (15) days. A manifest is considered complete after the commercial waste is delivered and disposed of at the commercial waste disposal or processing facility, and the manifest has been signed and completed by the disposal or processing facility. 
e.  Send a completed copy of the manifest to the originator with the signature of the disposal site operator within thirty (30) days. 
f.  Keep one (1) copy of the completed manifest form demonstrating delivery to the disposal site operator for their records and shall maintain such records for a period of three (3) years; except that the transporters manifest (or copy thereof) covering not less than the immediately preceding thirty-day period for a particular tank truck shall be kept in the transporter's tank truck. All such records shall be available for inspection. 
g.  Ensure that the manifest contains all the information required on the manifest form prescribed and furnished from time to time by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, § III, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 5-1-219. - Limitations. 
No user shall introduce into the sewer system any materials in an amount which would cause interference with the system. In addition to any limitations set forth in the pretreatment ordinance, no user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sewer system the following: 
(a)  Solid or viscous materials in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow to the sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  Petroleum or mineral oils in concentrations greater than one hundred (100) mg/L. 
(c)  Any trucked or hauled commercial waste materials. 
(d)  F.O.G. of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than one hundred (100) mg/l. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, § III, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 5-1-220. - Originator. 
(a)  Food service establishment. 
(1)  Permit required. No food service establishment shall discharge commercial wastewater into the sanitary sewer system without a commercial waste discharge permit issued by the city. Application for such permit must be made on a form furnished by the city. The permit is valid for up to five (5) years and is non-transferable. 
(2)  F.O.G. separator required. All new restaurants, institutional kitchens, or other food service establishments defined as commercial users of the system, shall provide approved F.O.G. and settleable solids removal equipment or facilities sufficient to meet the limitations set forth in this article. The number and size(s) of the system(s) shall be determined by the city. Existing commercial users will be assessed on an individual basis, and will require approval by the city. 
a.  The separator(s) shall exclude sanitary wastewater and be located outside of any building and accessible for proper maintenance and inspection. 
b.  The separator must be located in an area that will allow for the dumpster pad to be connected. 
c.  In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the separator(s) shall be installed with traffic bearing covers. 
d.  The separator/grease trap must be a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons and have three (3) baffles, and three (3) inspection openings provided, one (1) over the influent pipe, and another over the center baffle, and another over the discharge pipe for inspection purposes. 
e.  The equipment or facilities shall be installed and maintained by the originator. 
f.  All food service facilities defined as commercial facilities, shall be required to have a separate water meter and back-flow device, unless a specific variance is granted by the director. 
g.  Alternatative treatment methods. The use of any alternative method of treatment is prohibited without written approval by the city. Alternative treatment systems, such as mechanical grease recovery devices, shall only be used only after evaluation and authorization by the city. 
h.  The use of chemicals, enzymes and bacteria is prohibited, unless specifically authorized in writing by the city, and only after site specific monitoring and data collection has been performed. The use of any additives shall not be considered as an alternative to an adequate treatment system or in lieu of regular maintenance, as prescribed in this article. 
i.  Maintenance required. All F.O.G. separators shall be maintained at the originators expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents of the separator. The city has established the following minimum pumping schedule and may increase or decrease the pumping frequency based on the originators compliance with the sewer use ordinance: 

 
(b)  Maintenance and service facilities . 
(1)  Permit required. No maintenance or service facility shall discharge commercial wastewater into the sanitary sewer system without a commercial waste discharge permit issued by the city. Application for such permit must be made on a form furnished by the city. The permit is valid for one (1) year and is non-transferable. 
(2)  Sand/oil separator required. All maintenance or service facilities shall provide approved oil and solids removal equipment or facilities sufficient to meet the limitations set forth in this article. The type, number, and size(s) of the system(s) shall be determined by city. 
a.  All maintenance or service facilities defined as commercial users of the system, shall be required to have a separate water meter and back-flow device, unless a specific variance is granted by the director. 
b.  The separator(s) shall exclude sanitary wastewater and be located outside of any building and accessible for proper maintenance and inspection. 
c.  In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the separator(s) shall be installed with traffic bearing covers. 
d.  The separator/grease trap must be a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons and have three (3) baffles, and three (3) inspection openings provided, one over the influent pipe, and another over the center baffle, and another over the discharge pipe for inspection purposes. 
e.  The separators shall be installed and maintained by the originator. 
f.  Maintenance required. All separators shall be maintained at the originators expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents of the separator. The frequency for maintaining these interceptors shall at the minimum be as follows based on the classifications listed. The city has established the following minimum pumping schedule and may increase or decrease the pumping frequency based on the originators compliance with the sewer use ordinance: 

 
(c)  Monitoring . All commercial facilities shall have an approved manhole on the discharge sewer to allow observation, sampling and flow measurement. 
(d)  Reporting spills . All commercial facilities must report any spills to the city upon becoming aware of a spill that could impact any surrounding areas such as storm drains, adjacent streams or ground surface where the transporter has removed waste from the facility's pretreatment system. Failure to notify the city of a spill will constitute a violation and fines may be assessed to the commercial waste originator, as well as the transporter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, § III, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 5-1-221. - Transporter. 
(a)  Registration required. Any transporter, owning or operating one (1) or more waste tank trucks that receive, transport or dispose of commercial waste in the city, must be registered with EPD. 
(b)  Permit required . No transporter shall pump-out or vacuum F.O.G. separators, grit traps, sand traps, or oil-water separators without a valid commercial waste transporter permit issued by an LGA. 
(1)  Application for the permit must be made on a form prescribed by the EPD. 
(2)  The transporter shall include the location of the disposal site(s) on the commercial waste transporter permit application. 
(3)  No commercial waste transporter permit shall be issued if the owner of the tank truck(s) is not registered with the EPD. 
(4)  A commercial waste transporter permit shall be required for each individual tank truck owned and operated by a transporter. 
(5)  The commercial waste transporter permit issued by the LGA for operation of a tank truck shall be valid throughout the state. 
(6)  A transporter, who has trucks permitted by an LGA, and who decides to have additional trucks permitted by another LGA, must provide copies of the current commercial waste transporter permits with the new commercial waste transporter permit application. 
(7)  A transporter cannot have two (2) tank trucks permitted with the same commercial waste transporter permit number. 
(8)  This registration number shall be part of the commercial waste transporter permit number issued by the LGA. Every vehicle that transports commercial waste must display, on the vehicle, the commercial waste transporter permit number. 
(9)  Transporter permit fees. A transporter permitting fee will be assessed on an annual basis as is now or hereafter provided by Title 10 of this Code. 
(10)  Vehicle inspection. Annually the LGA shall inspect each tank truck prior to the issuance of a commercial waste transporter permit. Such inspection shall verify that the tank truck is substantially leak proof, durable, of easily cleaned construction, and is maintained in good repair. The LGA shall maintain records of each inspection. 
(c)  A transporter must remove the entire contents of any commercial tank that is serviced and dispose of such contents, unmingled with hazardous wastes or septic wastes, only at a facility permitted to receive such waste. 
(d)  A transporter shall provide a copy of the commercial waste transporter permit for the tank truck to each disposal site where the transporter disposes of commercial wastes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, § III, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 5-1-222. - Disposal facility. 
A processing or disposal facility of commercial waste generated within the city shall maintain copies of all manifests of tank pumping at their principal place of business for a period of three (3) years and make such records available for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, § III, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 5-1-223. - Enforcement. 
Inspection and entry. Representatives of the city, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter the premises of any originator, transporter, processor, or disposal site servicing the city's jurisdiction at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this article or the commercial waste transporter permit. Representatives of the City of Gainesville during inspections of the originator, transporter, processor, or the disposal site operator, may review records to determine compliance with provisions of these regulations. The right of inspection shall include the right to measure, observe, sample, test, record, review and make copies of all pertinent documents in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, § III, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 5-1-224. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article, or any terms, conditions, schedule of compliance or other requirements contained in the respective permit, shall be subject to enforcement proceedings by the City of Gainesville pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Not withstanding any other provisions of law, the city shall be authorized to impose a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, § III, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 5-1-225. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  Any permit issued by the City of Gainesville may be suspended, revoked or modified by the City of Gainesville, upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the terms of the permit or other conditions outlined in this article. 
(b)  The permit may be reissued by the City of Gainesville upon remedy of the non-compliance that caused the suspension, revocation or modification of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-20, § III, 6-21-05) 
CHAPTER 5-2. - WATER[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 5-1; obstruction of fireplugs, § 3-3-2; water pollution, § 3-6-36 et seq.; water quality control, § 3-6-51 et seq.; termination of water service for failure to pay sanitary and health charge, § 4-3-9. 
State Law reference— Water resources, OCGA § 12-5-1 et seq.; state grants for water service, OCGA § 36-40-20 et seq.; acquisition and construction of water and sewage systems, OCGA § 36-34-5; public utilities, OCGA Title 46. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-2-1. - Taps by other than authorized persons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an employee of the city in the performance of his duties as such, to tap into or make any opening in connection with the water mains or water lines of the city. 
(Code 1958, § 25-1.2) 
Sec. 5-2-2. - Separate meter requirements. 
Each lot, tract or parcel of land to be served by the city water system, within or without the city limits, shall be served by its own individual utility furnished water meter. No restrictions shall be placed on the number or types of units served by said meter except as outlined herein. The utility furnished water meter as referenced shall be purchased from and installed by the city. 
(1)  No water shall be metered for domestic or process purposes by "master meters" through which firefighting water could also pass. 
(2)  Certain users, businesses, or activity types receiving water service, within or without of the city limits, whether in stand alone structures or multi-unit structures, that are also connected to the city sanitary sewer system may be required to be served through a separate utility furnished water meter. Such users, businesses or activity types include but are not limited to medical or dental activities, film processing, metal plating, food processing, restaurants, automobile or other vehicle servicing, car and truck washes, printing, activities regulated under 40 CFR 403 (the federal pretreatment program), or other uses that could pose a threat to the public health, environment or sewage collection and treatment systems as determined by the utilities director or his designee. 
(3)  All water to be furnished to newly constructed or renovated multi-tenant buildings, within or without the city limits, will be sub-metered at each unit as outlined below: 
a.  Separate utility furnished water meters. Multi-tenant buildings or premises as referenced above shall receive service through separate utility furnished water meters for each individual unit. Water service shall be charged at established rates through said meters, or 
b.  Single utility furnished water meter with owner furnished private sub-meters. 
1.  Multi-tenant buildings or premises as referenced above shall receive service through a single utility furnished meter. Water service shall be charged at established rates through said meter, and 
2.  The property owner shall be responsible for privately providing and installing sub-meters for each individual unit. 
(Code 1958, § 25-2; Ord. No. 89-15, § I, 5-2-89; Ord. No. 95-20, § I, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 2009-31, § I, 8-4-09) 
Sec. 5-2-3. - New carwashes required to recycle water. 
(a)  All commercial carwash facilities permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011, with in-bay and conveyor carwashes shall install operational recycled water systems. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  In-bay automatic carwash means a commercial carwash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the vehicle. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
(2)  Conveyor carwash means a commercial carwash where the vehicle moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  In-bay automatic carwashes and conveyor commercial carwashes that were permitted or constructed prior to January 1, 2011; 
(2)  Commercial self-service carwashes where the customer washes the vehicle with spray wands and brushes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-30, § I, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 5-2-4. - Property owner liable for charges, procedure when tenant fails to pay. 
(a)  Non-residential, multi-family and commercial properties. The property owner of non-residential, multi-family or commercial property only where city water is used, within or without the city limits, shall be liable to the city for the water fees in the amounts fixed in Title 10. If property owner's tenant shall fail to pay water fee charges when presented, then the amount due shall be presented to the property owner or his agent. Upon the owner or agent's failure or refusal to pay same, the city water shall be cut off from said premises and no reconnection shall be made with such premises until all arrears, together with the cost of the reconnection shall have been paid to the utility. 
(b)  Single-family or multi-family residential properties. No water service can be refused, within or without the city limits, in the case of single-family or multi-family residential units where water service is provided through a separate utility furnished water meter for each residential unit upon application of the owner or new residential tenant of the premises because of the indebtedness of a prior owner or residential tenant to the city utility. 
(c)  Lien. Subject to O.C.G.A. § 36-60-17, the delinquent water bill or charge shall be a lien on the property where the bill or charge was incurred. 
(Code 1958, § 25-3; Ord. No. 2009-31, § II, 8-4-09) 
Sec. 5-2-5. - Discontinuance of service, notice required; no continuous flow of water, exception. 
Any person wishing to discontinue the use of water supplied from the city must give notice to the public utilities department in writing on form approved by the utility; and they will be charged for the water until such notice. No continuous flow of water will be allowed, unless a special rate is fixed or a meter used. 
(Code 1958, § 25-4; Ord. No. 2007-26, § II, 7-3-07) 
Sec. 5-2-6. - Consumer to connect and provide fixtures. 
Persons taking water must keep their own water pipes and all fixtures connected therewith, in good repair and protected from frost. They must provide a stop and waste cock, arranged so that the water can be drawn from them whenever and wherever there is danger of freezing. Water will not be furnished to any premises not provided with a stop and waste cock. 
(Code 1958, § 25-6) 
Sec. 5-2-7. - Responsibility for leaks and the expense incurred. 
All leaks which occur on the discharge side of the water meter are the responsibility of the property owner and not the public utilities department of the city. Responsibility of the public utilities department to maintain and repair water lines ends at the meter outlet couplings, and customers will be charged for water consumed due to any leak on the customer's side of the meter. Sewer charges may be subject to adjustment, provided the public utilities department receives an affidavit from a licensed plumber, stating a leak existed and was repaired. 
The public utilities director shall serve as the final authority regarding disputes over utility service bills. 
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city council from establishing, or amending, a policy administered by the city manager or his designee, which policy shall be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1958, § 25-6.1; Ord. No. 96-47, § I, 11-5-96; Ord. No. 99-68, § I, 10-5-99) 
Sec. 5-2-8. - Buildings connected to water mains; plumbing systems, conformance with plumbing code, required. 
Every building, dwelling or other structure which is connected to the water mains of the city shall have installed therein plumbing systems, both water and sewer, in conformance with the terms and provisions of the plumbing code of the city and such plumbing systems shall meet all of the terms, specifications, requirements and conditions of the plumbing code. 
(Code 1958, § 25-7) 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 7-1-166 et seq. 
Sec. 5-2-9. - Connections to mains, in accordance with inspections and tests set forth in plumbing code. 
All connections to the water mains of the city shall be made in accordance with and undergo the inspections and tests as set forth in the plumbing code of the city and subject to payment of all inspection fees and other deposits, fees and charges provided therein and in Title 10 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1958, § 25-8) 
Sec. 5-2-10. - Application of sections 5-2-8 and 5-2-9. 
The requirements of sections 5-2-8 and 5-2-9 above shall apply to additions, remodeling or other changes in the plumbing systems of existing structures as well as to new construction, and to structures located without the limits of the city as well as to those structures located within such limits. 
(Code 1958, § 25-9) 
Sec. 5-2-11. - City to furnish water during construction of new buildings, compliance with sections 5-2-8 and 5-2-9 after completion. 
During the construction of new buildings, dwellings and other structures, connections may be made and water furnished by the city and the requirements of sections 5-2-8 and 5-2-9 above need not be complied with during such construction, but on the completion of such construction then the connection shall be cut off and water shall not be furnished until the requirements of sections 5-2-8 and 5-2-9 above have been complied with. 
(Code 1958, § 25-10) 
Sec. 5-2-12. - Consumer to conform to city cross connection and backflow prevention requirements. 
All persons connected to or proposing to connect to the city public water supply system shall install and maintain a building water conveyance system which minimizes cross connections between potable and nonpotable water flows. Where such connections cannot be eliminated, the consumer shall install and maintain devices designed to totally eliminate the hazard of backflow or back siphonage of nonpotable waters into the potable water system. Such backflow and back-siphonage prevention devices shall be of design and installation to conform with the requirements of Chapter 7-1, Article 8, of this Code. Within and without the corporate limits of the city, the director of the utility department, or his designated representative, shall have authority independent of the respective plumbing inspector to ensure that all consumers have installed and maintained adequate backflow and back-siphonage protection insofar as is necessary to protect the public water supply. This authority shall include the review, inspection and approval of new installation or alterations and the periodic review of existing systems. At the discretion of the director, he may delegate this authority to the respective plumbing inspector or the chief building inspector. Such delegation does not terminate the right of the director to make or have made independent inspections. 
(Code 1958, § 25-11) 
Sec. 5-2-13. - Fire sprinkler mains; double detector check valves required. 
All water mains within or without the city limits, constructed for the purpose of providing water to a fire sprinkler system shall have a double detector check valve installed in line. The valve shall be installed in a concrete vault constructed as close to the city water main as is possible. The vault shall be constructed solely for the purpose of housing the valve and shall be approved by the director. Provision, construction and maintenance of the double detector check valve installation shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or consumer. The rate schedule for water service for fire protection services shall be in the amounts fixed in Title 10. 
(Ord. No. 89-15, § II, 5-2-89) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, § 7-1-56 et seq. 
Sec. 5-2-14. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  Whenever the director, city manager or mayor determines that a person is violating or has violated the cross connection provisions of this chapter and determines that the violation of such provisions will cause immediate damage or harm to the treatment process, equipment or treatment and distribution facilities of the city, or that the violation endangers the public health, safety or general welfare of the community, the director, city manager or mayor of the city shall have the power and authority to immediately terminate that person's water service until that person has ceased the violation. 
(b)  Charges for any discontinuance or resumption of water service shall be in the amounts fixed in Title 10. 
(Code 1958, § 25-12) 
Secs. 5-2-15—5-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - EXTENSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 4-4. 

Division 1. - Generally 

Sec. 5-2-31. - Compliance with article provisions required. 
Water service shall not be extended to developed or undeveloped property either within the city or outside the city except in conformity with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1958, § 25-21) 
Sec. 5-2-32. - Maintenance and renewal projects—Compliance with provisions. 
All maintenance and renewal projects for either the water treatment and distribution system or the sewerage collection and treatment system which are not regulated by other ordinances shall conform to the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Code 1958, § 25-22) 
Sec. 5-2-33. - Same—Approval of city manager required. 
Before an extension, renewal or maintenance project shall be undertaken, the city manager shall be required to authorize the project. 
(Code 1958, § 25-23) 
Sec. 5-2-34. - Same—Application. 
Application for a project shall be in the form of a work order request: 
(1)  A work order request shall be prepared in triplicate and it shall be signed by the city manager. 
(2)  The work order request shall contain all the pertinent facts about the proposed project and shall include a certification that sufficient funds are available to finance the project. 
(Code 1958, § 25-24) 
Sec. 5-2-35. - Water lines to be placed in public rights-of-way or public easements. 
Water lines shall only be placed within public easements established for such purpose or within the right-of-way lines of streets and roads which have been certified as being a part of the public road or street system of either the city or of the county. 
(Code 1958, § 25-25) 
Sec. 5-2-36. - Streets to be at final grade. 
A water line shall not be placed within a street right-of-way until the street for which such right-of-way was created has been constructed to final grade. 
(Code 1958, § 25-26) 
Sec. 5-2-37. - New subdivisions. 
The following rules shall govern the extension of water service into new subdivisions: 
(1)  Subdivisions within the city. A subdivision established within the city shall comply with all applicable provisions of Chapter 8-2 before it shall be eligible to receive water service from the city. 
(2)  Subdivisions outside city limits. From and after the date that a governmental jurisdiction adopts subdivision regulations for areas outside the corporate limits of the city a subdivision thereafter established in such areas shall comply with all applicable provisions of such subdivision regulations before it shall be eligible to receive water service from the city. In the event subdivision regulations are not adopted for areas outside the city then all subdivision lots established after April 5, 1960 and which are seeking city water service shall comply with the lot area requirements found in Chapter 8-2 of this Code. In such cases a certification of such compliance shall be obtained from the planning commission. 
(Code 1958, § 25-27) 
Sec. 5-2-38. - Service prohibited lots creating potential health and sanitation problems. 
When the lots requesting water service have been laid out in such a manner as might cause health and sanitation problems to develop when such lots are developed, the city water service shall only be extended to such lots after the owner, or owners, of such lots have first devised a method of eliminating the danger of health and sanitation problems which shall meet with the approval of the county health department. 
(Code 1958, § 25-28) 
Sec. 5-2-39. - Water lines—Size determined by city. 
The size of the water lines to be installed to provide water service shall be determined by the city or its engineers and such determination shall be based on the following factors, among others: 
(1)  The maximum length of the line that will be installed. 
(2)  Possible future extensions of a proposed line. 
(3)  Reasonable estimates of the maximum demands for water service that will be placed on a line. 
(4)  The present or future part the line in question will play in a fire protection program. 
(Code 1958, § 25-29) 
Sec. 5-2-40. - Same—Installation by city. 
All water lines which are to be made a part of the city water distribution system shall be installed by the city or its duly authorized agent and such lines shall be installed in accordance with such specifications as the city shall require and such lines when installed shall be the property of the city. 
(Code 1958, § 25-30) 
Secs. 5-2-41—5-2-55. - Reserved. 
Division 2. - Cost of Extension Projects 

Sec. 5-2-56. - Method of financing water service extensions. 
The cost of a water service extension project shall be allocated in the manner set forth in this division and in Title 10 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 25-41) 
Sec. 5-2-57. - Water service to undeveloped lots. 
Whenever water service is to be extended to undeveloped lots, such projects shall be financed in the same manner and under the same limitations as set forth for water service extensions to developed lots. However, in such cases, the petitioner for service shall be required to make certain advance deposits with the city. The procedure for calculating the amount of the advance deposit and the method for collecting such deposits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Number of lots. At the time application for water service to undeveloped lots is received, the petitioner for such service shall certify the exact number of lots for which service is being sought. 
(2)  Costs calculated. The total cost of the project will then be calculated. This cost shall then be converted into the cost per certified lot. 
(3)  Advance payment required. After the cost of the total project has been determined, the petitioner shall then be required to deposit with the city an amount equal to the total estimated cost of the project. Whenever a portion of this deposit shall be required to make up the difference between the actual cost of the project and the amount the city can legally spend on the project, then such portion shall be deposited into the fund established for water service extension projects and shall not be refundable. 
(4)  Project constructed. When the petitioner has deposited an equal amount to the full cost of the project with the city, the construction of the project shall then be carried out, subject to other applicable provisions of this article. 
(5)  Deposit fund created. A deposit fund is hereby created into which all advance deposits shall be placed. Disbursements from this deposit fund shall only be for the purpose of transferring nonrefundable deposits to the fund established for water service extensions or for the purpose of investing the money in short term United States Government securities. No other disbursements from this fund shall be made. 
(Code 1958, § 25-43) 
Sec. 5-2-58. - Financing the cost of combined projects. 
(a)  Method. Whenever a water service extension project will include both existing structure and undeveloped lots, then the method of financing shall be as follows: 
(1)  That part of the project which shall include existing structures shall be administered in the manner hereinbefore set forth. 
(2)  That part of the project which shall include undeveloped lots shall be administered in the manner hereinbefore set forth for undeveloped lots. 
(b)  Assigning cost. That part of the water service extension project which will serve existing structures shall be assigned its pro rata share of the total cost of the project and that part of the water service extension project which will serve undeveloped lots shall be assigned its pro rata share of the total cost of the project. 
(Code 1958, § 25-44) 
Sec. 5-2-59. - Other fees. 
In addition to such payments or deposits as a petitioner shall be required to make in connection with a water service extension project, a petitioner shall also be required to pay water cut-on fees and other fees which the city council may from time to time establish. Such fees shall be paid in advance of water service being provided. 
(Code 1958, § 25-45) 
Sec. 5-2-60. - Water line extensions in subdivisions for hardship cases. 
(a)  Upon proper petition signed by at least seventy-five (75) percent of the owners of developed lots of a subdivision which has been approved, the city council will consider such petitions for water service assistance due to hardship. Such petition shall contain: 
(1)  A request for special consideration to extend water service due to hardship with a statement outlining the circumstances causing the hardship and noting the actions taken by the owners to correct their problem; 
(2)  Signature(s) as per deed and addresses of at least seventy-five (75) percent of the owners of the exact number of developed lots in the subdivision to be served; and 
(3)  A statement of understanding that if the petition is granted, the owners will sign an agreement to pay their individual pro rata share of the cost of extending such water service. 
(b)  The city council shall have the authority to accept or reject such petition based on cost estimates, the circumstances and severity of the hardship and the city's ability to fund the city share of such extension. The number of present potential customers on developed lots and the realistic potential customers on undeveloped lots shall be considered. 
(1)  The total cost of the project will then be calculated and converted into the cost per certified lot. 
(2)  The city shall establish a pro rata cost per customer in accordance with section 5-2-57, section 5-2-58 and section 5-2-59. Notwithstanding the above requirements, customers will be permitted to pay their pro rata share as follows: 
a.  Total sum in advance, or 
b.  On a level monthly basis over a ten-year period with an interest rate to be determined upon approval. 
(c)  Prior to extension of service, full payment in advance shall be made to the city by each property owner or in the case of installment payments a signed contract or agreement from each property owner and other documents needed for recording to be used as a lien against the owner's property shall be provided. 
(d)  Size of water lines, installation and other criteria shall be the same as provided otherwise in this chapter. 
(e)  The city council shall have the authority in hardship cases to change the existing priority for the use of city funds to permit hardship cases to be assigned a priority behind priority four (4) and ahead of priority five (5) as outlined in section 5-2-79. 
(f)  In all subdivisions granted a hardship classification, future customers will be required to pay either: 
(1)  Total pro-rata cost in advance prior to tapping on the water system; or 
(2)  Upon prior proper petition signed by the property owner and approved by the city council, the pro-rata cost on a level monthly basis over a ten-year period at an interest rate to be determined by the council. 
(g)  Upon determination that the city has been reimbursed for its costs and expenses for providing water service assistance due to hardship to a subdivision, the council may, by resolution, declare the project complete and that no further payments for providing water service assistance due to hardship are to be made by the property owners in the subdivision. 
(Code 1958, § 25-46; Ord. No. 93-57, § I, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 98-60, § I, 11-17-98) 
Secs. 5-2-61—5-2-75. - Reserved. 
Division 3. - Extension, Renewal and Maintenance Fund 

Sec. 5-2-76. - Created; purpose; source. 
An extension, renewal and maintenance fund is hereby created. This fund shall be used exclusively for the purpose of financing the cost of the maintenance, the renewal and the extension of both the water treatment and distribution system and the sewage collection and treatment system. The extension, renewal and maintenance fund shall derive its income from such sources as the city council shall establish in the annual budget of the city. 
(Code 1958, § 25-57) 
Sec. 5-2-77. - Deficit financing prohibited. 
Except as otherwise provided in the capital improvement plan and the financing plan attached thereto, no extension, renewal or maintenance project shall be authorized unless there shall be a sufficient unencumbered balance in the extension, renewal and maintenance fund to finance the project. 
(Code 1958, § 25-58; Ord. No. 99-20, § I, 3-16-99) 
Sec. 5-2-78. - Petitioner authorized to finance cost when fund depleted. 
Whenever there shall not be a sufficient balance in the extension, renewal and maintenance fund to finance the cost of a water service extension project, such project may be carried out if the petitioner for such service shall agree to pay the full cost of such project on a nonrefundable basis. In such cases the petitioner shall deposit the appropriate amount directly into the extension, renewal and maintenance fund. 
(Code 1958, § 25-59) 
Sec. 5-2-79. - Priority for use of fund. 
Projects which are to be financed from the extension, renewal and maintenance fund shall be assigned priority on the following basis: 
(1)  First priority shall be assigned to a water service extension project in which the petitioner has agreed to pay the full cost of the project on a nonrefundable basis. 
(2)  Second priority shall be assigned to projects which are necessary to keep the water and sewer systems in working order. 
(3)  Third priority shall be assigned to water line or sewer line renewal projects. 
(4)  Fourth priority shall be assigned to applications for water service to existing in-city structures. If several applications of this type are pending, then priority shall be assigned on a chronological basis. 
(5)  Fifth priority shall be assigned to applications for water service to undeveloped in-city lots. If several applications of this type are pending then priority shall be assigned on a chronological basis. 
(6)  Sixth priority shall be assigned to applications for water service to existing out-of-the-city structures. If several applications of this type are pending then priority shall be assigned on a chronological basis. 
(7)  Seventh priority shall be assigned to applications for water service to undeveloped out-of-city lots which are contiguous to an existing water main. If several applications of this type are pending then priority shall be assigned on a chronological basis. 
(8)  Eighth priority shall be assigned to applications for water service to undeveloped out-of-city lots which are removed from an existing water main. If several applications of this type are pending then priority shall be assigned on a chronological basis. 
(Code 1958, § 25-60) 
Secs. 5-2-80—5-2-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - WATER SHORTAGE MANAGEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-41, § I, adopted September 19, 2006, repealed and reenacted article 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article 3 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1958, §§ 25-71, 25-72, 25-76, 25-78; Ord. No. 88-16, §§ I—VI, adopted May 17, 1988; Ord. No. 89-19, §§ I—IV, adopted May 16, 1989; Ord. No. 2000-14, § I, adopted April 4, 2000. 
Cross reference— Emergency management, § 3-1-46 et seq. 

Sec. 5-2-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Gainesville or his designee. 
Egregious violation means an unauthorized usage of water, as determined by the city manager, which may impede providing water for essential services. 
EPD means the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division or its duly authorized representative. 
Essential services mean health care, sanitation, cooking needs and fire protection. 
Noncompliance means having violated water usage restrictions. Noncompliance begins with the first violation and expires twelve (12) months from the date of the first violation. 
Outdoor water usage means lawn and garden watering; noncommercial car washing; filling of private swimming pools; noncommercial pressure washing of building exteriors, sidewalks, or driveways; or any other outdoor water usage as determined by the city manager and/or the EPD. 
Violation means a usage of water other than what is authorized under water shortage management. Each day of unauthorized water usage will constitute a separate violation. 
Water shortage management is a program by which the city may restrict the usage of water by any or all users of the water system in order to protect and manage water resources. 
(Ord. No. 2006-41, § I, 9-19-06) 
Sec. 5-2-97. - Application. 
This article shall apply to all users of the city water system. Surcharges under this article are provided in title 10. 
(Ord. No. 2006-41, § I, 9-19-06) 
Sec. 5-2-98. - Purpose and public notification. 
(a)  The purpose of this article shall be to install procedures to prevent threats to public health and safety arising from periods of water shortage and drought and to prevent acts that cause, or can be reasonably expected to cause, significant imminent harm to limited water resources. 
(b)  The public shall be notified that this article is in effect through the news media and by posting notice thereof on the city's bulletin board in City Hall at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-41, § I, 9-19-06) 
Sec. 5-2-99. - Implementing water shortage management. 
(a)  Water shortage management shall be implemented if water usage restrictions are necessary to protect water resources or provide for essential services as determined by the city manager, to be consistent with the city's approved Water Conservation Plan, or as directed by the EPD, as may be specified in the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-30, or as otherwise directed. Water shortage management shall remain in effect until all factors are relieved and shall cease when the city manager determines that an adequate supply to fulfill public needs exists. The city manager's decision shall be subject to being approved or modified by the city council at the council's next meeting. The public shall be notified of the water use restrictions in effect under water shortage management through the news media and by posting notice thereof on the city's bulletin board in City Hall at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to enforcement of this article. 
(b)  The city manager may authorize water usage restrictions in order to accomplish water shortage management, as necessary to protect water resources. These restrictions may be imposed on any user of the city water system. 
(c)  The city manager may authorize the following penalties, as the result of a violation, egregious violation, or continued noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, in order to accomplish water shortage management, as necessary to protect water resources: 
(1)  Water shortage management surcharges for noncompliance, as described in section 10-1-49, and 
(2)  Water service termination. 
(Ord. No. 2006-41, § I, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2007-51, § I, 11-6-07) 
Sec. 5-2-100. - Extreme cases. 
(a)  In extreme cases of loss of service, the city manager may authorize closing valves in the water distribution system. When exercising this discretion, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Make water available to private consumers from fire hydrants that are equipped to dispense water to the consumers' private containers; 
(2)  Fully consider the needs of essential services; and 
(3)  If possible, avoid the interruption of the fire protection. 
(b)  When determining "extreme cases", the city manager shall consider: 
(1)  Loss of service; 
(2)  Available water supply; and 
(3)  The threat posed to public health and safety by continued water usage. 
(Ord. No. 2006-41, § I, 9-19-06) 
Secs. 5-2-101—5-2-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - WATER WASTE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 5-2-104. - Waste of water; prohibitions. 
(a)  The following uses are a waste or unreasonable use or method of use of water and are prohibited: 
(1)  Allowing water to escape from any premises onto public right-of-way, such as streets and sidewalks, or upon any other person's property; 
(2)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device during rain; 
(3)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device that has any broken or missing sprinkler heads; 
(4)  Failing to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler head, or a leaking valve, or a leaking outdoor faucet, or a service line leak, or any other visible outside water leaks, on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person, within thirty (30) days; 
(5)  Washing any vehicle with a hose and not having a water shut-off nozzle or allowing water to run continuously from a hose while washing any vehicle is also prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2015-36, § I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-2-105. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The restrictions in section 5-2-104 do not apply to the following authorized uses: 
(1)  Flow resulting from firefighting or routine inspection of fire hydrants or from fire training activities; 
(2)  Water applied as a dust control measure, as required by erosion and sedimentation rules; 
(3)  Water applied to abate spills of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials, where water is the appropriate methodology; 
(4)  Water applied to prevent or abate health, safety, or accident hazards when alternate methods are not available; 
(5)  Water used for construction or maintenance activities where the application of water is appropriate methodology and where no other practical alternative exists; 
(6)  Water used for power washing hard surfaces to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, unless prohibited by drought restrictions; 
(7)  Mobile car washes when approved or a special use permit is obtained from the local authority; 
(8)  Emptying of swimming pools for maintenance when proper local rules are followed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-36, § I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-2-106. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Water wasting includes water waste by any classifications of user; 
(b)  Whenever the director of the city department of water resources, city manager or mayor determines that there is a waste of water in or about premises to which water is supplied from the city, either by willful waste or by means of a leak in any water pipe or fixture located in or upon the premises, said waste may cause the water to be cut off, subject to section 5-2-104; 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code; 
(d)  In addition to the penalty provided for the violation of this article, the city may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-36, § I, 12-15-15) 
Title 6 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The license tax ordinance, Ord. No. 71-31, as amended, is not included in this Code and is kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Fiscal affairs, Tit. 2; public works and health, Tit. 4; municipal utilities, Tit. 5; planning, Tit. 8; schedule of fees, Tit. 10; finance generally, § 2-3-1 et seq.; parking in shopping center fire lanes, § 3-4-85; pet dealers, kennel or stable operators and animal shelters, § 4-1-101 et seq.; rat control, § 4-1-143; display or sale of merchandise on streets or sidewalks, § 4-4-15. 
State Law reference— Commerce and trade, OCGA Title 10; state grants relating to business licenses, OCGA § 36-40-20 et seq.; professions and businesses, OCGA Tit. 43; certain agricultural products and livestock raised in state exempt from municipal tax or license fee, OCGA § 48-5-356; specific, business and occupation taxes, OCGA § 48-13-1 et seq. 

CHAPTER 6-1. - WRECKER SERVICES 

Sec. 6-1-1. - Wrecker services placed on rotation basis for service calls. 
(a)  Generally. In all cases whereby the owner or operator of a motor vehicle fails to designate a wrecker service for the removal of his/her motor vehicle for whatever reason, inside the city limits, the city shall contact only those wrecker services which have been approved under this section to be placed on the city wrecker rotational list and have made application to be placed on the rotating list for service calls by the city. The chief of police shall establish two (2) rotation lists. The first list shall be for light duty operators and shall consist of those having been approved for light duty service. The second list shall consist of only those wrecker services having been approved for heavy duty service. The rotational list shall be approved and certified by signature of the chief of police. Each wrecker service approved shall be placed on its respective list for as long as they can demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section and shall be used by the city for a period of two (2) weeks. The start of the rotation will begin at midnight on Monday and will run continuously for a period of two (2) weeks. At the end of this period, this wrecker service shall be placed at the bottom of the list and each list shall be rotated in like manner every two (2) weeks. The chief of police shall have responsibility for the maintenance of records that ensure that wrecker services placed on the list are in compliance with the requirements of this section. Any new wrecker service shall be placed at the bottom of the list for which it is approved. Within thirty (30) days after a new company is placed on the rotation list a revised copy of the rotation list will be delivered by personal service or by certified mail to all wrecker services currently on the rotation list. The chief of police shall have responsibility for conducting a meeting with all wrecker services on the rotation lists a minimum of annually. 
(b)  Approval requirements to be placed on the rotational lists. At the time that the wrecker service submits its application to be included on the rotating lists as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the wrecker service shall provide proof to the city that it has satisfactorily complied with the following requirements: 
(1)  For light duty list it has a minimum of three (3) wreckers for light duty service or a minimum of one (1) wrecker which meets the requirements for heavy duty list with the capacity to handle and transport all types of vehicles including but not limited to automobiles, pickup trucks, commercial trucks and vans, buses and tractor trailers. 
a.  Light duty operator that owns or leases at least three (3) wreckers and proof of title or legally binding and enforceable contracts or leases for at least three (3) wreckers together with equipment sufficient for each wrecker. A light duty wrecker is a wrecker that is only able to tow/haul passenger cars, pickup trucks and vans. One (1) of the three (3) wreckers may be a heavy duty wrecker which would enable the owner or lessee to qualify for approval for inclusion on the heavy duty rotation list as provided for hereafter. 
b.  Heavy duty operator that owns or leases one (1) wrecker and proof of title or legally binding and enforceable contracts or leases one (1) wrecker together with equipment sufficient for the wrecker. A heavy duty wrecker shall be equipped with air brakes and must have a minimum of twenty six thousand one (26,001) gross vehicle weight (GVW). The wrecker must be capable of towing all other types of vehicles including, but not limited to, automobiles, pickup trucks commercial trucks, and vans, buses, and tractor trailers. 
c.  Each lease or contract shall be for a period of not less than twelve (12) months and must be approved by the city. In the event any lease or contract provided hereunder is terminated during the period of the time that the wrecker service is on the rotation list, the owner of the wrecker service shall promptly notify the city of the termination and shall furnish proof of any new lease or contract which shall be approved by the city. 
d.  Any lease or contractual arrangement shall meet each and every other requirement as specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
e.  Any wreckers used to meet the minimum of this section must be permanently lettered to include, at a minimum, the name of the wrecker service and the phone number of the business. This lettering must be displayed on both sides of the wrecker and shall not include any magnetic or removable signs. 
(2)  The wrecker service will be available and on call for twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week, during the time that wrecker service has duty as the list wrecker service. 
(3)  Proof of liability and garage liability insurance, covering all loss and damage to the vehicles as well as the contents and others in an amount not less than three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00). 
(4)  Proof of compliance with all local, state, county and federal inspection requirements and/or local, state, county, and federal requirements for the operation of a wrecker or towing service. This is to include all state requirements concerning the receiving and disposing of abandoned vehicles. 
(5)  An impoundment area with a minimum of one (1) acre, lighted and adequately secured or guarded which may include, but is not limited to, a chain link fence with a barbed wire top. 
(6)  Ownership of a two-way business band radio with applicable license or other method of communication such as cellular telephone. A citizens band radio is not an acceptable method for communication under this section. 
(7)  All vehicle operators shall have the proper drivers license for the type of vehicle which they are operating. All vehicles are appropriately insured and maintained in safe operating condition as required by applicable local, state and federal requirements for the operation of motor vehicles. 
(8)  That it will not charge fees or rates in excess of the amounts provided in Title 10 of this Code. The chief of police shall have responsibility for an annual review of the schedule of fees and determine if they are adequate or should be revised. The fee schedule is in no way applicable to private calls. 
(9)  In addition to basic services provided by the wrecker service, the following requirement duties are required for the wrecker service to continue to be placed on the list: 
a.  The wrecker service shall respond promptly to calls for service (within twenty (20) minutes) unless there are extenuating circumstances. 
b.  The wrecker service shall clean up all debris from the street or area of the wreck. 
c.  The wrecker service upon impoundment of a motor vehicle shall promptly make an inventory of the vehicle and all personal property and provide a receipt of the inventory to the owner/operator of the vehicle. 
d.  In the event a wrecker service is unable to respond for a call for service, the next-listed wrecker service will be called. Wrecker services on the rotational list can not designate that another service take their calls. 
e.  At all times keep the city notified as to the name, owner, address, and telephone number of the wrecker service. The wrecker service will immediately notify the city of any change in liability insurance coverage or change in the status of their wrecker fleet. The wrecker service shall also immediately notify the city of any changes in their employee roster or employee's driving privileges. 
f.  It shall be the responsibility of the wrecker service owner to provide the chief of police with proofs of compliance with these requirements as may be necessary for the maintenance of their records. 
g.  Any wrecker service which removes a motor vehicle from public property at the request of a city law enforcement officer or stores such vehicle shall, if the owner of the vehicle or some person acting for the owner is not present, seek the identity of and address of all known owners of such vehicle from the city law enforcement officer requesting removal of such, from such officer's police department within three (3) business days of removal. The city police department shall furnish such information to the person removing such vehicle within three (3) business days after receipt of such request. 
(10)  Wrecker services may be inspected for compliance with this section by the chief of police or his designee. This inspection would be during the time the wrecker service has the duty as the list wrecker service. 
(11)  a.  No wrecker service owner, operator, shall have been convicted, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, been on probation, parole or been imprisoned for the violation of any of the following offenses of the United States, this state or any other state, or of any political subdivisions thereof: child molestation; child endangerment; child abuse; prostitution; keeping a place of prostitution; pimping, pandering; masturbation for hire; public indecency; sodomy; aggravated sodomy; rape; statutory rape; sexual battery; aggravated sexual battery; peeping tom; possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs or alcohol; or criminal solicitation or attempt to commit any of these listed offenses shall be placed on the city's rotational list for service calls by the city. 
b.  No wrecker service owner, operator, shall have been convicted within the previous five (5) years for the violation of any of the following offenses of the United States, this state or any other state, or of any political subdivisions thereof: driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs; contributing to the delinquency of a minor; no insurance; or suspended license shall be placed on the city's rotational list for service calls by the city. 
c.  All wrecker service owners, operators, on city list must submit their criminal histories to the chief of police or designee before being approved for placement on the rotational list. 
(c)  Removal from the rotation list. In the event the wrecker service which has been approved by the city for inclusion on the rotation list fails to meet the requirements provided for herein, or violates any of the approval specifications then the chief of police shall have the authority to remove the wrecker service from the rotation list. The wrecker service may be excluded from the rotation list for a period not exceeding one (1) year at which time the wrecker service may make application to be returned to the rotation list. The wrecker service upon approval shall be placed at the bottom of the list. 
(d)  Appeal process. If a wrecker service is removed from either the light or heavy duty rotation list by the chief of police the appeal process for that removal is as follows: The wrecker service must request an appeal hearing in front of the city manager by certified letter, within ten (10) days of the notice of removal from the list by the chief of police. If criminal charges have been filed against an employee or the owner of the wrecker service and these criminal proceedings are the justification for the removal, the wrecker service will be taken off the rotation list until all criminal proceedings and appeals are exhausted. The appeal process will then be ten (10) days from the final disposition of the criminal proceedings and notification will be by certified mail to the city manager. 
(e)  Approval requirements do not apply to private calls. Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the owner of a motor vehicle from contracting a wrecker service of his/her choice, nor in any way limiting the requirements of fees for a wrecker service which does not choose to be placed on the rotation list provided for herein, provided the wrecker service responds promptly and cleans up all glass and wreckage debris from the street or area of the work, and complies with municipal ordinances, state laws, federal regulations or laws. 
(Code 1958, § 3-113; Ord. No. 98-08, § I, 2-17-98; Ord. No. 2002-68, § I, 1-7-03; Ord. No. 2008-14, §§ I, II, 5-20-08) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-4. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to contract for removal of junked motor vehicles, OCGA § 36-60-4; municipal licensing and regulation of wrecker services, OCGA § 48-13-10.1; flashing or revolving lights on vehicles, OCGA § 40-8-92. 
CHAPTER 6-2. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, adopted Aug. 15, 2017, repealed Ch. 6-2 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 6-2 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 6-2, §§ 6-2-1—6-43, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 94-44, § I, adopted Nov. 1, 1994; Ord. No. 95-49, § I, adopted Nov. 7, 1995; Ord. No. 98-62, §§ I—IX, adopted Dec. 1, 1998; Ord. No. 99-48, §;s I—VI, adopted July 20, 1999; Ord. No. 2003-69, §§ I—V, adopted Dec. 16, 2003; Ord. No. 2012-10, § III, adopted May 1, 2012. 

Sec. 6-2-1. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings within the city. 
For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the City of Gainesville, Georgia, whether with a location in the City of Gainesville, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable certificate, except for practitioners of professions and occupations, shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the City of Gainesville, Georgia. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the City of Gainesville, Georgia, such business tax certificate shall be shown to a city code enforcement officer, the business services manager, chief financial officer or to any police officer of the City of Gainesville, Georgia, upon their request. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-2. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "City of Gainesville" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean "Gainesville, Georgia"; wherever the term "city" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean "Gainesville, Georgia." 
(b)  As used in this chapter, the term: 
Business means any person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity which exerts substantial efforts within the city, engages in, causes to be engaged in, and/or represents or holds out to the public to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain or benefit, either directly or indirectly. 
Business location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. A temporary work site which serves multiple customers is included in this definition. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of the real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or the lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple-line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) of this definition, "employee" means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, Federal Income Tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
(2)  An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one (1) business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2. 
Engaged in business means doing or performing of any act of selling any goods or services, or soliciting business, or offering any goods or services for sale primarily in an attempt to make a profit, including selling or performing services of the character of a wholesaler or retailer, or being involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, or renting real or personal property; all of the foregoing performed either as an owner, operator or agent of any business, trade, profession, or occupation within the city. 
Manufacturing means a person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or commercial use any articles, substances or commodities, including, but not limited to, the following: materials upon which commercial activities have been applied, by hand or machinery, so that as a result thereof a new substance of trade or commerce is produced; the production or fabrication of special or custom-made articles; the making, fabrication, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, preserving, canning, preparing and freezing of fresh foods, fruits, vegetables and meats. 
Nonprofit organization means an organization which compiles with U.S. Internal Revenue Code 501-a. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue raising purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business. 
Person wherever used in this chapter shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. "Practitioners of professions and occupations" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of the regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. The city is not authorized to require any administrative fee, registration fee, or fee by any other name in connection with a regulatory fee, except an occupation tax, as defined in the code section. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees and defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
Retailer means a person who sells to consumers or any other person for any purpose, other than for resale, any tangible personal property. 
Services means the accommodating or performing a duty or work by a person utilizing time or talents for direct or indirect remuneration. 
Wholesaler means a person who sells to jobbers or to persons, other than consumers, any tangible personal property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-3. - Regulatory fee structure. 
A regulatory fee will only be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-4. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one (1) or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city of and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Number of full-time equivalent employees of the business or practitioner determined as follows: 
By adding the total number of hours worked during the preceding calendar year by all employees and dividing that total by two thousand eighty (2,080) (forty (40) hours per week times fifty-two (52) weeks), and rounding the result to the nearest whole. (Five-tenths (0.5) or greater would be rounded up; less than five-tenths (0.5) would be rounded down.) 
Employees whose total number of hours worked are not available (such as salaried employees) shall be calculated at a rate of forty (40) hours per week. 
In businesses where it can be shown that calculation by this method would be impractical, an alternate method may be used which would provide an accurate count of full-time equivalent employees. 
An employee whose hours total more than two thousand eighty (2,080) during a year, may be counted as having worked two thousand eighty (2,080) hours. 
Any alternate method is subject to the approval of the business services manager or chief financial officer. 
(2)  For the purpose of calculating full-time equivalent employees, all employees, including owners, who actually perform work at the business shall be included. 
(b)  (1)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one (1) occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have. 
(2)  The city shall not require an occupation tax on those employees that were taxed by occupation tax in other localities or states, provided that those businesses were taxed in full compliance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 and § 48-13-14. Upon request by any city official, including, but not limited to, personnel of the financial services department, and building inspection department, the operator of a business shall be required to provide proof that the business was taxed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 and § 48-13-14. 
(3)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(c)  Occupation tax schedule. The occupation tax levied shall be based on the following tax table: 
Tax Table 
Number of Employees       Tax Amount 
0—1 ..... $135.00 
2—2 ..... 210.00 
3—4 ..... 315.00 
5—7 ..... 435.00 
8—10 ..... 545.00 
11—15 ..... 685.00 
16—20 ..... 800.00 
21—27 ..... 945.00 
28—35 ..... 1,073.00 
36—50 ..... 1,290.00 
51—75 ..... 1,630.00 
76—100 ..... 2,030.00 
101—150 ..... 2,510.00 
151—200 ..... 2,950.00 
201—300 ..... 3,570.00 
301—500 ..... 4,790.00 
501—1,000 ..... 7,150.00 
1,000+ ..... 9,950.00 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-5. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
For out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia, occupation taxes apply to the employees of the business which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state. The assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-6. - Dominant line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. Except for practitioners of professions and occupations, no business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the financial services department and that line of business being noted by the business services manager or chief financial officer upon the occupation tax certificate form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-7. - Number of businesses considered operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one (1) store or place, each store or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-8. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax: 
(1)  For the year 1996 and subsequent years, one (1) of the following: 
a.  The occupation tax based on number of employees. 
b.  A fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per practitioner fee shall include all persons in the business who qualify as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-9. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-10. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law ordinance. Payment of an occupation tax shall not be required as a precondition for the practice of professions and occupations as set out in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c). 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-11. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such business or occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Except for practitioners of law, said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 15 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by April 15 of each year and shall be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this chapter. In the event that any person commences business on any date after January 15 in any year, the tax shall be due and payable thirty (30) days following commencement of the business. 
(b)  Except for practitioners of law, regulatory fees authorized by this chapter shall be paid before commencing business as a condition precedent for transacting business. 
(c)  Regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business when: 
(1)  The work done or services provided are necessary for the health and safety of one (1) or more individuals; and 
(2)  The work done or services provided have no adverse effect on any other person; and 
(3)  Regulatory fees are tendered to the local government within two (2) business days after commencing business. 
(d)  The tax certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the business services manager or chief financial officer. Except for the practitioners of law, if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax become delinquent, transact, or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling in this chapter specified without having first obtained said registration and certificate, such person shall, in addition to remedies provided herein, be punished as provided in section 6-2-18 of this chapter. 
(e)  In addition to the above remedies, the business services manager or chief financial officer may proceed to collect delinquent business or occupation tax in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(f)  (1)  Any occupation tax due by any practitioner of law pursuant to this chapter shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days of January 15 for the previous calendar year. 
(2)  If a practitioner of law commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty (50) percent of the tax imposed for the entire year and shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days of January 15 for the previous calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-12. - Allocation of employees of businesses with multiple intra or interstate locations. 
For those businesses who have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the number of employees can be allocated to each location, the number of employees used to determine the occupational tax assessed will be those employees attributed to each city location. In the case where the number of employees attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total number of employees will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one (1) jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Information necessary to allocate the number of employees of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's number of employees by other local governments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-13. - Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this chapter shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless eighty (80) percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-14. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
Each person who is licensed under Title 43 of the state license examining boards shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-15. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificate of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-16. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
(a)  All persons subject to the occupation taxes provided in this chapter shall be required to take out the necessary registration and obtain the necessary tax certificate for said business prescribed in this chapter, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a certificate. Except for practitioners of professions and occupations, every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration and obtain the tax certificate herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offer to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, except for practitioners of professions and occupations, shall be subject to penalties provided herein and upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 6-1-18 of this chapter. In the case of practitioners of professions and occupations, if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration and an occupation tax certificate shall fail to pay such tax in a timely fashion, such offender shall be subject to penalties provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager, executive officer or employee of any business, coming within the provisions of this chapter, to make a false registration for such business, or to give or file, or direct the giving or filing, of any false information with respect to the occupation tax due under the provisions of this chapter or upon which any occupation tax due under the provisions of this chapter is based. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-17. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year 1996 and each succeeding calendar year thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before April 15 of each year, on the 16th day of April of each year thereafter. The penalty for failure to comply with this section shall be assessed in the amount of ten (10) percent of the occupational tax determined to be due and owning under the provisions of this chapter for the first thirty (30) days or fraction thereof of delinquency and an additional one and five-tenths (1.5) percent of the occupation tax for each additional month or fraction thereof of delinquency. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other civil penalties, herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the business services manager or chief financial officer and, except for practitioners of law, if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business or trade without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(c)  In the case of practitioners of law, if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration and an occupation certificate, or shall fail to pay such tax when due, the penalty for failure to comply with this paragraph shall be assessed in the amount of ten (10) percent of the occupational tax determined to be due and owing under the provisions of this chapter for the first thirty (30) days or fraction thereof of delinquency and an additional one and five-tenths (1.5) percent of the occupation tax for each additional month or fraction thereof of delinquency. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other civil penalties, herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-18. - Penalty for chapter violation. 
(a)  In addition to the other remedies available to the city for the collection of special taxes, occupation taxes, and license regulatory fees due the city from persons subject to the tax fee who fail or refuse to pay the tax or fee, the business services manager or chief financial officer shall issue executions against the delinquent taxpayers for any or all of the following: the amount of the taxes or fees due when the taxes or fees become due; any penalty imposed by sections 6-2-17(a) and (b); and any interest imposed by sections 6-2-17(a) and (b), except for practitioners or professions and occupations, the municipal court may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax or regulatory fee. Such a civil fine shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and may be enforced by the contempt power of the municipal court. 
(b)  Any person whose qualifications to practice their profession is determined by the general laws of the state and who fails to pay an occupation tax as provided in this chapter shall only be subject to the provisions of section 6-2-17(c) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-19. - Code enforcement officers; business inspector. 
Code enforcement officers shall be classified as business inspectors with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business tax ordinance for 1996 (this chapter) and succeeding years thereafter. The business services manager or chief financial officer shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the levy, assessment and collection and penalties imposed herein. In carrying out its responsibilities hereunder, the business services manager or chief financial officer shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for registration of a business, and for the submission of required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  To issue to each person an occupation tax certificate within a reasonable time after the payment of the occupation tax assessed and levied in this chapter; provided, however, where under other ordinances of the city, permits, certifications, and compliance with the enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the business services manager or chief financial officer shall not issue said certificate until the applicant exhibits to the business services manager or chief financial officer such obtained permits, certifications and compliances; 
(3)  To audit periodically, and when deemed necessary by the business services manager or chief financial officer, the books and records of the businesses subject to the provisions of this chapter, and to require the submission of such additional information as may be necessary in order to correctly determine the amount of the occupation tax due and to insure the collection of same; and 
(4)  The business services manager or chief financial officer shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or other laws of the city and the state or the constitution of this state for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the collection of the occupation tax and fees hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-20. - Businesses not covered by this chapter. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax or fee pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law. 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, and City Code section 6-6-1 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Disabled veterans and blind persons with proof of exemption under O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1. 
(10)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, and City Code section 6-5-1 et seq. 
(11)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(12)  Any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. 
(13)  Any person engaging in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, where such involve personal assets and are not an occupation for the individual. 
a.  In regard to yard/garage sales, this exemption shall apply to persons or nonprofit organizations conducting such sales at a private residence or at a commercial location with an occupancy permit and with permission of the property owner, not exceeding four (4) events per year. 
b.  In regard to the rental of personally owned residences, this exemption shall apply to persons renting a maximum of five (5) residences within the state. 
The city may require any business claiming not to be covered by the provisions of this chapter to provide specific and detailed evidence showing such noncoverage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-21. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
This occupation tax is not levied upon any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-22. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during calendar year; filing of returns showing number of employees during preceding calendar year. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied by this chapter are levied on number of employees during the calendar year. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, those businesses subject to the occupation tax levied in sections 6-2-4 and 6-2-8 hereof shall, on or before the times hereinafter set forth, file with the business services manager or chief financial officer the returns hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the number of full-time equivalent employees of that business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer of the business subject to said occupation tax for the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before April 15 of the current calendar year, file with the financial services department of the city, on a form furnished by the business services manager or chief financial officer, a signed return setting forth the number of full-time equivalent employees of such business for the preceding calendar year. The return calendar year 1996 shall include the number of full-time equivalent employees for calendar year 1995. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the number of full-time equivalent employees for such part shall be set forth in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the full-time equivalent employees for such part of a year on an annual basis, which figure shall bear the same ratio to the number of employees for such part year as the full year bears to such part. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the number of full-time equivalent employees of the business for the current calendar year. 
(d)  If any person fails to make a return, the business services manager or chief financial officer may make an estimate of the number of full-time equivalent employees of the business. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the business services manager or chief financial officer. 
(1)  The business services manager or chief financial officer, shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his/her address as it appears in the records of the business services manager or chief financial officer. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(2)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest and penalty as required in section 6-1-19. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-23. - Plan for economic development; prorated tax for persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older conducting business from their homes with under ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) annual gross income. 
The city recognizes and encourages the fact that individuals within the city who have reached the age of sixty-five (65) wish to remain involved in the economy of the area without pursuing a full-time business or occupation. This involvement contributes to the economic development of the city, and as a means of encouraging this, the following plan for economic development shall apply: 
Any person sixty-five (65) years of age or older conducting business from his/her home with under ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) annual gross income may conduct such business by paying one-half (½) of the otherwise required business tax. Proof of qualification for this status must be provided to the business services manager or chief financial officer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-24. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of full-time-equivalent employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid as provided in section 6-2-11. The estimate shall be, at a minimum, the number of full-time-equivalent employees which will be employed when the business begins operation. 
Businesses beginning operation after July 1 of any calendar year shall pay a pro-rated business tax of fifty (50) percent of the tax which would be due on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-25. - More than one (1) place of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one (1) place, the number of employees of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return on a form to be furnished by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-26. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-2-27. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner any information provided for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax required under this chapter. Such information shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as "agents of the city." Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or information such as name, location, ownership and line of business with no association made to number of employees or amount of tax paid, or the inspection of the records by duly-qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia or of the United States, and other local governments. Information provided by a business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-28. - Inspection of books and records. 
In any case the business services manager or chief financial officer, through his officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The business services manager or the chief financial officer or their designees shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the business services manager, or chief financial officer or their designees such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within thirty (30) days. Failure of submission of such books or records within thirty (30) days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax certificate currently existing to do business in the city. In the case of practitioners of professions and occupations, the city shall be sensitive to the issues of client or customer confidentiality. In such cases, the practitioner may redact information claimed to be privileged before disclosing books or records of financial transactions. If such practitioner alleges that redaction provides inadequate protection to the confidences of its clients or customers, such practitioner may petition the Superior Court of hall county for an in-camera inspection, prior to examination by the business services manager or chief financial officer. Except for practitioners of professions and occupations electing to pay a flat fee in lieu of a per employee tax, adequate records shall be kept in Gainesville, Georgia, for examination by the business services manager or chief financial officer or their designees at their discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the deficiency and an additional one (1) percent of the deficiency for each month or fraction thereof that the deficiency was due and unpaid shall be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-29. - Tax certificate to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Except for a person whose qualifications to practice law are determined by the general laws of the state, the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax certificate granted by the city under this chapter permitting the owner of said business to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the business services manager or chief financial officer in accordance with provisions found in section 6-2-22. In the case of practitioners of law, if any such person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration and an occupation tax certificate shall fail to pay such tax in a timely fashion, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 6-2-17(c). 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-30. - Effect of failure to comply with chapter provisions; continuing in business after tax certificate revocation. 
Any persons, their manager, agent or employee, who does business in the city after the certificate for said business has been revoked as above; any person, their manager, agent or employee, who is hereby required to make returns showing the amount of full-time equivalent employees and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, or refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the correct information, or who shall make false returns, and except for practitioners of professions and occupations electing to pay a flat fee in lieu of a per employee tax, any person, their manager, agent or employee who refuses to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officer(s), agent(s), employee(s) or representative(s) of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided in section 6-2-18 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-31. - Execution for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the business services manager or chief financial officer of the city, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the business services manager or chief financial officer upon the property of the person liable for said tax, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the ordinances and the Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by property authority upon an execution issued by the business services manager or chief financial officer against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, except for practitioners of professions and occupations, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full to other with all interest, penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-32. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-33. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This chapter does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-34. - Enforcement of provision. 
It is hereby made the duty of the business services manager, chief financial officer, code enforcement and the police department to see that the provisions of this chapter relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the business services manager, chief financial officer, code enforcement, the chief of police, their designees and assistants, to inspect all certificates issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the certificate held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-35. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by council. 
This chapter shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-36. - Requirement of public hearing. 
In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than the preceding year, the city shall hold a public hearing as a part of the process for determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-37. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The city may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one (1) or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-38. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this chapter between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-39. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-2-40. - Occupation tax certificate not transferable. 
An occupation tax certificate and/or regulatory fee certificate shall not be transferable and a transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the termination of such business and the establishment of a new business. Therefore, a new certificate shall be required for each new owner of the business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-41. - Duty to keep information current. 
Any person required by this chapter to register his or her business shall notify the business services manager or chief financial officer in writing within thirty (30) days of the following changes: 
(1)  Any change of address of the business, in which case the same occupation tax certificate shall be valid at the new location. 
(2)  Any change of ownership, in which case the transfer shall be treated as the termination of one (1) business and the establishment of a new business for the purposes of this chapter. 
(3)  The termination of any business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-42. - Compliance with other ordinances and laws. 
(a)  All businesses are required to comply with the provisions of all ordinances of the city and other laws and the issuance of a occupation tax receipt to any business pursuant to this chapter shall not authorize that business to engage in or carry on business or to perform any other activity in violation of state or federal law or regulations and other ordinances of the city nor shall it relieve that business from obtaining any certificate or permit required by the provision of other laws or ordinances. 
(b)  No certificate shall be issued or renewed until any delinquent property taxes and other debts to the city have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-2-43. - Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
It being the intention of the mayor and council that no portion of this taxation scheme shall be construed to be, or have the practical effect of, regulation of practitioners of professions and occupations and if any provision hereof shall be construed by a court of competent jurisdiction to be an unlawful regulation of such profession, then such provision shall be considered rescinded by the mayor and council as if such provision had not been adopted, and in such case, the remaining provisions of this chapter shall be applied to such practitioner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18, § I, 8-15-17) 
CHAPTER 6-3. - ADVERTISING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Business license fees, Tit. 10; advertising signs and structures under zoning ordinance, § 9-1-18. 
State Constitution reference— Power of General Assembly to provide by law for the regulation of outdoor advertising devices adjacent to certain highways, Art. 3, § 6, para. 2(a)(6). 
State Law reference— False advertising, OCGA § 10-1-420 et seq.; outdoor advertising adjacent to certain highways, OCGA § 32-6-70 et seq. 

Sec. 6-3-1. - Misleading or deceptive advertising generally. 
Any person who, with intent to sell, purchase or in any way dispose of, or to contract with reference to merchandise, securities, real estate, service, employment, money, credit or any thing offered by such person, directly or indirectly, to the public for sale, purchase, loan, distribution or the hire of personal services, or with intent to increase the consumption of or to contract with reference to any merchandise, real estate, securities, money, credit, loan, service or employment, or to induce the public in any manner to enter into any obligation relating thereto, or to acquire title thereto, or an interest therein, or to make any loan, or makes, publishes, disseminates, circulates or places before the public, or causes, directly or indirectly, to be made, published, disseminated, circulated or placed before the public, in the city, in a newspaper, magazine or other publication, or in the form of a book, notice, handbill, poster, sign, bill, circular, pamphlet, letter, placard, card, label or over any radio station or in any way similar or dissimilar to the foregoing, an advertisement, announcement or statement of any sort regarding merchandise, securities, real estate, money, credit, service, employment or anything so offered for use, purchase, loan or sale, or the interest, terms or conditions upon which such loans will be made to the public, which advertisement contains any assertion, representation or statement of fact which is untrue, misleading or deceptive, shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, § 3-1) 
State Law reference— False or fraudulent statements in advertising, OCGA § 10-1-421. 
Sec. 6-3-2. - Fire, wreck, bankrupt, going out of business sales, etc. 
(a)  General provisions. It shall be unlawful for any person advertising by newspaper, radio, posters or otherwise to represent that he is operating, offering or maintaining "fire sales," "wreck sales," "bankrupt sales" or "going out of business sales" and similar businesses whereby the public is led to believe that they are being offered merchandise at reduced rates on account of fires, wrecks, bankruptcies, closing out or discontinuance of business when, in fact, such sales are not bona fide. It shall also be unlawful for any person, conducting any sale, except judicial sales, whether the same is by auction or otherwise, of any goods, wares or merchandise which are claimed to be or have been in or damaged by fire, or which are claimed to be or have been sold or purchased on account of any fire, or which are or have been, or which are claimed to be the property of any bankrupt person who has failed in business or has made a general assignment or is or has made a general assignment, or is or has been in voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy, or which are being sold or offered for sale in any other way than through the usual channels of trade, to sell or offer for sale in such sale any goods, wares or merchandise not so affected or damaged or to add to or to permit to be added to, or to bring into or permit to be brought into any store, warehouse or any building in the city, for the purpose of adding to such goods, wares or merchandise so circumstanced or affected and which are on hand in any such store, warehouse or other building for the purpose of being sold at such sale. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
(2)  Going out of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: Adjuster's, adjustment, alteration, assignee's bankrupt, benefit of administrator's, benefit of creditor's, benefit of trustee's, building coming down, closing, creditor's committee, creditor's end, executor's final days, forced out, forced out of business, insolvent's last days, lease expires, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustee's quitting business and other like sales. 
(3)  Goods means any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this section. 
(4)  Removal of business sale means a sale held out in such manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the city or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. 
(c)  License—Required. All persons shall secure a license from the city before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following kinds: 
(1)  Going out of business sale. 
(2)  Removal of business sale. 
(3)  Fire and other altered stock sale. 
(d)  Same—Application. A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this section shall make a written application to the city, setting forth and containing the following information: 
(1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be object of the sale. 
(2)  The true name and address of the person from whom he purchased the goods to be sold, the price therefor, and, if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition. 
(3)  A description of the place where such sale is to be held. 
(4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy. 
(5)  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted. 
(6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted. 
(7)  The means to be employed in advertising such sale together with the proposed content of any advertisement. 
(8)  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. Such inventory shall be attached to and become part of the required application. 
a.  All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
b.  Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business hereby affected within ten (10) days before the filing of an application hereunder shall be deemed to be of such character. 
(e)  Same—Fee. Any applicant for a license under this section shall submit to the city with his application a license fee as provided in Title 10 of this Code. 
(f)  Same—Established business prerequisite. Any person who has not been the owner of the business advertised or described in the application for a license under this section for a period of at least twelve (12) months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a license, except upon the approval of the mayor and city council; provided, that upon the death of a person doing business in this city, his heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a license under this section. 
(g)  Same—Restricted to one place of business. Where a person applying for a license under this section operates more than one (1) place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one (1) store or branch specified in the application. No other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. 
(h)  Same—Term. A license issued under this section shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, following the issuance thereof; provided, that a longer period shall be designated by the mayor and city council upon good cause shown. 
(i)  Same—Limitation as to type of sale. A license issued under this section shall authorize only the one (1) type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(j)  Same—Nontransferable. Any license provided for by this section shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(k)  Surrender of other licenses for going out of business sale. Upon being issued a license under this section for a going out of business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the city all other business licenses he may hold at that time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this section. 
(l)  Interval between sales. Any person who has held a sale, as regulated under this section, at the location stated in the application, within one (1) year last past from the date of such application, shall not be granted a license, except upon the approval of the mayor and city council. 
(m)  Limitation on goods to be sold. A license issued under this section shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(n)  Duties of licensees. A licensee under this section shall: 
(1)  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license. 
(2)  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising. 
(3)  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto. 
(4)  Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and shall present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request. 
(5)  Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all such goods. 
(o)  Effect of section on license ordinance. The provisions of this section are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of the general licensing ordinance of the city. Where this section imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by the general licensing ordinance of the city, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(p)  Applicability of section. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction. 
(4)  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, or any operator of a radio or television broadcasting station or other kinds of media, who publishes, broadcasts or in any other manner presents, in good faith, any advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this section have not been complied with. 
(Code 1958, § 3-2) 
State Law reference— Advertising without intending to sell on stated terms, OCGA § 10-1-420; false or fraudulent statements in advertising, OCGA § 10-1-421; misrepresenting ownership in advertising liquidation, auction or going-out-of-business sale, OCGA § 10-1-425. 
Sec. 6-3-3. - Posting bills and advertising on city property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills or other advertising upon any permanent or temporary structure or building, pole or tree located in any street, park or other public way or place within the corporate limits of the city except as approved by the city council as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The city council may by resolution permit on premises advertising upon or within city-owned premises, including the walkways and areas surrounding the same, to advertise and identify events scheduled in said public places and may make appropriate charges therefor. 
(Code 1958, § 3-3) 
CHAPTER 6-4. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-17, § II, adopted Sept. 18, 2018, amended Ch. 6-4 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 6-4, §§ 6-4-1—6-4-12, 6-4-20, 6-4-31—6-4-42, 6-4-50, 6-4-51, 6-4-60—6-4-63, 6-4-70—6-4-73, 6-4-80—6-4-93, 6-4-100—6-4-105, 6-4-110—6-4-117, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. Ord. No. 2017-17, § I, August 15, 2017. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages on private parking lots, § 3-5-5. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, OCGA Title 3; local regulation of distilled spirits, OCGA § 3-4-40 et seq.; local regulation of malt beverages, OCGA § 3-5-40 et seq.; local regulation of wine, OCGA § 3-6-40; local regulation of the sale of distilled spirits by private clubs, OCGA § 3-7-40 et seq.; public drunkenness, OCGA § 16-11-41; ordinances on drinking or drunkenness, OCGA § 37-8-11. 

ARTICLE 1. - PURPOSE AND LICENSING 

Sec. 6-4-1. - General policies and purpose. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold, manufactured, distributed and imported in the City of Gainesville only after the issuance of a license for such sale by the city and only in the manner permitted by said license, unless exempted by state law. Alcoholic beverages may be sold, manufactured, distributed and imported in the city only by a licensee who complies with the rules and regulations of this article, and with the licensing, regulatory and revenue requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city is a privilege and not a right, and the issuance of a license hereunder shall not create any property rights in the licensee. 
(c)  The city council designates the city manager for the purpose of administering this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated by the city manager to other city personnel. The city manager or designee shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions, or any other provision of this chapter, unless that authority is provided to another administrative official within a specific article. Interpretations of the city manager or designee may be appealed under the provisions of section 6-4-11. The city manager or designee shall have administrative authority of this code. 
(d)  Each licensee of the city shall display the license prominently at all times at the premises for which the license is issued. 
(e)  The holder of every alcoholic beverage license hereunder shall have available in his place of business at all times a copy of this chapter and shall be responsible for compliance herewith by all persons on the premises. 
(f)  Any premises outlets which cannot be determined as one (1) identifiable place of business shall require additional licenses regardless of such establishments having the same tradename, ownership, or management. 
(g)  The purposes of this article include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Compliance with state law. 
(2)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons. 
(3)  Protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing alcohol and shall include but shall not be limited to, malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits. 
Alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer who has been licensed by the city to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink or the unopened package. 
Art shop means a retail business devoted exclusively to providing art education that is limited to instruction in painting, sculpture and similar crafts. An art shop may also sell and display portraits, paintings, sculptures, art supplies and similar art work and crafts. An art shop shall not allow activities that would cause the business to be an "adult entertainment establishment" as defined in chapter 6-10 of this code. 
Authorized catered event means an event at a location not otherwise licensed for consumption of alcoholic beverages by the drink at which alcoholic beverages are furnished, for consideration, and sold, dispensed or provided free of charge to persons present at the event, by the drink, pursuant to a permit obtained under this section. 
Business means any person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity which exerts substantial efforts within the city, engages in, causes to be engaged in, and/or represents or holds out to the public to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain or benefit, either directly or indirectly. 
Brewery means a place where malt beverages are manufactured. In addition to manufacturing, malt beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises, and/or sold by the package for consumption off the premises in accordance with state law. 
Brewpub means any restaurant in which malt beverages are manufactured, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A § 3-5-36. Barrels of malt beverage sold to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution or to the public for consumption off the premises as authorized by state law shall not be used when determining the total annual gross food and beverages sales. 
BYOB or brown bagging means possession of an open glass bottle, can, or other container containing an alcoholic beverage or consumption of an alcoholic beverage on premises: 
(1)  For which a city business/occupation tax certificate has been issued; and 
(2)  Which occurs at a location different from where said alcoholic beverage was purchased. 
Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order: united under one (1) form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies, place where persons regularly assemble in a facility for worship, congregation, or organization for religious purposes. 
College campus means a collection of two (2) or more buildings used for educational purposes, on either one parcel or contiguous parcels that are under the same ownership by either a public or private institution of higher learning. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume. 
Distillery means a facility that manufactures distilled spirits. 
Establishment means any physical location or section thereof for the operation of a business. 
Food caterer means any person who holds a valid business license and for consideration, prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentations with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to "brandy." 
Georgia farm winery means a farm winery which is licensed by the state to manufacture wine in Georgia. 
Growler means a reusable, resealable, and professionally sanitized glass jug used to transport malt beverages or wine for off-premises consumption that is not to exceed sixty-four (64) ounces and is filled with malt beverages or wine from a keg by a licensee, or an employee of a licensee, with a malt beverage and/or wine license for consumption off premises issued by the City of Gainesville. 
Hard cider means an alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the juice of apples, containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to flavored or carbonated cider. For purposes of this chapter, hard cider shall be deemed a malt beverage. 
Importer means any person who imports an alcoholic beverage into this state from a foreign country and sells the alcoholic beverage to another importer, broker or wholesaler and who warehouses a stock of the alcoholic beverage. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any person licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the state and who possesses a license by a local government in the state authorizing such person to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink off licensed premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
Licensee means any person who holds a license from the city to engage in the selling, manufacturing, distributing or importing at retail or wholesale, of any alcoholic beverages. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least forty (40). 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than fourteen (14) percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, also known as Japanese rice wine. 
Managing agent means an individual that is at least twenty-one (21) years of age, is a U.S. citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residency, is a resident of the State of Georgia, has day-to-day managerial authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises including the sale of alcoholic beverages, and is employed full-time by the licensed business. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; provided, however, that a vintner that blends wine with distilled spirits to produce a fortified wine shall not be considered a manufacturer of distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner 
Minor means any person less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
Multi-use facility means a structure containing three (3) or more retail or office establishments and one (1) or more eating establishment, which has a court area for pedestrian use. 
Non-profit, charitable and civic organization means a bona fide nonprofit civic organization which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of subsection (c), (d), or (e) of 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
Nonprofit botanical garden or nature science center means a facility primarily used to develop and maintain animals or plant collections, including flowers, shrubs and trees, for public display, education, research, conservation and enjoyment, through, without limitation, horticultural gardens, public and private programs, exhibitions and special events, having not less than seventy-five (75) acres of outdoor gardens or land preserved for conservation, containing a documented collection of living plants, shrubs and trees, having meeting event space with a capacity for not less than one hundred (100) people, that is owned by a corporation that is exempt from federal income taxes pursuant to section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended. 
Open air cafe means a premise located within the pedestrian court area and adjacent sidewalk of a multi-use facility where food is available for purchase during all hours of operation and where alcoholic beverages may be purchased from a restaurant contained within the multi-use facility for consumption within the open air cafe. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, social club, joint venture, association, company, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnerships, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, the plural as well as the singular member, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Premises means one (1) physically identifiable place of business operated by the same ownership and/or overall management consisting of one (1) or more contiguous rooms with only one (1) address registered as a single place of business with the local licensing authority and the state. "Premises" is further defined to include the following areas: 
(1)  In the case of hotels, motels or private clubs, the swimming pool which is owned by said hotel, motel or club. 
(2)  Outdoor areas or patios approved pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  In the case of a malt beverage and/or wine licensee where a golf course is located adjacent to and contiguous with a restaurant, the playing area of the golf course. 
(4)  In the case of a nonprofit botanical garden or nature science center, the geographic grounds. 
(5)  In the case of an open air cafe, the pedestrian court area and sidewalk in front of the building in which the multi-use facility is contained. 
(6)  In the case of the Gainesville Civic Center, the geographic grounds of the Gainesville Civic Center and the Martha Hope Cabin. 
(7)  In the case of a brewery or distillery, an adjacent outdoor area, contained on the same property utilized by the licensee. If the adjacent outdoor area is a parking lot that is shared and utilized by more than one (1) business, the outdoor consumption area must be controlled to limit public access. 
(8)  In the case of a temporary limited license permit holder, the sidewalk cafe, deck, lawn and parking lot adjacent to the licensed premises during the hours for which the temporary limited license is valid. In the case of a parking lot that is shared and utilized by more than one (1) business, the outdoor consumption area must be controlled to limit public access. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one (1) year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least seventy-five (75) regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
i.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
ii.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary as defined by state law. 
Private function means any affair where attendance is by invitation only, where no business transactions are conducted during the private function and there is no cost to attend or to consume the food or alcohol either by donations or by any other means. 
Residence means the act or fact of living or regularly staying at or in some place for the discharge of a duty or the enjoyment of a benefit or the place where one actually lives as distinguished from his domicile or place of temporary sojourn. 
Resident means a person whose primary residence is within the territorial limits of the county. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, air conditioned, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests for every hour they are open. At least one (1) meal per day shall be served at least five (5) days a week, except that restaurants that open for business more than five (5) days a week, shall be required to serve at least one (1) meal per day each day that the restaurant is open, with the exception of holidays, vacation and periods of redecoration, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A restaurant shall provide at least thirty (30) seats for customers. 
School means an organized source of education or training whether public or private for the teaching of children in which the traditional subjects and learning processes associated with the Pre-K—12 grades of school are taught. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a Georgia farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine can be given free of charge or for a fee. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. This shall include any person that transports or delivers alcoholic beverages from a manufacturer for sale at retail by the package. 
Wine tasting means an event as defined in the rules and regulations of the department of revenue. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-3. - Qualifications for licensing. 
(a)  To qualify for an alcoholic beverage license, an applicant shall meet the following: 
(1)  Designate a managing agent that meets the defined qualifications in section 6-4-2. In the case of a non-profit private club, the managing agent may be an officer of the non-profit private club in lieu of a full-time employee if the individual is otherwise qualified. 
(2)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in Hall County a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. The registered agent must be a resident of Hall County. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written, notarized consent of such agent with the city in such form as may be prescribed. 
(3)  Have a certificate of occupancy that has been issued by the city for the premises for which an alcoholic beverage license is sought. 
(b)  Where the application is made on behalf of a corporation, partnership, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership or sole proprietorship, the license shall be issued jointly to the organization and an individual that meets the qualifications of a managing agent. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-4. - The application process. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain an alcoholic beverage license in the city shall submit a written and signed application on forms provided by city and in connection therewith, shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits, bonds and other supporting data as required by the city. 
(b)  All applications for licenses to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be made in person by the applicant to the city manager or designee and shall contain but not be restricted to the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name, age, address and length of residency of applicant. 
(2)  The name of the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other organization applying for the license. Said name shall include the legal name as well as the trade name of the business. 
(3)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person with an interest in the application has made application at any previous time for any alcoholic beverage license and the disposition of such application. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any person with an interest in the application has ever been convicted of a crime, other than for traffic violations. 
(5)  Whether a previous license issued to the applicant or any person with interest in the application has been revoked by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government and the reason therefor. 
(6)  The identity of any other person interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses or both of the proposed business. 
(7)  The physical address and detailed plans of such building and outside premises, and evidence of ownership of the building, or a document that evidences the right of the applicant to use the premises, including but not limited to a deed, lease, sublease, management agreement, concession agreement, shall be attached to the application. 
(8)  Every new application for a package license hereunder shall be accompanied by a drawing to scale, showing the nearest church, school or college or by the affidavit of a registered surveyor that the proposed location of the business complies with the distance requirements as specified in this chapter. Applications for renewal of licenses, or for premises that have been licensed in the preceding twelve (12) months, are exempted from this subsection. 
(c)  Every managing agent, owner and interest holder listed in an application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be fingerprinted in a manner prescribed by the city. 
(d)  The license fees as required in Title 10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Gainesville are due and payable upon the filing of the application. Any person who is doing business on or after the first day of January shall pay the full annual license fee without proration; provided, however, that if an application is filed after July 1st, the license fee shall be one-half (½) of the annual license fee for such calendar year. 
(e)  All new applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be accompanied either by lawful money of the U.S., or by a certified check, cashier's check or money order, payable to the city for the proper amount of the license fee. If the application is denied or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, less a one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) administrative fee which shall be retained by the city. 
(f)  The city license issued shall be valid for the calendar year indicated thereon and shall expire at midnight on the last day of the year. 
(g)  All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be filed with and approved by the city manager or designee provided the applicant meets all of the requirements and qualifications of this chapter. 
(h)  The written application for the license shall be a permanent record, and the licensee must maintain current and accurate information within said application as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-5. - Grounds for denial of application. 
(a)  The following shall be sufficient cause for the denial of an application: 
(1)  Failure of the applicant to meet the qualifications for licensing as set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  The making of any untrue or misleading statement in the application for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(3)  Failure to meet distance requirements as provided in this chapter. 
(4)  Where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(b)  When contrary to the public interest and welfare, no license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be issued to or for: 
(1)  Any person by reason of such person's business experience, trade associations, personal associations, record of arrest, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, who is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony not involving moral turpitude within ten (10) years immediately preceding the filing of application for such license. 
(4)  Any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of a misdemeanor, particularly, but not limited to, those involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or tax law violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(5)  A location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the city because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties or on the neighborhood. 
(6)  A location within an area where, in the judgment of the city manager, the number of alcoholic beverage licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
(7)  A location at which the operation of the proposed business would be in violation of the City's Unified Land Development Code. 
(8)  A location at which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the city manager, the problems which have arisen from the operation of an alcoholic beverage license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location. 
(9)  A person or location which the granting of such license would constitute a violation of state law or regulations. 
(10)  The operation of a distilled spirits package business licensed hereunder by any person already holding two (2) such licenses. 
(11)  Any person who is as close kin as brothers or sisters, by blood or marriage, to one already holding two (2) distilled spirits package licenses under this chapter. 
(12)  Any trustee or director of a private club, if disqualified under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-6. - Renewal of licenses. 
(a)  The city manager or designee may approve all applications for renewal of an existing license upon payment of the license fees for renewal of licenses, where no objections have been raised by the city manager or designee and the application clearly shows no change in the ownership, managing agent, location, or operation of the business. 
(b)  A licensee that desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make application for such year, on or before November 15th of the preceding year. License fees for such year shall be submitted on or before December 15 of the preceding year. Any license fee submitted after the due date of December 15th, shall be considered delinquent and assessed a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the fees due. Interest on delinquent fees shall be assessed at one (1) percent for each month or fraction thereof of delinquency. 
(c)  If objections have been raised by the city manager or designee due to previous violations of this chapter or if there have been any changes in the ownership, managing agent, location, or operation of the business, a new application must be submitted to the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-7. - Duty to remain current. 
(a)  It is the duty and responsibility of the licensee to notify the city manager or designee of any changes to the information contained in the original application. Any amendments to the original application shall be made in writing on forms provided by the city manager or designee and shall be under oath and verified as otherwise required of license applications. 
(b)  Failure to maintain a current application shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(c)  In the event the "managing agent" either ceases to be employed by or ceases to have day-to-day managerial oversight of alcoholic beverage sales, the licensee shall notify the city within five (5) days of the change and must follow the requirements to transfer the license to a new "managing agent" as set forth in section 6-4-8 (b). If the applicant does not meet the qualifications for "managing agent" as required by this chapter and the city manager or designee recommends denial, the applicant may have a hearing as set out in section 6-4-11. 
(d)  In the event the "registered agent" changes, the licensee shall notify the city within ten (10) days of the change and must submit written information on forms provided by the city. A fee as required in Title 10 will be charged for the processing of a change in the "registered agent." 
(e)  No person shall have, own or enjoy any ownership, interest in, share in the profits from, or otherwise participate in the business of any alcoholic beverage licensee in the city unless a full description of such interest is furnished to the city manager or designee at the time such interest arises. It shall be the duty of the licensee to report to the city manager or designee, within twenty (20) days, any change in any interest in such licensee's business including but not limited to: 
(1)  Any division of the profits; 
(2)  Any division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever; 
(3)  Any change in the payment of rents or leases; 
(4)  Any change in the ownership of any lease or building or land used in such business; 
(5)  Any change in the ownership of any corporation that has any interest in such business or the change of management of such corporation. 
(f)  After receipt of notice pursuant to section 6-4-7(e), the city manager or designee shall notify such person within thirty (30) days of any objection to the ownership or interest set forth therein, based on the interest holder's ability to qualify as a licensee under this chapter. In the event such interest is not disposed of in accordance with the objections set forth by the city manager or designee within thirty (30) days after the mailing of the notice by the city manager or designee, or in the event no objections are mailed to the licensee within such thirty-day period, or in the event such person fails to notify the city manager or designee of the transfer of any such interest within twenty (20) days after the acquisition thereof, then the license as provided for herein may be subject to suspension or revocation by the city manager or designee. 
(g)  The licensee shall make all reports required by this section in the form required by the city manager or designee, and such reports shall be an amendment to the licensee's permanent license application on file with the city and as such shall be under oath and verified as otherwise required of license applications. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-8. - Transfer of licenses. 
(a)  No city license may be transferred from one (1) person or from one (1) location to another without permission and approval of the city manager or designee upon receipt of a written application made. Approvals as to any change shall be at the discretion of the city manager or designee. 
(b)  In the event of a change in the managing agent of a licensee, the city license shall remain in effect pending approval or denial of the transfer provided: 
(1)  The licensee notifies the city manager or designee within ten (10) days of the change of the managing agent; 
(2)  The licensee submits a proper written application for approval thereof; 
(3)  The licensee pays a transfer fee as required by Title 10; 
(4)  The transferee meets all qualifications of a managing agent as required by this chapter; and 
(5)  There has been no change of ownership, location or operation of the business. 
(c)  Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one (1) location and commence business at some other new location must make a complete change of location application for such new location. Upon proper application and provided that there has been no change of ownership or interest in the business, the city manager or designee may permit the license to be transferred upon payment of a fee required in Title 10 for a change of location, provided that the licensee and the new location meet all qualifications required by this chapter. The fee for a change of location shall be in addition to the original license fee paid by the licensee for the calendar year. 
(d)  Upon the sale of an existing business, the city license issued for that business location shall remain in effect pending approval or denial of a new application by the city manager or designee, provided that the buyer or transferee meets all the qualifications of a managing agent as required by this chapter, and provided that the buyer or transferee has immediately upon the date of sale or prior to the date of sale made proper written application and has paid the original license fee required by Title 10. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-9. - Right to investigate. 
(a)  Upon receipt by the city manager or designee of any application for an alcoholic beverage license, or for the transfer of any license, each person listed on the application shall consent to a criminal background check on the forms supplied by the city manager or designee. 
(b)  The city manager or designee, the chief of police, or any policeman of the city may enter upon the premises operated under the provisions of this chapter during operating hours for the purpose of inspecting the premises and enforcing this chapter and shall have access during the inspection of all books, records, and supplies relating to the sale, storage or possession of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-10. - Surrender, suspension or revocation of license or imposition of a monetary administrative penalty. 
(a)  The following may be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license or for the imposition of a monetary administrative penalty against the licensee. 
(1)  The violation by the licensee of any state or federal law or regulation, except misdemeanors or any ordinance of the city, other than traffic violations. The determination of whether any such violation has occurred shall be made by the administrative hearing officer and an actual conviction in a court for such offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license or issue a monetary administrative penalty. 
(2)  The failure of the licensee or his employee to report promptly to the police department any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, occurring on the premises. 
(3)  Any conduct on the part of the owner of the business, the licensee or his employee contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. While not to be considered a comprehensive or exhaustive listing of prohibited behavior, specific instances of prohibited behavior by the owner, the licensee and/or his employee include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Consumption or being under the influence of alcoholic beverage while working or on duty; 
b.  Breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence; 
c.  The conviction of any felony reasonably related to the ability of the licensee to operate and maintain the premises in a proper manner; 
d.  The violation of any state law or regulation governing the manufacture, sale, distribution or transportation of alcoholic beverages; 
e.  The violation of any section of O.C.G.A. § 10-1-370 et seq., known as the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, reasonably related to the operation of licensed establishments; 
f.  The conviction of the owner or the licensee of driving under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or drugs on two (2) or more occasions; 
g.  Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other unlawful act where the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct; 
h.  The selling or serving of any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication; 
i.  The failure to comply with any and all federal, state or municipal tax laws and regulations applicable to the operation of establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages; 
j.  Failure by the licensee to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises or on any property owned or leased by the owner or licensee, including but not limited to parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
(4)  Operating or conducting the business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance. Any combination totaling three (3) or more of the following occurrences within any thirty (30) day period shall constitute prima facie evidence that the licensee is operating or conducting an alcoholic beverage business in a manner which is contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance: Three (3) or more violations of law, violations of municipal ordinances, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, all occurring on the premises. The business license holder shall, upon suspension for violations of this section, have the burden of proving such occurrences were beyond his control and not related to the operation of his business. 
(5)  The violation of any state law or regulation or municipal ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  The violation of any provision contained in this chapter. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the definition of an employee shall include any agent or independent contractor that is working for hire on the licensed premises. 
(c)  The city manager or designee, with an order from the Gainesville Municipal Court and/or administrative hearing officer, shall have the right to suspend any alcoholic beverage license pending a hearing as provided for in section 6-4-11 where in the judgment of the city manager or designee such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare or morals. 
(d)  The city manager or designee, chief of police or any police department shift commander on duty at the time may close any location holding an alcoholic beverage license for a period not in excess of twenty-four (24) hours in the event there shall occur on the premises any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, or other occurrence which is contrary to the public health, welfare, safety or morals, when in the judgment of the city manager or designee, chief of police or shift commander such action is necessary to protect the public health, welfare, safety or morals. 
(e)  In the case of the revocation or surrender of an alcoholic beverage license before expiration, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund or fees paid to the city regarding the license to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only so long as the licensee is actively engaged in such business, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration, and in the event the licensee shall cease to be actively engaged in such business such license shall be invalid and the licensee of such business shall immediately notify the city manager or designee and return his license thereto. 
(g)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by a holder of an alcoholic beverage license, or his agent, or employee, shall be unlawful, and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-1-7 of this code, and shall also subject the holder of such license to suspension or revocation of such license or monetary administrative penalty, or any combination thereof as the city manager or designee deems proper. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-11. - Hearing on denial, suspension or revocation or imposition of monetary administrative penalty. 
(a)  Before the denial of any application, including a renewal application, for an alcoholic beverage license or for the transfer of any alcoholic beverage license, or the revocation or suspension of any existing alcoholic beverage license, or for the imposition of a monetary administrative penalty against a licensee, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, shall be given notice in writing from the city manager or designee to show cause before an administrative hearing officer at a time and place specified therein not less than three (3) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of service of the notice, why such application for license or for transfer of license should not be denied, or why such license should not be revoked or suspended as the case may be, or why a monetary administrative penalty should not be imposed, stating the grounds therefor, and at the appointed time and place the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exist, why such application should not be denied or such license revoked or suspended or a monetary administrative penalty imposed after which the administrative hearing officer shall take such actions as he or she in his or her judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. 
(b)  The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final unless appealed by certiorari to the Superior Court of Hall County. 
(c)  In all instances of a denial of any application for an alcoholic beverage license or the revocation of any existing alcoholic beverage license, the applicant, licensee or any person(s) with twenty-five (25) percent or more interest, shall not reapply for a license for at least one (1) year from the final date of the denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-12. - Employee permits. 
(a)  No person shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages, or be in any managerial position, by an establishment holding a license for the sale of distilled spirits by the package or for consumption on premises or an establishment holding a license for malt beverage or wine for consumption on premises unless such person has been approved by the chief of police or his designee. The individual named on the alcoholic beverage license as the managing agent for such establishment shall be exempt from obtaining an employee permit. 
(b)  Upon approval by the chief of police or his designee, such person shall be issued an employee permit which shall contain the name, expiration date, fingerprint and photograph of such employee. Such employee permit shall remain the property of the city and shall be in the possession of the employee at any time he or she is working at any licensed establishment, and shall be produced upon the request of any law enforcement officer of the city. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the Gainesville Police Department and upon the payment of the non-refundable fee designated in Title 10 of this code. The applicant shall furnish, at the time of presenting the application, two (2) forms of valid, current identification. Such application shall contain the following information: Applicant's name, date of birth, height, weight, race, sex, address, telephone number, and disclosure of arrest record. Applicant must give permission to the police department to obtain and inspect any criminal history on such applicant which is in the possession of any law enforcement agency. 
(d)  No person shall be granted an employee permit that has been convicted, plead guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving the sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages to an underage person or any felony within three (3) years of the date of the application. 
(e)  No person shall be granted an employee permit if he or she has been the holder of an alcoholic beverage license or employee permit which has been revoked within five (5) years of the date of the application. 
(f)  An employee permit shall be valid for three (3) years from the date of issue. At the expiration of three (3) years, the employee permit may be renewed upon the submission of a renewal application, the payment of the appropriate fee, and upon determination that such individual remains qualified under this chapter. 
(g)  The employee permit is non-transferable and is valid only for the individual named on the permit. Such permit is valid for the individual named while employed in any establishment licensed in the city. 
(h)  An employee permit may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police if it is determined that the individual has violated any provision of this chapter or committed any offense which would make him or her ineligible to hold such a permit. 
(i)  Falsifying or failing to disclose any information required by this chapter shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the employee permit. 
(j)  Notification of any denial, suspension, or revocation of an employee permit shall be in writing and served either in person or by certified mail and shall contain the reasons for such action and the notice of the right to appeal the decision. 
(1)  Decisions of the chief of police that adversely affect or aggrieve any applicant, certificate holder, or permit holder under this chapter may be appealed to the administrative hearing officer, as defined in section 1-8-1 of this code. All appeals shall be submitted in writing to the chief of police within ten (10) calendar days after notification of the adverse decision. 
(2)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of the filing of the written appeal, unless a continuance of such hearing is agreed to by the appellant and the chief of police, or unless the hearing is rescheduled by the administrative hearing officer. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. 
(3)  The appellant shall be notified in writing of the date and time of the hearing at least three (3) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(4)  The findings of the administrative hearing officer shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of the finding by certiorari to the Superior Court of Hall County. 
(k)  No licensee shall allow any employee or manager required to hold an employee permit to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in their possession a current valid employee permit. Provided, however, that an individual may be employed for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days pending the submission of the application to and the approval of the permit by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Secs. 6-4-13—6-4-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - MANUFACTURERS 

Sec. 6-4-20. - Malt beverage. 
No individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brewery without first obtaining a proper brewery license from the city. A licensed brewery shall comply with state law relating to the limited sale of malt beverages to the public and may sell on all days and at all times that sales of malt beverages by retailers are lawful within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-21. - Wine. 
A Georgia farm winery may engage in retail package sales of wine in a tasting room or the retail consumption sales on premises of its wine and the wine of any other Georgia farm winery in a tasting room. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-22. - Distilled spirits. 
No individual shall be permitted to own or operate a distillery without first obtaining a proper distillery license from the city. A licensed distillery shall comply with state and federal law relating to the manufacture and limited sale of distilled spirits to the public and may sell on all days and at all times that sales of distilled spirits by retailers are lawful within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Secs. 6-4-23—6-4-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - EXCISE TAX ON MIXED DRINKS CONSUMED ON PREMISES 

Sec. 6-4-31. - Definitions. 
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means the person designated by the licensee in this application for permit to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
Drink or mixed drink shall include any distilled spirits served for consumption on the premises, which may or may not be diluted by water or other substance in solution. 
Licensee means any person who holds a license from the city to engage in the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including receipts, cash, credit, property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any distilled spirits by the drink. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-32. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There is hereby imposed and levied upon every purchaser of a distilled spirits purchased by the drink within this city a tax in the amount provided in Title 10. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-33. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Every licensee or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed herein from purchasers of distilled spirits by the drink within the licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be required by the city to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(b)  In all cases where the collection of food and drinks is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee is liable at the time of and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The city shall have authority to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-34. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall become due and payable from the purchaser at the time of purchase of any mixed drink in this city. All amount of such taxes collected by the licensee shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period for which this tax is imposed; provided, however, that upon a proper showing that the tax imposed will not be collected until after a regular billing period of the collecting agent, then the collection of the tax may be deferred by the city for an additional period not exceeding thirty (30) days. 
(b)  On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city in such form as the city may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax hereunder. All returns shall show the gross receipt of the sale of distilled spirits by the drink and the amount of the tax collected on such drinks. 
(c)  Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-35. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If the city has cause to believe that the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly period. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths (¾) of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  The city or its designated representatives shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-36. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  If any person fails to make a return, the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in possession of or may come into the possession of the city official. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 6-4-35(c). 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths (¾) of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-37. - Penalty for nonpayment. 
Any person who fails to pay the tax herein imposed or fails to pay any amount of the tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required shall pay a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 6-4-36(b). 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-38. - Action for collection. 
(a)  At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city may bring an action in the courts of this state any other state or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-39. - Overpayment. 
If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city, he will have three (3) years from the date of payment to file claim in writing with the city manager stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or from his administrators or administrators. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-40. - Purchasers or successors of business. 
(a)  If any licensee liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-41. - Administration. 
(a)  Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city may require. 
(b)  The city or any person authorized in writing by the city may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee for sale of distilled spirits by the drink and any licensee liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(c)  In administration of the provisions of this subsection, the city may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to purchases which are subject to the tax. Reports shall be filed with the city when required by the city and shall set forth the purchase price for each purchase, the date or dates of purchase, and such other information as the city may require. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-42. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this code. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the subsection is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee or any other person who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may, in addition to the other penalties and liabilities provided for herein, have his license or permit revoked as provided for previously herein. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Secs. 6-4-43—6-4-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - EXCISE TAX REQUIRED OF WHOLESALE DEALERS 

Sec. 6-4-50. - Imposition of tax. 
There is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer and manufacturer distributing malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits within the city an excise tax in the amounts fixed in Title 10. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-51. - Payment of taxes. 
(a)  Payment of excise taxes for the distribution of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits shall be remitted by the tenth day of each month following the month in which deliveries were made. 
(b)  Copies of the "summary of sales" showing delivery by each supplier to retailers and/or consumption on the premises licensees shall be furnished to the city's finance department with each monthly payment. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Secs. 6-4-52—6-4-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - MALT BEVERAGE AND WINE—ORIGINAL PACKAGE 

Sec. 6-4-60. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No malt beverage and/or wine shall be offered for sale or sold in an unopened package within one hundred (100) yards of any school building, school grounds or college campus. This subsection shall not apply: 
(1)  To a grocery store licensed for the retail sale of only wine and malt beverages for consumption off the premises, which shall be allowed to sell wine and malt beverages within one hundred (100) yards of any school building, school grounds or college campus. As used in this subparagraph, the term "grocery store" means a retail establishment which has a total retail floor space of at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of which at least eighty-five (85) percent is reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic items and conducts all of its sales inside the building containing its retail floor space. 
(2)  To any premises or location where an alcoholic beverage license was issued or approved prior to July 1, 1981, so long as alcoholic beverages are being sold or dispensed in compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  To any premises or location where alcoholic beverages are being sold or dispensed in compliance with the other provisions of this chapter and a school or college campus is built or erected within the minimum distances provided for in this section. 
(b)  No malt beverage and/or wine shall be offered for sale or sold in an unopened package within one hundred (100) yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government. 
(c)  All measurements to determine distances required by this chapter shall be measured as provided for in section 6-4-110. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-61. - Hours of sale. 
The hours of sale of malt beverages and wine at retail and not for consumption on premises are from 7:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m. on Monday through Saturday and from 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-62. - Growler sales. 
Package malt beverage licensees or wine licensees, who are not also licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package, may fill growlers with malt beverages and/or wine at the licensed location subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  At least ninety (90) percent of the licensee's total gross sales are from packaged sale of malt beverages and/or wine or the licensee's premises have a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of floor space dedicated to the display of malt beverages and/or wine offered for sale. 
(2)  A growler shall not exceed sixty-four (64) ounces. Growlers may only be filled from kegs or barrels procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. 
(3)  Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. 
(4)  Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. 
(5)  Samples of tap malt beverages may be made available. No individual shall be allowed to sample more than a total of forty-eight (48) ounces of malt beverages per day. 
(6)  Samples of wine may be made available. No individual shall be allowed to sample more than a total of twenty-four (24) ounces per day. 
(7)  Individuals may sample both beer and wine, however no individual shall be allowed to sample a total combination of more than forty-eight (48) ounces per day. 
(8)  A licensee may charge a fee for samples of tap malt beverages or wine. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-63. - No consumption on premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises licensed for the sale of malt beverages or wine by the package and it shall be unlawful for any licensee by the package to open for, or break the package for, a purchaser and/or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises. 
(b)  This section shall not apply for the holder of a temporary limited license as provided for in this chapter during the hours for which the temporary limited license is valid. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Secs. 6-4-64—6-4-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - DISTILLED SPIRITS—ORIGINAL PACKAGE 

Sec. 6-4-70. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No distilled spirits shall be offered for sale or sold in an unopened package within one hundred (100) yards of any church building or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, education building, school grounds or college campus. 
(b)  A new retail package liquor licensed place of business or the relocation of an existing retail package liquor licensed place of business engaged in the retail package sales of distilled spirits shall not be located within five hundred (500) yards of any other business licensed to sell package liquor at retail. 
(c)  The distance provided for herein shall not apply: 
(1)  To any premises or location where alcoholic beverages are being sold or dispensed in compliance with the other provisions of this chapter and a school or church is built or erected within the minimum distances provided for in this section. 
(2)  To any premises or location licensed as an importer, so long as the same is allowed by the state; provided, however, no signs or other forms of advertisement shall be placed on or near the licensed premises, which directly or indirectly advertise that alcoholic beverages are stored or warehoused on the premises. 
(d)  No distilled spirits shall be offered for sale or sold in an unopened package within one hundred (100) yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government. 
(e)  All measurements to determine distances required by this chapter shall be measured as provided for in section 6-4-110. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-71. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  The hours of sale of distilled spirits at retail and not for consumption on premises are from 8:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m. on Monday through Saturday and from 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(b)  No retail dealer of distilled spirits shall be in, or permit others to be in, its place of business Monday through Saturday any time prior to 6:00 a.m. or thirty (30) minutes past the closing time. No retail dealer of distilled spirits shall be in, or permit others to be in, its place of business on Sundays prior to 10:30 a.m. or thirty (30) minutes past the closing time. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-72. - No consumption on premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises licensed for the sale of distilled spirits by the package and it shall be unlawful for any licensee by the package to open for, or break the package for, a purchaser and/or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-73. - Sufficient lighting required. 
The building in which each retail dealer of distilled spirits in the unbroken package is located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself, the premises and all entrances are readily visible at all times from the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Secs. 6-4-74—6-4-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-4-80. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits for consumption on the premises may be offered for sale, sold or dispensed within one hundred (100) yards of any property containing three hundred (300) housing units or fewer, which property is owned or operated by a housing authority created by OCGA § 8-3-1 et seq., also known as the Housing Authorities Law. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, or to the renewal of such license. 
(b)  All measurements to determine distances required by this chapter shall be measured as provided for in section 6-4-110. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-81. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  The hours of sale for consumption by the drink on the premises where sold are from 8:00 a.m. to 1:30 a.m. on Monday through Friday, from 8:00 a.m. on Saturday through 1:30 a.m. on Sunday, and from and 12:30 p.m. on Sunday to 1:30 a.m. on Monday. 
(b)  All alcoholic beverages shall be removed, from the area of the premises utilized by customers or patrons within forty-five (45) minutes after the closing time for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-82. - Food volume ratio for restaurants. 
(a)  Restaurants shall maintain at least fifty (50) percent of their business volume from the sale of food, private clubs exempted. Food sales shall include all consumable items sold on the premises except alcoholic beverages. The fifty (50) percent ratio shall be determined on a calendar quarter basis by review of the monthly report submitted by each licensee. 
(b)  Monthly reports for the preceding month's alcohol and food sales shall be submitted on forms provided by the city on or before the 20th day of the month. 
(c)  In the event food sales fall below fifty (50) percent of the business volume of the licensee for any two (2) consecutive quarters, then the city manager or designee may request a hearing for the suspension or revocation of such license in accordance with section 6-4-11. Nothing herein provided shall prevent the city manager or designee from suspending or revoking such license for any other violations of this chapter. 
(d)  Authorized officials of the city may examine the records of businesses licensed hereunder at any reasonable time to ascertain that the requirements of this and other provisions of this chapter are met. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-83. - Sales volume ratio for select businesses. 
Any business required to pay a business occupation tax that does not meet the criteria in section 6-4-82, section 6-4-84, or section 6-4-85 may obtain a consumption on premises license for malt beverages and wine subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be clearly incidental to the primary business conducted on the premises. 
(2)  No individual shall be allowed to consume more than forty-eight (48) ounces of malt beverages per day or more than a total of twenty-four (24) ounces of wine per day. Individuals may consume both beer and wine, but shall not consume a total combination of more than forty-eight (48) ounces per day. 
(3)  Consumption on the premises licensees shall maintain at least sixty (60) percent of their business volume from the sale of merchandise or services, not including alcoholic beverages. The sixty (60) percent ratio shall be determined on a calendar quarter basis on the monthly report submitted by each licensee. 
(4)  Monthly reports for the preceding month's alcohol and retail or services sales shall be submitted on forms provided by the city on or before the 20th day of the month. 
(5)  No alcoholic beverages shall be served on Sunday. 
(6)  To qualify for a license, a retail or business establishment must be open to the public for business a minimum of thirty-two (32) hours per week. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-84. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-4-85. - Non-profit organizations with facilities. 
(a)  Non-profit organizations meeting the criteria of subsection (b) below may obtain a consumption on premises license subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be clearly incidental to the primary function of the non-profit organization on the premises. 
2.  No alcoholic beverages shall be served on Sunday except as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7. 
(b)  To qualify for a consumption on premises license, the nonprofit organization must be exempt from federal income taxes pursuant to section 501(c), (d) or (e) of the Internal Revenue Code and must have a building, facility or grounds that is primarily used for public education, research, conservation and enjoyment, or that serves as a repository for a collection of literary, natural, or scientific objects of interest, or works of art where such facility or building is arranged, intended, designed and open to be viewed by members of the public with or without an admission fee. This shall include, but not be limited to, nonprofit botanical gardens or nature science centers. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-86. - Brown bagging. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee or any other business that has been issued a business occupation tax certificate to allow customers to bring with them their own alcoholic beverages, a practice commonly referred to as "BYOB" or "brown bagging." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverages to be served, stored, kept or consumed by any person on the premises of any business establishment for which a city business/occupation tax certificate has been issued, excluding those businesses with a valid alcoholic beverage license or as otherwise exempted by this chapter. 
(c)  The prohibitions in paragraph (a) shall not apply to a private function, art shop, or when contained in a sixteen (16) ounce clear plastic cup within the downtown dining district and when authorized by the business establishment. 
(d)  Art shops, as defined by this chapter are subject to the specific provisions governing the operation of an art shop: 
(1)  An art shop may allow customers to bring in a bottle or bottles of wine and/or malt beverages to be consumed on the premises. 
(2)  The customer must remove any unconsumed wine and or malt beverages from the premises before leaving the premises. 
(3)  The brown bagging of wine and or malt beverages in an art shop shall be subject to this chapter and to state law; including but not limited to the prohibition of consumption by one (1) who is under twenty-one (21) years of age or intoxicated. 
(4)  An art shop may serve food provided it meets all federal, state and local requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-87. - No outside consumption. 
(a)  A consumption on premises licensee shall not permit a purchaser to remove from the premises any alcoholic beverage from the premises, and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no beverages are sold and carried out. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverage beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(c)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside a premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage premise and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  This section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  For events that are sponsored or organized by the City of Gainesville where the alcohol is obtained from a participating business within any city designated area, and is contained in and consumed from an approved, clear plastic container. 
(2)  Where the city council through a resolution has permitted otherwise. 
(3)  For restaurants that have a valid sidewalk cafe permit provided that all outdoor activities are contained within the permitted sidewalk cafe. 
(4)  For an open air cafe as defined by this chapter. 
(5)  Beverages for consumption at a publicly owned or privately owned golf course. 
(6)  For the carrying out of a partially consumed bottle of wine as defined in section 6-4-88. 
(7)  When a temporary limited license has been issued, provided that the person consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage remains on the licensed premises as defined in section 6-4-2. 
(8)  For a downtown dining district as defined by this chapter. 
(f)  Downtown dining district—outside consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted. 
(1)  For the purposes of this chapter only, a downtown dining district is defined as follows: a specifically authorized and pedestrian oriented area of the city as established by resolution of mayor and council that allows those establishments with a valid alcohol license within such area to dispense and/or serve an alcoholic beverage for carry out purposes, provided all other laws, rules and ordinances are followed. 
(2)  Within a downtown dining district, any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a clear plastic cup; provided, however, that no person shall remove more than two (2) such alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises at a time. 
(3)  Within a downtown dining district, no unsealed container in which an alcoholic beverage is carried and consumed shall exceed sixteen (16) fluid ounces in size. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful within a downtown dining district for any person to drink, attempt to drink or possess any alcoholic beverage in an unsealed can, glass or metal container, on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and/or parking lots, whether public or private. This section shall not prohibit the possession of containers of alcoholic beverages with unbroken seals. 
(5)  No alcoholic beverage purchased pursuant to this provision may be consumed outside of the downtown dining district, or upon any private property, without the express consent of the private property owners. 
(6)  Unless authorized by mayor and council in the resolution creating the downtown dining district, no alcoholic beverage purchased within the downtown dining district pursuant to this provision shall be consumed within the downtown dining district on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and/or parking lots, whether public or private, prior to 12:00 p.m. or later than 12:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-88. - Partially consumed bottles of wine purchased with a meal. 
(a)  Any restaurant which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one (1) unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and a consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. 
(b)  A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. 
(c)  The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. 
(d)  If transporting in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a lock trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-89. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales may be made by a licensed consumption on premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved as provided in this section. 
(b)  The requirements for approval are: 
(1)  The patio/open area must be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The only exception to this would be a fire exit as required by building and fire codes. Such fire exit would not be for general public use unless an emergency exists and would be of the type which sounds an alarm so that the establishment would be alerted of unauthorized use if no emergency exists. The height of such structure shall be a minimum of three and one-half (3.5) feet above the patio floor. The structure is not required to be solid nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open area. 
(2)  The patio/open area shall not be required to be covered by a roof. 
(3)  The patio/open area shall be used merely as an extension of the interior seating area. Service in the patio/open area shall be only by waiter or waitress or by customer self-service at an interior selling location; i.e. no outside bar or service window. 
(c)  It is prohibited for an establishment to be in violation of the city's noise ordinance as defined in Chapter 3-8 of the Code of Ordinances and to allow any noise to be created in a patio/open area which may be heard from a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the patio/open area. Any measurement made pursuant to this section shall describe the shortest straight line distance from the patio to the point in question. 
(d)  Patio/open area plans must be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by the city manager or designee. Patio/open areas must be permitted and approved by the city's building inspection and fire departments as required by their governing regulations or codes. 
(e)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in the patio areas of such hotel or motel. "Patio areas," as that term is used herein, do not have to conform to the standards in this section. 
(f)  Sidewalk cafes approved pursuant to chapter 6-13 are exempt from this section. 
(g)  Licensed consumption on premises establishments located within the city's midtown tax allocation district, as adopted by ordinance 2006-53, are exempt from subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-90. - Happy hour promotions. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "drink" means a single portion beverage which contains any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  This section shall be construed to cover, include and apply to all alcoholic beverages including malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits for consumption on premises by properly licensed establishments in the city. All consumption on premises licensees are prohibited from selling or giving away alcoholic beverages under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Offering all you can drink for a set price during a set time. 
(2)  Serving multiple drinks for a single price unless the drinks are part of a variety sampler of which no more than a total of sixteen (16) ounces can be served as part of the sampler and which sampler shall be comprised of at least four (4) different varieties of malt beverages or wine or three (3) different mixes containing distilled spirits. 
(3)  Making a single price the basis for a required purchase of two (2) or more servings. 
(4)  Serving alcoholic beverages by the pitcher, except to two (2) or more persons at any one (1) time. 
(5)  Offering reduced-price drinks to any segment of the population for any period of time as an inducement to patronize the premises; except between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday, drinks may be sold at a reduced price which is no less than half the price usually charged. 
(6)  Selling alcoholic beverages for less than half the normal retail price, or selling alcoholic beverages in pitchers or in jumbo sizes for less than half the normal retail price. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the dispensing of drinks in pitchers or in jumbo sizes, provided that such pitchers or jumbo sizes shall be available at all times that the licensee is open for business. 
(7)  Using coupons or other special promotional items as an inducement to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  Sponsoring, conducting or allowing contests or other promotions which have as their primary purpose increasing the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(9)  Offering or delivering any free alcoholic beverages to the general public except as otherwise allowed by law. 
(c)  The prohibitions and restrictions in the foregoing subsection which apply to licensees or agents or employees of licensees shall not: 
(1)  Apply at private functions; 
(2)  Prohibit the offering of free food or entertainment at any time; 
(3)  Prohibit including drinks as part of the price of a hotel, travel, entertainment, or meal package; 
(4)  Prohibit the sale, offer to sell, or delivery of wine or malt beverage by the bottle, pitcher or carafe; 
(5)  Prohibit any motel or hotel from offering room service to registered guests. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-91. - Brewpubs. 
(a)  No individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brewpub without first obtaining a proper brewpub license from the city. Each brewpub licensee shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements. 
(b)  A brewpub license authorizes the holder of such license to: 
(1)  Manufacture on the licensed premises not more than ten thousand (10,000) barrels of malt beverage in a calendar year solely for retail sale. 
(2)  Operate a restaurant that shall be the sole retail outlet for such malt beverage and may offer for sale for consumption on premises any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are authorized for retail sale under this chapter, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer and, provided further, in addition to malt beverages manufactured on the premises, each brew pub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer. 
(3)  Sell up to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) barrels annually of such malt beverage to licensed wholesale dealers. Under no circumstances shall such malt beverages be sold by a brewpub licensee to any person holding a retail consumption dealer's license or a retailer's license for the purpose of resale. 
(4)  Sell malt beverages manufactured on the premises by the package for consumption off the premises. 
(c)  Possession of a brewpub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining any other license available under this chapter for the same premises. 
(d)  A brewpub licensee shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed under this chapter as manufacturers, retailers and, where applicable, wholesale dealers. 
(e)  Except as set forth in this section, a brewpub licensee shall be subject to all sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-92. - Private clubs. 
(a)  Private clubs, meeting the definition of this chapter, are eligible to apply for a license for consumption on premises of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No license shall be issued or renewed for the sale of alcoholic beverages prior to the furnishing of evidence, satisfactory to the city, that such private club has been approved as a tax exempt entity by the IRS. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-93. - Gainesville Civic Center. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages and consumption of mixed drinks on the premises of the Gainesville Civic Center shall be allowed. 
(b)  The Director of the Gainesville Parks and Recreation Department, or his designee, may hold an alcoholic beverage license for the Gainesville Civic Center. There shall be no alcoholic beverage license fee paid by the Director of the Gainesville Parks and Recreation Department or his designee. 
(c)  The consumption on the premises license provided for herein is exempted from the food sale requirements provided for in section 6-4-82 of this chapter. 
(d)  The city may solicit for proposals to be the designee for the Gainesville Parks and Recreation Department for alcoholic beverage services for consumption on the premises at the Gainesville Civic Center. 
(e)  Any designee shall obtain a business occupation tax and an alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises under this chapter. 
(f)  The hours of sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises of the Gainesville Civic Center shall be the same as provided in section 6-4-81. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Secs. 6-4-94—6-4-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 8. - EVENTS 

Sec. 6-4-100. - Non-profit special temporary event permit. 
(a)  Bona fide non-profit charitable and civic organizations, colleges and universities desiring to sell alcoholic beverages may apply to the city manager or designee for a special temporary event permit authorizing the organization to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages for a period not to exceed three (3) days as provided in rules 560-2-11-.02 and 560-2-11-.03 of the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue as amended from time to time. 
(b)  The non-refundable permit fees as required in Title 10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Gainesville are due and payable upon the filing of the application for a special temporary event permit. 
(c)  Bona fide non-profit charitable and civic organizations, colleges and universities, if approved for a temporary event, may sell distilled spirits and malt beverages for consumption on premises only. Wine may be sold for consumption on the premises and by the unopened package subject to O.C.G.A. §§ 3-9-3, 3-9-4 and 3-9-5 and subject to distance requirements for package sales as outlined in this chapter. If the temporary event is a wine tasting, then the event shall also be subject to the provisions of section 6-4-104. 
(d)  Holders of a special temporary event permit shall be considered the same as any other licensee and subject to all laws, rules and regulations and other applicable sections of this chapter relating thereto. 
(e)  No more than six (6) permits may be issued to an organization in any one (1) calendar year pursuant to this section. 
(f)  Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit. 
(g)  Applicants under this section do not have to obtain alcohol bonds. 
(h)  If a designee has been appointed by the Gainesville Parks and Recreation Board for alcoholic beverage services for consumption on the premises at the Gainesville Civic Center, then only the designee shall submit an application for a special temporary event permit to be held at the Gainesville Civic Center. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-101. - For-profit special temporary event permit. 
(a)  A for-profit organization desiring to sell alcoholic beverages may apply to the city manager or designee for a special temporary event permit which, if issued, licenses the event for alcohol sales by the drink. 
(b)  A for-profit organization desiring to obtain a special temporary event permit, must possess a valid consumption on premises license for malt beverage, wine or liquor or a valid malt beverage, wine, or distilled spirits package license issued by the city. 
(c)  The non-refundable permit fees as required in Title 10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Gainesville are due and payable upon the filing of the application for a special temporary event permit. 
(d)  Provided a special temporary permit has been issued to a for-profit organization, said organization shall be subject to all laws, rules and regulations and other applicable sections of this chapter relating thereto. 
(e)  Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the place specified in the application. 
(f)  If a designee has been appointed by the Gainesville Parks and Recreation Board for alcoholic beverage services for consumption on the premises at the Gainesville Civic Center, then only the designee shall submit an application for a special temporary event permit to be held at the Gainesville Civic Center. 
(g)  No special temporary event permit shall be issued within any property zoned central business during any event that is sponsored or organized by the City of Gainesville. 
(h)  The licensee for a permitted special temporary event shall designate and clearly mark, by the use of ropes, barricades, stanchions or similar devices, a specific area within which alcoholic beverages may be consumed. 
(i)  Applicants desiring to sell distilled spirits must obtain an alcohol bond as required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-102. - Temporary limited license. 
(a)  A retail dealer that is licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises or a retail dealer licensed to sell only malt beverages and/or wine by the package where seventy-five (75) percent of total annual retail sales of the business are from beer or wine sales by the package and/or from charges for samples of beer or wine, may apply for a temporary limited license to allow for the sale of alcohol by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(1)  Applications for the temporary limited license shall be made by the licensee with the city manager or designee on forms provided by the city. 
(2)  Payment of the non-refundable license fee as provided for in Title 10 shall be paid at the time the application is submitted. 
(b)  If issued, the temporary limited license shall allow for outdoor consumption on the premises during an event and shall be valid for one (1) calendar day for the specific event as set forth in the application. For the purposes of this section, a calendar day for which the temporary limited license is granted will extend to 1:30 a.m. 
(c)  The hours and day of sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages at a licensed event shall be conducted in compliance with section 6-4-81 of this chapter. 
(d)  Any licensed retail dealer shall not be granted more than thirty (30) temporary limited licenses per calendar year and any licensed retail dealer shall not be granted more than four (4) per calendar month. 
(e)  If a temporary limited license is issued prior to an event, revenue from food and alcohol sales that occur during the time the temporary limited license is valid may be exempt from the food volume ratio requirement stated in section 6-4-82 of this chapter and from the sales volume ratio requirement stated in section 6-4-83 of this chapter. If the temporary limited license holder chooses to have food and alcohol exempt from the food volume ratio requirement stated in section 6-4-82, the food and alcohol sales that occur during the time the temporary limited license is valid, must be reported to the city on a separate report from the monthly sales report that is provided to the city. Any attempt to manipulate food or alcohol sales between days, times or reports may be cause for revocation of the retail dealer's alcohol license. 
(f)  No temporary limited license shall be issued within any property zoned central business during any event that is sponsored or organized by the City of Gainesville, unless approved by the city. 
(g)  Any retailer dealer receiving a temporary limited license under this section shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter not in conflict with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-103. - Catered events. 
(a)  Annual licenses to cater alcoholic beverages by the drink on premises at authorized catered events may be obtained only by those persons, firms or corporations currently licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for sales of alcohol in the unbroken package. 
(b)  Any licensee desiring to obtain a license to be an alcoholic beverage caterer in the city shall submit, in person, a written and signed application on forms provided by city. Only a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may distribute or sell alcoholic beverages by the drink at an authorized catered event, after the application and issuance of a catered event permit. 
(c)  Before a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at any authorized catered function, such caterer shall apply for a catered event permit from the city manager or designee at least ten (10) working days prior to the event. 
(1)  The application for a catered event permit shall include the name of the alcoholic beverage caterer, the caterer's license number, and the date, address and time of the event. 
(2)  If the catered event permit is granted, it shall be good only for the specific event at the specified address and times set forth in the application, unless otherwise stated by city council by resolution. 
(3)  The permit shall be kept in the vehicle used to transport alcoholic beverages to the event at all times during which the permit is in effect. 
(d)  Caterers licensed by the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported for each event, and shall make report and remittance of such taxes with their regular monthly reports to the city. 
(e)  No alcoholic beverages shall be transported, distributed, or sold to other than licensed locations in the city, except to permitted catered events, unless otherwise authorized by this chapter or by state law. 
(f)  No licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall employ any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to dispense, serve, sell or handle alcoholic beverages at authorized catered functions. 
(g)  No catered event permit will be issued for an event at the Gainesville Civic Center or any location with respect to which any alcohol license has been denied or revoked within the past twelve (12) months; nor for any location with respect to which conduct prohibited in this chapter has previously occurred. 
(h)  The hours and days of sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages at an authorized catered event, except for private functions, shall be conducted in compliance with section 6-4-81 of this chapter. Except as set forth above in this section, an off-premises permit holder must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-104. - Wine tasting. 
(a)  A request to conduct a wine tasting may be approved by the city manager or designee when such request is made in writing on an application furnished by the city manager or designee, and a non-refundable fee as provided for in Title 10 is submitted. If issued, the wine tasting shall be conducted under the following conditions: 
(1)  A wine tasting must comply with all local and state laws and regulations pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state and the city. 
(2)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in the unbroken package or container at retail. 
(b)  A bona fide non-profit charitable and civic organization that seeks to conduct a wine tasting shall comply with all requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 3-9-3, 3-9-4, and 3-9-5 and must make application twenty-five (25) days prior to the proposed event on forms supplied by the city. 
(c)  A for-profit organization that seeks to conduct a wine tasting and is not licensed shall comply with all requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-20 and must make application twenty-five (25) days prior to the proposed event on forms supplied by the city, and shall obtain the wine secured for the wine tasting through a wholesale dealer possessing a valid license to distribute wine issued by the city. 
(d)  Licensees that are licensed to sell wine in the unbroken package are exempt from the requirement to make application for a wine tasting if sixty (60) percent or greater of the total malt beverage and/or wine sales is derived from the sale of wine. Samples of wine may be made available for consumption on the premise provided no individual shall be allowed to sample more than a total of twenty-four (24) ounces per day. A licensee may charge a fee for samples of wine. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-105. - Home brew special events. 
(a)  Home brewed malt beverages for purposes of this section shall be limited to malt beverages produced by an individual(s) pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4 and any applicable rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(b)  A home brew special event may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed under this chapter for the sale, storage, or distribution of alcoholic beverages by the package or for consumption on the premises, or may be conducted at locations not otherwise licensed under this chapter. 
(c)  All applications for a home brew special event shall be submitted in writing to the city manager or designee, on forms provided by the city, along with a payment of a non-refundable fee as outlined in Title 10. 
(d)  At a minimum, applicants shall provide the following information in their application: 
(1)  Name, address, and contact number of the applicant; 
(2)  Location of the event; 
(3)  Date and times at which the event will be held; 
(4)  Estimated number of participants in the event. 
(e)  Home brew special events shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Events shall only be held during legal hours for drinking on premises as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages at the event shall be limited solely to home brewed malt beverages produced pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4. Consumption of other alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Consumption of home brewed malt beverages shall be limited solely to participants in and judges of the special event. For the purpose of this section participants shall be either individuals submitting home brewed malt beverages to the event or individuals admitted to the event by the sponsor without having to submit a home brew. 
(4)  At the event, home brewed malt beverages shall not be sold, offered for sale, or made available for consumption by the general public. 
(5)  A home brew special event permittee shall not allow any person to take an open container of alcoholic beverage from the designated event area. 
(f)  A home brew special event permittee shall be subject to all laws, rules and regulations of the city and state, including the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue and shall be subject to permit revocation for violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Secs. 6-4-106—6-4-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 9. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-4-110. - Measurement of distances. 
(a)  All measurements to determine distances required by this chapter shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  In a straight line from the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  To the front door of the building of a church, government-owned treatment center or a retail package store; or 
(3)  To the nearest property line of the real property being used for school or educational purposes or property that is owned or operated by a housing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-111. - Grandfather provision for distance requirements. 
If the sale of alcoholic beverages was lawful at a location at any time during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding an application for renewal or a new application for an alcoholic beverage license, the premises shall be grandfathered in regarding any distance requirements as outlined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-112. - Sales on election day. 
No malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits will be sold within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. As used in this section, the term "day" means that period of time beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-113. - Responsibility of licensees and employees. 
(a)  No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Knowingly furnish or cause to be furnished or permit any other person in his employ to furnish any minor alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Knowingly sell alcoholic beverages to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(3)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(4)  Permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practice on the licensed premises. Such misconduct shall be immediately reported to the city police department. 
(5)  Sell, offer for sale, possess, or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic beverages, the sale, possession or consumption of which is not authorized under his license. 
(6)  Add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  Sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages by use of vending machines. 
(c)  Receive or cause to be delivered at the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages by any means other than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a license from the city to make such deliveries. Transportation of alcoholic beverages by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of all licenses concerned. 
(d)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to the general public use is prohibited, except that private parties and conventions, or a properly permitted wine tasting, which have been scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms, and provided further that this prohibition shall not apply at private clubs hereunder, nor to the sale for consumption hereunder to the registered guests of any hotel or motel in their designated rooms. 
(e)  All alcoholic beverages shall be stored only on the premises for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-114. - Financial interest prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold an alcoholic beverage license (package or consumption) who also has any direct financial interest in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any alcoholic beverage license (package or consumption) to or accept or receive financial aid or assistance from the holder of any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's or wholesale dealer's license. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-115. - Employment of minors. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under eighteen (18) years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises. 
(b)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under eighteen (18) years of age to sell or take orders for any distilled spirits in the unopened package. 
(c)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under sixteen (16) years of age to sell or take orders for any malt beverages or wine in the unopened package. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-116. - Regulations involving minors. 
(a)  The following regulations involving minors shall apply: 
(1)  No person knowingly, by himself or through another, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in his employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(3)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(4)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall misrepresent his age, identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually twenty-one (21) years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and to be furnished with proper identification in order to verify the age of such person; and the failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than twenty-one (21) years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly. 
(c)  For purposes of this chapter, "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. § 40-5-100 et seq. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(d)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a) above shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state. 
(2)  At a religious ceremony. 
(3)  In the home of the minor with the consent of said minor's parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
Sec. 6-4-117. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, II, 9-18-18) 
CHAPTER 6-5. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 6-5-1. - Business license fee levied; amount. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied an annual business license fee upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations at the rate fixed in Title 10. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the minimum amount of annual business license fee due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this chapter shall be fixed in Title 10. 
(Code 1958, § 9A-1) 
Sec. 6-5-2. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city by March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The fee levied pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(b)  The due date of fees levied by this chapter shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1958, § 9A-2) 
CHAPTER 6-6. - INSURANCE COMPANIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-51, § I, adopted Jan. 3, 1995, repealed former ch. 6-6, §§ 6-6-1—6-6-7, which pertained to similar subject matter, and added a new ch. 6-6 to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Insurance, O.C.G.A. Tit. 33; fees and taxes, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-1 et seq.; municipal licensing and taxation of insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 

Sec. 6-6-1. - Insurer license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount provided in Title 10. For each separate business location in excess of one (1) not covered by section 6-6-2, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount provided in Title 10. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 94-51, § I, 1-3-95) 
Sec. 6-6-2. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee as provided in Title 10, per location for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 94-51, § I, 1-3-95) 
Sec. 6-6-3. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2000 and for each year thereafter an annual business/occupation tax upon independent insurance agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 6-6-1 hereof in the amount provided in section 6-2-4 for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-51, § I, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 99-60, § I, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 6-6-4. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 6-6-1. 
(Ord. No. 94-51, § I, 1-3-95) 
Cross reference— Fiscal affairs, Tit. 2. 
Sec. 6-6-5. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in paragraph (1) of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the state in an amount equal to two and one-half (2.5) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 6-6-1. 
(Ord. No. 94-51, § I, 1-3-95) 
Sec. 6-6-6. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 6-6-1 and 6-6-2 shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 94-51, § I, 1-3-95) 
Sec. 6-6-7. - Enforcement. 
The fees and license taxes levied by this chapter to be collected by the city may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other license fees and taxes of the city. A violation of this chapter shall be grounds for refusing or revoking a license, and the person responsible may be punished as for violations of the business tax ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 94-51, § I, 1-3-95) 
Sec. 6-6-8. - Administrative provisions. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this chapter to the insurance commissioner of the state within forty-five (45) days of its enactment. 
(Ord. No. 94-51, § I, 1-3-95) 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1. 
State Law reference— Commissioner of insurance, OCGA § 33-2-1 et seq. 
CHAPTER 6-7. - AMUSEMENTS, PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS, PARADES, SPECIAL EVENTS, ETC.[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Public safety, Tit. 3; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-4; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 4-4; license fees, Tit. 10. 

ARTICLE 1. - THEATERS, CARNIVALS AND AMUSEMENTS 

Sec. 6-7-1. - Motion picture theaters—Operation on Sundays, authorized, hours specified. 
Motion picture theaters may be operated in the city on Sunday from 1:00 p.m. until 12:00 midnight, and at no other hours on Sunday. 
(Code 1958, § 22-1) 
Cross reference— Smoking in theaters, § 7-1-62. 
Sec. 6-7-2. - Same—Religious or educational picture required each month. 
The operator of any motion picture theater operating on Sundays shall show once each month a show on either a religious or educational subject. 
(Code 1958, § 22-2) 
Sec. 6-7-3. - Poolrooms regulated. 
No person shall operate a poolroom, billiard table, pool table or billiard room whereon charges are made for the use of the same, except under the following rules: 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusements and games shall mean any bona fide coin operated machine as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1, as amended. 
Licensee shall mean any person, firm or corporation who is duly licensed under the provisions of this Code of Ordinances to conduct the business of a poolroom in the City of Gainesville. 
Poolroom shall mean any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of pool and for which a charge of any kind is made for the use of the equipment and where there exists more than two (2) pool or billiard tables and where the proceeds from the operation of the pool tables consist of fifty (50) percent or more of the gross revenues of said business. 
(2)  License required. 
a.  A license shall be required to own and operate a poolroom in the City of Gainesville. Licenses for the operation of a poolroom in the city will be issued by the city council and pursuant to this article. 
b.  No person shall engage in the operation of a poolroom without first obtaining all applicable licenses issued by the city council. 
c.  Upon the issuance of a license to operate a poolroom, said license shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which the license is issued. 
d.  The city council designates the city marshal for the purpose of administering this section. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city marshal may be delegated by the city marshal to other city personnel. 
(3)  Application for license. 
a.  1.  An application for a regulatory license shall be filed with the city licensing department upon forms provided by the city and shall be verified under oath. 
2.  Each applicant is required to submit to a background investigation which shall include a criminal history check. 
3.  If the applicant is other than the sole proprietor, all partners, officers, managers and stockholders holding a ten (10) percent or more interest in the company shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
b.  1.  The application shall be made in the owner's name. 
2.  An applicant must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age, be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence. 
3.  An applicant and if other than a sole proprietor, all partners, officers, managers and stockholders shall not have been convicted, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, been on probation, parole or been imprisoned within a period of ten (10) years previous to the date of the application, for the violation of any of the following offenses of the United States, the State of Georgia, or any other state, or of any political subdivisions thereof: 
i.  Contributing to the delinquency of a minor; 
ii.  Any crime(s) involving children; 
iii.  Prostitution; 
iv.  Keeping a place of prostitution; 
v.  Possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs; 
vi.  Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs; 
vii.  Any felony; 
viii.  Criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; 
ix.  Attempts to commit any of these listed offenses. 
c.  The applicant shall furnish proof that all licenses required by the State of Georgia have been obtained prior to the operation a poolroom. 
d.  The applicant shall submit with the application payment of the proper regulatory fee as provided in title 10 of this Code and the proper occupation tax. 
(4)  Application; investigation. 
a.  The city marshal shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and upon completion of such investigation, present the application to city council. 
b.  No application shall be acted upon by the city council except at a regular meeting of the council. 
c.  City council will issue a regulatory license for the designated location in accordance with this Code if it determines that: 
1.  The required fees have been paid; 
2.  The applicant meets all the requirements of this chapter and other provision of the City Code; 
3.  The applicant has not knowingly made any false statements in the application; 
4.  The building, structure or location of such business as proposed by the applicant complies with all applicable zoning and building codes; 
5.  The applicant has not had a poolroom license or other similar license or permit previously suspended or revoked; and 
6.  The applicant, if a previous holder of any license to operate a business of this type, has not violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to this type of business. 
(5)  General regulations. 
a.  The poolroom shall always be open to the inspection by the city marshal or the city police during operating hours, and no disorder of any kind will be allowed under penalty of forfeiting the license granted to operate the same. 
b.  The licensee shall maintain detailed records of all revenue generated by the poolroom and shall produce them for inspection upon the request of the city marshal. 
c.  The poolroom shall not permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions, or other obstructions to be used to prevent a clear view of the interior, which clear view must be maintained at all times. No partitions forming rooms, stalls or other enclosures shall be permitted. 
d.  No billiard or pool tables shall be operated or played upon unless located on the ground floor of the business establishment. 
e.  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed on the premises of the poolroom by the licensee, agent or employee of a licensee. It shall be the duty of the licensee, agent or employee to verify the age of persons patronizing the poolroom. 
f.  No owner, operator, manager, employee or agent of a poolroom open for public use, shall allow the use of any dice, cards, dominoes or other games of chance or any form of gambling on the premises, nor shall any checks, tokens or tickets be given which can be redeemed for merchandise or cash. 
g.  No poolroom shall allow any noise or music to be so loud as to be heard outside the walls or ceiling of the business establishment. 
h.  All alcoholic beverages are prohibited from the premises of any poolroom. 
i.  No poolroom shall open on Sundays, or between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. during any weekday. 
(2)  License; denial, transfer, revocation or suspension. 
a.  Before the denial of any application for a poolroom license, or for the transfer of any poolroom license, or the revocation of any existing poolroom license, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, shall be given notice in writing from the city marshal to show cause before the administrative hearing officer at a time and place specified therein not less than three (3) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of service of the notice why such application for license or for transfer of license should not be denied, or why such license should not be revoked or suspended as the case may be, stating the grounds therefore, and at the appointed time and place the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exist, why such application should not be denied or such license revoked or suspended, after which the administrative hearing officer shall take such actions as he or she, in his or her judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. All decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be in writing with reasons therefore stated and mailed or delivered to the applicant or licensee. 
b.  Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the administrative hearing officer to deny an application or request to transfer a license applied for under the provisions of this section or the revocation or suspension of a license shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the city council within thirty (30) days after the action or decision has been mailed to the person's address as shown on the license application form, or to his last known address. 
c.  An appeal shall be taken by filing with the clerk of the city council a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. 
d.  The clerk shall transmit the written statement to the city manager within ten (10) days of its receipt and the city manager shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal before the city council. 
e.  A hearing shall be set not later than thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the appellant's appeal. 
f.  The hearing herein provided for need not be at a regular meeting of the city council, but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in such notice of hearing. 
g.  At any hearing as provided herein, the party afforded the hearing shall have the opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. 
h.  The hearing herein provided shall be de novo. 
i.  All decisions, denying, approving, suspending or revoking any application or request for transfer or license shall be in writing with the reasons therefor stated and mailed or delivered to the applicant. 
j.  The decision of the city council shall be final unless appealed by certiorari to the Superior Court of Hall County, Georgia. 
k.  In all instances of a denial of any application for a poolroom license or the revocation of any existing poolroom license, the applicant, licensee or any person(s) with twenty-five (25) percent or more interest, shall not reapply for a license for at least one (1) year from the final date of the denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, § I, 6-7-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-05, § I, adopted June 7, 2011, repealed the former § 6-7-3 and enacted a new § 6-7-3 as set out herein. The former § 6-7-3 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from the Code of 1958, § 22-3; Ord. No. 91-24, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 1991. 
State Law reference— Operators of billiard rooms, OCGA § 43-8-1 et seq.; municipal regulation of the operation of billiard rooms, OCGA §§ 43-8-2, 43-8-6, 43-8-15; hours for operation of billiard rooms, OCGA § 43-8-9. 
Sec. 6-7-4. - Attending games, contests or performances without payment of charged admission prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, attend, be present at or view as a spectator any athletic or other exhibition, games, contest, concert or performance of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged held in or upon the city park, school grounds, school buildings, playgrounds, city hall or other public property or property belonging to or dedicated to the city without paying the admission fee or charge for the same. 
(Code 1958, § 22-4) 
State Law reference— Theft of services, OCGA § 16-8-5; defenses to prosecution, OCGA § 16-8-10; venue, OCGA § 16-8-11; penalties for violation, OCGA § 16-8-12. 
Sec. 6-7-5. - Itinerant carnivals or amusements, prohibited, not to be licensed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to set up, maintain or exhibit any itinerant carnivals or similar forms of itinerant amusement within the city limits. No city license shall be issued for such itinerant carnivals or other similar forms of public itinerant amusement. 
(Code 1958, § 22-5) 
Cross reference— Special events, § 6-7-101 et seq. 
State Law reference— State licensing of traveling carnivals, circuses, etc., OCGA § 25-2-20; amusement ride safety, OCGA § 34-12-1 et seq.; carnival ride safety, OCGA § 34-13-1 et seq.; itinerant entertainers, OCGA § 43-1-15. 
Sec. 6-7-6. - Licensing of bingo games. 
(a)  No nonprofit, tax exempt organization shall be permitted to operate a bingo game until it has obtained a license from the city authorizing it to do so. 
(b)  Any nonprofit, tax exempt organization desiring to obtain a license to operate bingo games shall make application to the city council on forms prescribed by the licensing department and shall pay an annual fee as provided in Title 10. No license shall be issued to any nonprofit, tax exempt organization unless such organization has been in existence for twenty-four (24) months immediately prior to the issuance of the license. Such license will expire at midnight on December thirty-first, following the granting of such license. Renewal applications for each calendar year shall be filed with the city council sixty (60) days prior to January first of each year and shall be on a form prescribed by the licensing department of the city. Each application for a license and each application for renewal of a license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and home address of the applicant and if the applicant is a corporation, association or other similar legal entity, the names and home addresses of each of the officers of the organization as well as the names and addresses of the directors, or other persons similarly situated, of the organization. 
(2)  The names and home addresses of each of the persons who will be operating, advertising or promoting the bingo game. 
(3)  The names and home addresses of any persons, organizations or other legal entities that will act as surety for the applicant, or to whom the applicant is financially indebted, or to whom any financial obligation is owed by the applicant. 
(4)  A determination letter from the federal internal revenue service certifying that the applicant is an organization exempt under federal tax law. 
(5)  A determination letter from the state department of revenue certifying that the applicant is exempt under the tax laws of the state. 
(6)  The location at which the applicant will conduct the bingo games, and if the premises on which the games are to be conducted is to be leased, a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(7)  A statement showing the convictions, if any, for criminal offenses, other than minor traffic offenses, of each of the persons listed in (1), (2) and (3) above. 
The city shall refuse to grant a bingo license to any applicant who fails to fully provide the information required by this section. 
(c)  Bingo games shall be operated only on premises owned by the nonprofit, tax exempt organization operating the bingo game, on property leased by the nonprofit, tax exempt organization and used regularly by that organization for purposes other than the operation of bingo games, or on property leased by the nonprofit, tax exempt organization operating the bingo game, from another nonprofit, tax exempt organization. 
(d)  The licensee shall: 
(1)  Own all the equipment used to conduct a bingo game or lease such equipment from an organization that is also licensed to conduct a bingo game. 
(2)  Display its bingo license conspicuously at the location where the bingo game is conducted. 
(3)  Conduct bingo games only at the single location specified in the licensee's application. 
(4)  Not conduct more than one (1) bingo session during any one (1) calendar day and such session shall not exceed five (5) hours. 
(e)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to play any game or games of bingo conducted pursuant to any license issued under this section or the state unless accompanied by an adult. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to conduct or assist in the conduct of any game of bingo pursuant to any license issued under this section or the state. 
(f)  On or before April fifteenth of each year, every nonprofit, tax exempt organization engaged in operating bingo games shall file with the council members a report disclosing all receipts and expenditures relating to the operation of bingo games of the previous year. Such report shall be in addition to all other reports required by law. Such report shall be prepared and signed by the certified or public accountant competent to prepare such report and shall be deemed a public record subject to public inspection. 
(g)  The city council shall have the specific authority to suspend or revoke any license for any violation of the provisions of this section after hearing before the city council in accordance with the rules and regulations governing the revocation and suspension of alcoholic beverage licenses. 
(h)  By making applications for a license under this section, every applicant herewith consents that the city, as well as any of its agents for the city police department may come upon the premises of any licensee or upon the premises on which any licensee is conducting a bingo game for the purpose of examining the accounts and records of the licensee to determine if a violation of any provisions of this section have occurred. 
(i)  The licensee shall provide to the city notice immediately upon receiving a suspension, notice of the violation, or revocation of its license issued by the state. In the event the licensee fails to provide such information to the city, then the licensee shall have its license revoked hereunder. 
(j)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the licensee shall at all times comply with all state laws and rules and regulations issued by the state department of revenue pertaining to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-50 et seq. 
(Code 1958, § 22-7) 
State Constitution reference— Nonprofit bingo games, Art. 1, § 2, para. 8. 
State Law reference— Bingo, OCGA § 16-12-50 et seq.; local bingo license, OCGA § 16-12-52; age restrictions, OCGA § 16-12-58; penalties, OCGA § 16-12-62. 
Secs. 6-7-7—6-7-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - PICKETING AND PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, adopted Sept. 1, 1992, repealed former articles 2—5 and enacted new articles 2—5, which pertained to similar subject matter, to read as herein set out, 

Sec. 6-7-21. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "picketing and public demonstrations ordinance" of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-22. - To be peaceful and unattended by noise, etc. 
All assemblies and picketing shall be orderly, taking into consideration the rights of any residents in the immediate area of the demonstration or picketing to the peaceable enjoyment of their residences. To the extent that any residence is located within three hundred (300) feet of the location of any demonstration/picketing, the demonstrators or picketers shall not use any sound amplification system, except for one (1) hand-held bullhorn; provided, however, that no hand-held bullhorn may be used in any such demonstration or picketing between sundown and sunrise. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Cross reference— Disorderly conduct generally, § 3-5-4. 
Sec. 6-7-23. - Use of sidewalks and streets. 
When picketing or a demonstration is conducted on public sidewalks maintained by the city, only the outside five (5) feet of the sidewalks next to the curb shall be used by the pickets or demonstrators. No picketing or demonstrating shall be conducted on the remaining portion of the sidewalks or on that portion of the streets used primarily for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-24. - Method of marching; limitation on number of pickets or demonstrators before given place of business or facility. 
Marching by picketers or demonstrators shall be spaced at a distance of five (5) feet, front to back, and five (5) feet, side to side and shall not otherwise block access. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-25. - Use of placards and signs. 
Pickets or demonstrators shall carry only cardboard or paper placards or signs and the words used thereon shall not be such that they would immediately incite violence. No metal or wood may be attached to the placards or signs and the placards or signs shall not be more than thirty-six (36) inches in length and not more than thirty-six (36) inches in width. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-26. - Picketing and demonstrating prohibited in certain places. 
There shall be no picketing or demonstrating in front of any building in which the following are located, affecting the normal operations thereof: 
(1)  A hospital, nursing home or rest home, within two hundred feet of the boundary line; 
(2)  A school, within one hundred (100) feet; 
(3)  A residence, no longer than forty-five (45) minutes; 
(4)  A state or federal highway or road unless there has been compliance with all rules, regulations, and requirements imposed by the appropriate state or federal governing authority for the use of a state or federal highway or road as a private route. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-27. - Participation by persons under sixteen prohibited. 
No person under the age of sixteen (16) shall be permitted to absent themselves from school attendance in order to march, picket, or demonstrate within the corporate limits of the city during any time that such person is required by law to be in attendance at school, unless such person has obtained written permission from the appropriate educational authority to be absent from school to attend and to participate in such march, picket, or demonstration. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-28. - Notice of proposed picketing or demonstrating. 
The chief of police is to be given at least eighteen (18) hours' written notice of any person or persons planning to picket or demonstrate. This written notice shall include the name of the organization or organizations planning to picket and also shall include the names of the places of business or public facilities which will be picketed and the hours the picketing or demonstrating will be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-29. - Duty to disperse as directed by police. 
Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move on when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to so disperse or move on when so directed by a police officer as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-30. - Use of vehicles for picketing or demonstrating. 
No vehicles shall be used in any picket or demonstrating line, and all pickets or demonstrators shall be afoot. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-31. - Time of picketing and public demonstrations. 
Picketing and demonstrations shall be conducted only between sunrise and sunset. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-32. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, be punished according to the provisions of section 1-1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Secs. 6-7-33—6-7-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - PARADES[8] 
Footnotes: 

Division 1. - Generally 

Sec. 6-7-51. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "parade ordinance" of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-52. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Parade is any parade, march, ceremony, demonstration, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind involving ten (10) or more persons or five (5) or more vehicles. 
Parade permit is a permit as required by this article. 
Person or applicant is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Professionally organized parade means a parade which has been organized and produced by any person or organization that has received compensation or remuneration for its services in organizing and producing such parade, other than reimbursement of its actual expenses. 
Vehicles shall include any device which moves on wheels or tracts whether under its own power or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-53. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions, provided the police department is notified of each procession's time and route; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational or school-sponsored activities; provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-54. - Permit review committee established. 
There is hereby established a permit review committee composed of the chief of police, the fire chief, the public works director, the city clerk, parks and recreation director and Georgia Mountains Center director, or their designated representative. The chief of police, or his authorized representative, shall be the chairperson of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1. 
Sec. 6-7-55. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The police department shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part hereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The police department may post signs to the effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-56. - Regulations for conduct of parades. 
(a)  For the purpose of controlling traffic and pedestrian congestion and of providing for the public health, safety and general welfare, the following regulations shall pertain to all parades conducted within the city: 
(1)  All parades shall be conducted along the route specified in the parade permit; 
(2)  Parades shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; 
(3)  All parade participants shall assemble for the parade at the time and location designated in the parade permit and shall disperse from public property immediately after the conclusion of the parade; 
(4)  No parade participant shall carry arms or other weapons (or facsimiles thereof), nor bricks, bats, sticks, rocks, bottles or other items which may be used as weapons; 
(5)  No parade participant shall drink alcoholic beverages or be under the influence of any intoxicating beverages or drugs; 
(6)  Materials used in the construction of floats in the parade shall be of fire-retardant materials and shall be subject to such requirements concerning fire safety as may be determined by the fire chief; 
(7)  Once commenced, the parade shall not stop along the parade route, but shall continue to move at a fixed rate of speed, and any willful delay or willful stopping of said parade, except when reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade, shall constitute a violation of the permit; 
(8)  It shall be the responsibility of the person, group or organization obtaining the parade permit to police the parade route for discarded literature, publications, or other written materials distributed along the parade route by participants of the parade and literature, publications, leaflets or other written material shall be distributed in such a manner as not to unduly delay or hinder the progress of the parade; 
(9)  Speeches shall be allowed only at a location designated in the parade permit; 
(10)  Speeches, rallies or other activity to be conducted during any time that the parade is on the public roads, streets or highways located within the corporate limits of the city shall be limited to a total time of thirty (30) minutes, after which the parade participants shall continue or disperse as designated in the parade permit; 
(11)  In no event shall speeches, rallies, etc. be conducted in the public streets, or along the sidewalks of the city; 
(12)  The permittee shall advise all participants in the parade, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of the permit prior to the commencement of the parade and shall sign an acknowledgment that the permittee and the parade participants have read, understand and will comply with the regulations specified in this article and the conditions of the permit. 
(b)  Any other reasonable regulation or restriction deemed necessary by the chief of police for the protection and safety of the parade participants, viewing public, or for the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, may be imposed by the chief of police. However, such additional regulations or restrictions shall be specified in writing to the applicant with all reasons therefor clearly enumerated. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-57. - Professionally organized parades. 
In the event the parade is a professionally organized parade, the applicant or the organizer shall pay a fee for such permit of ten dollars ($10.00) per one hundred (100) participants or any portion thereof reasonably estimated to participate and if more actually participate, a supplemental fee to cover such additional participants as though included in the original application shall be due and payable immediately following the parade. In any event, the fee shall not be less than ten dollars ($10.00) for a professionally organized parade. In addition thereto, the applicant or organizer shall post a bond of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per hundred participants or any portion thereof reasonably estimated to participate, the excess of which shall be conditioned upon the reimbursement of the city for the cost of additional police reasonably used during said parade and for clean up during and immediately following the parade. The applicant and organizers shall be liable for such costs of additional police and clean up as may be actually incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Cross reference— Permit fees, bond for professionally organized parades, § 10-1-66. 
Sec. 6-7-58. - Deviation from prescribed streets, ways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade, procession or demonstration along, upon or over any street or public way other than those set out in the permit issued as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-59. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. Each separate violation and each day of any continued violation, shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Secs. 6-7-60—6-7-70. - Reserved. 
Division 2. - Permit 

Sec. 6-7-71. - Required. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. Nothing in this section shall be read or understood as prohibiting or restricting any necessary initial planning activities to apply for or to obtain any permit required under this article. No more than one (1) permit under this article shall be issued to the same person more than once every ninety (90) days. No parade permit shall be issued to any person for a period of twelve (12) months following any parade for which a permit has been issued to such person and which has been conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-72. - Application generally. 
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file application with the chief of police on forms provided by his office. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed not less than ten (10) days or more than one hundred twenty (120) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number (day and night) of the person seeking to conduct the parade; and the applicant if different; 
b.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
c.  The name, business address, residence address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade leader, chairman, or marshal and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
d.  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on its, his or her behalf; 
e.  Whether or not any person will distribute or cause to be distributed any item, either perishable or otherwise, to any bystander or onlooker; 
f.  A statement from the person making the application that such person anticipates no unusual problems concerning either police protection or traffic congestion to be experienced as a consequence of the parade, or if such statement cannot be made, the reasons therefor; 
g.  The purpose of the parade; 
h.  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
i.  The hours when the parade will start and terminate; 
j.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly area or areas and the time the units will leave the dispersal area; 
k.  Whether parade marshals will be provided; 
l.  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. The proposed parade route shall be set forth in detail in the application for parade permit; 
m.  The estimated number of persons to participate in the parade; 
n.  The number and type of vehicles, animals, marching units, bands, and floats to be utilized in the parade including a description of any sound amplification equipment to be used; 
o.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
p.  The location by streets of any assembly and dispersal areas for the parade; 
q.  The interval space to be maintained between units of the parade; 
r.  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should [be] issued. 
(3)  Late applications. The chief of police, where just cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than ten (10) days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(4)  Fee. No fee shall be charged for such permit except as otherwise herein provided for professionally organized parades. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-73. - Procedure for processing permit application and standard for issuance. 
All applications for permits under this article shall be filed with the police department to be forwarded to the members of the permit review committee for investigation of the applicant and other facts, circumstances and information relating to such application and the permit review committee shall, within five (5) business days after the filing of an application, grant or refuse to issue a permit unless additional information is required. If any member of the permit review committee objects to the issuance of the permit, the chairperson shall promptly convene a meeting of the committee. If the committee does not unanimously approve the permit, the permit shall be denied. The standards for issuance of a permit are as follows: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of the parade will not unreasonably interfere with the movements of firefighting equipment enroute to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely: 
a.  To cause injury to persons or property; 
b.  To cause disruption of the provision of fire protection services or emergency medical services to the surrounding area; or 
c.  To cause there to be a substantial risk that the parade would incite or produce lawless action or spectator violence which cannot be satisfactorily prevented by means of reasonable crowd control techniques. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute; 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit; 
(9)  The parade will not unreasonably burden the streets and sidewalks or the city so as to substantially interfere with the normal use thereof by the public; 
(10)  The parade will not interfere with another parade for which a permit has been approved; 
(11)  The information contained in the application is not found to be false in any material detail; 
(12)  The purpose of the parade is not illegal or in any way prohibited by law; or 
(13)  That no alcoholic beverages will be consumed during the parade. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-74. - State permit. 
Prior to the issuance of a permit under this article, the applicant for such permit shall obtain any state permit required by law or by the regulations of the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-75. - Notice of granting or refusal of permit. 
The granting or refusal of any permit by the permit review committee shall be final unless appealed to the permit appeals committee in written within three (3) days from the date of service of written notice of the decision of the permit review committee on the application. Failure to file an appeal within such three-day period shall constitute a waiver of the right to such appeal. Such notice shall be deemed received five (5) days after deposit, postage prepaid, in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-76. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal in writing the denial of a parade permit to the permit appeals committee as set forth in Article 5 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-77. - Reconsideration of application; permit appeals committee. 
A permit appeals committee consisting of the city manager and city attorney shall hear appeals on all or part of an application for a permit, or any permit previously granted, either upon request of the applicant or the permit review committee after five (5) days' written notice thereof to the applicant and the permit review committee. Within five (5) days after hearing the appeal, the permit review committee shall issue a decision. Such appeal shall be a condition precedent to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-78. - Alternative permit. 
The permit review committee may grant the permit conditioned on the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that requested by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two (2) days after notice of action, file a written notice of acceptance with the permit review committee. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-79. - Notice to city and other officials. 
Immediately upon the application for a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The city manager; 
(2)  The city clerk; 
(3)  The fire chief; 
(4)  The public works director; 
(5)  The sheriff of the county; 
(6)  The public safety director of the county; and 
(7)  The permit review committee. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-80. - Issuance and contents of permit. 
The permit review committee shall grant a written permit for a parade as provided in this article which shall state the following information: 
(1)  Assembly time; 
(2)  Starting time; 
(3)  Minimum speed; 
(4)  Maximum speed; 
(5)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(6)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(7)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(8)  Any other information as the city manager shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-81. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The parade leader, chairman, or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-82. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designated representative shall have the authority to summarily suspend or revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth under section 6-7-73 or the regulations as herein set forth under this section. 
(b)  Any permit for a parade issued pursuant to this article may be summarily revoked on the day of the parade by the chief of police or his designated representative when by reason of inclement weather, disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the chief of police or his designated representative determines that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation. If a permit is so revoked, the permittee shall be allowed to reapply for a new parade permit. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Secs. 6-7-83—6-7-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - SPECIAL EVENTS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Note— See the editor's footnote to the title of Art. 2. 
Cross reference— Operation of radios, stereos, etc., from motor vehicles at levels audible at one hundred feet, § 3-4-105; sound trucks and sound amplifying devices, § 6-9-3. 

Division 1. - Generally 

Sec. 6-7-101. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "special events ordinance" of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-102. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Permit means a permit as required by this article. 
Person or applicant is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Sound-amplifying system means any system of electrical hookup or connection, loudspeaker system or equipment, sound-amplifying system, and any apparatus, equipment, device, instrument or machine designed for or intended to be used for the purpose of amplifying the sound or increasing the volume of the human voice, musical tone, vibration or sound wave. 
Special event means the temporary use, with a valid permit, of public property, including streets, sidewalks, beaches, parks, and community centers for the purposes of conducting certain short-term events such as art shows, music concerts, fundraising events, sidewalk sales, amusements, attractions, circuses, carnivals, rodeos, sporting events, including, but not limited to, walkathons, marathon runs, "10K's", exhibitions or related activities. Special events shall be events other than those included in section 6-7-21 et seq. and 6-7-51 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-103. - Interference with special event prohibited. 
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any special event in violation of any of the terms, conditions or regulations of the permit issued therefor, or knowingly join or participate in any special event without the consent and over the objection of the permittee or in any manner interfere with the orderly conduct of such event. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-104. - Special events committee established. 
There is hereby established a special events committee composed of the chief of police, the fire chief, the city clerk, the parks and recreation director, Georgia Mountains Center director and the public works director, or their designated representative. The police chief or his authorized representative, shall be the chairperson of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1. 
Sec. 6-7-105. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article or condition of the permit shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code; and each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted. 
(Ord. No. 90-38, § 1(22-322), 8-21-90) 
Secs. 6-7-106—6-7-120. - Reserved. 
Division 2. - Permit 

Sec. 6-7-121. - Required. 
No person shall organize, produce, direct, conduct, manage, institute or carry on any special event without a permit first had and obtained from the chief of police. A permit is required if the applicant desires to reserve and preempt public use of a portion of public property for a temporary period. No person shall promote, advertise, encourage or solicit attendance or otherwise participate in any way in a special event for which no permit has been issued, or for which such permit has been suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-122. - Application generally; specific locations for music concerts; dance permits. 
(a)  An application for a permit for a special event shall be filed with the chief of police not less than ten (10) or more than one hundred twenty (120) days before the date proposed for holding a special event. Such application shall be signed by the applicant or their authorized agent. 
(b)  Music concert permits shall only be issued upon approval according to the procedures set forth by the special events committee. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Cross reference— Fee, § 10-1-67. 
Sec. 6-7-123. - Contents of application. 
Application for a permit to hold a special event shall be made on forms provided by the police department and approved by the special events committee. The application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and, if the same is a corporation, the names of its principal officers or, if the same is a partnership, association, organization or fictitious company, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association, organization or company with the address and telephone number of each; 
(2)  If the applicant is a charitable or religious association, the application shall be signed by two (2) officers of the association, and shall include the following: 
a.  A list of the names of all persons authorized to solicit contributions on behalf of such association; 
b.  Total amount of funds sought to be raised; 
c.  The percentage of funds to be used for expenses and the percentage of funds to be used for charitable or religious purposes; 
d.  A financial statement showing the fiscal period ninety (90) days prior to the filing of the application; and 
e.  If a promoter or noncharitable association or entertainment group or person is to be used to raise funds for the charitable association, the true and fictitious names, home and business addresses of the promoter, noncharitable association, entertainment group or person. 
(3)  A detailed description of the special event proposed to be held, the number of persons participating in the event, number of spectators and vehicles expected, the purpose of the event, the date, hours and location where the event is proposed to be held, and the participant entry fee, if any, to be charged; 
(4)  A detailed description of the equipment to be used, if any, including the number and types of vehicles, the number of sound-amplifying systems, whether mounted, portable, or stationary, the time and area of operation of the sound-amplifying systems, the number and type of special units such as musical groups, animal zoos or shows and the like; 
(5)  An agreement that the city shall be compensated for any damage to public property, and that the site shall be cleaned and restored to the condition in which it was found prior to the holding of the special event; 
(6)  A detailed list of items to be sold and/or given away; 
(7)  The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury; 
(8)  Such other information as the special events committee may require to adequately evaluate the application. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-124. - Procedure for processing special event permit applications. 
All applications for permits to hold special events shall be filed with the police department to be forwarded to the members of the special events committee for investigation of the persons involved with the activity proposed to be conducted, and other facts, circumstances and information relating to such application; and the special events committee shall, within seven (7) days after the filing of an application, grant or refuse to issue a permit unless additional information is required. If any member of the committee objects to the issuance of the permit, the chairperson shall promptly convene a meeting of the committee. If the committee does not unanimously approve the permit, the permit shall be denied. Grounds for denial of a permit are set forth at section 6-7-132. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-125. - State permit. 
Prior to the issuance of a permit under this article, the applicant for such permit shall obtain any state permit required by law or by the regulations of the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-126. - Notice of granting or refusal of permit. 
The granting or refusal of any permit by the permit review committee shall be final unless appealed to the permit appeals committee in writing within three (3) days from the date of service of written notice of the decision of the permit review committee on the application. Failure to file an appeal within such three-day period shall constitute a waiver of the right to such appeal. Such notice shall be deemed received five (5) days after deposit, postage prepaid, in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-127. - Permit appeals committee. 
A permit appeals committee consisting of the city manager and city attorney shall hear appeals on all or part of an application for a permit, or any permit previously granted, either upon request of the applicant of the permit review committee after five (5) days' written notice thereof to the applicant and the permit review committee. Such appeal shall be a condition precedent to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-128. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal in writing the denial of a special events permit to the permit appeals committee as set forth in Article 5 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-129. - Alternative permit. 
The special events committee may grant the permit conditioned on the conduct of the special event on a date, at a time, or at a different location from that requested by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two (2) days after notice of the action, file a written notice of acceptance with the police department. An alternate special event permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a special event permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-130. - Surety and insurance. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit, the chief of police may require: 
(1)  In lieu of an agreement to compensate the city for loss or damage to public property, the deposit of a surety bond, letter of credit, or cash in an amount sufficient to guarantee the cleaning up of the site and the removal of any debris left as a result of the holding of a special event; if it determined that the special event will warrant the presence of police officers, paramedics, special officers for patrol or parking duty or lifeguards, the special events committee shall also require the deposit of a surety bond or cash in any amount sufficient to pay the additional costs of providing such officers or lifeguards; and 
(2)  That the applicant provide public liability insurance and property damage insurance, including products liability coverage written by an insurance company acceptable to the special events committee in minimum limits as set by the special events committee naming the city as an insured; or 
(3)  Execution a hold harmless agreement, indemnifying the city for any personal injury or property damage arising from such special event. 
(b)  The special events committee shall consider the recommendation of the city risk manager, as to the likelihood of harm to participants and spectators, as well as the financial hardship to the applicant when deciding if insurance is required. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-131. - Conditions for granting permit. 
(a)  As a condition to granting a permit, the special events committee may impose reasonable terms and regulations concerning the time and place of such event, the area and manner of conducting such event; the maximum number of persons participating therein; the regulation of traffic, if required, including the number and type of vehicles, the number and type of signs and barricades to be provided by applicant, if any, together with a plan of their disposition attached to the application; permissible decibel levels; and such other requirements as it may find reasonable and necessary for the protection of persons and property. 
(b)  The special events committee may require the applicant to compensate the city for incidental costs such as utility charges, increased fire, and/or police protection and/or additional lifeguard services. The permittee, as a condition to granting the permit, agrees to bear such costs. 
(c)  As an additional condition to granting such permit, the applicant shall be required to ensure that participants and spectators of the special event abide by the rules and regulations of this Code and all other applicable local, state and federal laws. 
(d)  The applicant may request a waiver of any condition set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-132. - Grounds for denial of permit. 
(a)  The special events committee shall not issue any permit if he or she finds any of the following: 
(1)  The application is not on the form provided or does not contain the required information; 
(2)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit; 
(3)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such special event does not comply with or fails to meet all of the health, zoning, fire and safety requirements or standards of all of the ordinances of the city, the county or the state applicable thereto; 
(4)  The activity or location of the activity is such as to not interfere with or unreasonably obstruct the free flow of vehicular traffic or other means of travel on any public street, or with pedestrian traffic on the sidewalks; 
(5)  Proof of insurance, as may be required by this article as a prerequisite to the holding of a special event, has not been filed with the city; 
(6)  The conduct of the special event will be contrary to law; 
(7)  The conduct of the special event will unreasonably interfere with the preservation of the public peace, health, safety or welfare of the public; 
(8)  The applicant has had a similar special event permit denied for good cause within one (1) year prior to the application, and can show no material change in circumstances since such denial; 
(9)  The applicant refuses to agree to, abide by or comply with all conditions and regulations attendant upon such permit; and 
(10)  Such event will interfere or conflict with another event for which a permit has already been issued, or will interfere or conflict with another event for which no permit is required by this Code. 
(b)  The special events committee shall notify the applicant in writing specifically stating all reasons for denial of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-133. - Reconsideration of application. 
A permit appeals committee consisting of the city manager and city attorney may reconsider all or part of an application for a permit, or any permit previously granted, either upon request of the applicant or the special events committee after five (5) days' written notice thereof to the applicant. Such motion for reconsideration shall be a condition precedent to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 90-38, § 1(22-316), 8-21-90) 
Sec. 6-7-134. - Contents of permit. 
A special event permit shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name of the person or organization to whom issued; 
(2)  The address and telephone number of the person or organization named on the permit; 
(3)  The type of activity for which the permit has been issued; 
(4)  The date, hour and location for the event; 
(5)  Expiration date; and 
(6)  Any conditions imposed on the holding of such special event. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-135. - Late applications. 
The special events committee, where cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than ten (10) days before the date the special event is proposed to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-136. - Notice to city and other officials. 
Immediately upon the application for a special event permit, the police department shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The city manager; 
(2)  Special events committee; 
(3)  The city clerk; 
(4)  The fire chief; 
(5)  The public works director; 
(6)  The sheriff of the county; and 
(7)  The county public safety director. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-137. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit for an event issued hereunder shall be summarily suspended or revoked by the chief of police or his designee at any time: 
(1)  When he or she has reasonable cause to believe that any of the grounds exist for which the original application for permit would have been denied; or 
(2)  When he or she has reason to believe that the health, safety and welfare of persons or property would be endangered because of inclement weather, real or threatened disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency. 
(b)  Notice of such suspension or revocation shall be made in writing to applicant or permittee. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-138. - Exceptions for public entities. 
No permit shall be required under this article for any event sponsored or cosponsored by the city or any department thereof. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-139. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this article or condition of the permit shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code; and each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Secs. 6-7-140—6-7-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - PROCEDURE FOR APPEAL 

Sec. 6-7-151. - Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation of permit. 
An appeal from denial, suspension or revocation of a permit requested pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be taken by the applicant, person or permittee to the permit appeals committee within three (3) days after service of notice of such action. Such appeal shall be in writing, setting forth fully the grounds upon which the appeal is based, and shall be filed with the city clerk who shall forward copies to the permit appeals committee and the permit review committee. The permit review committee shall submit to the permit appeals committee a report of the case appealed. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-152. - Permit appeals committee action on appeal. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days after the filing of an appeal with the city clerk, the permit appeals committee shall consider the appeal. Written notice of the time and place the permit appeals committee will consider the appeal shall be mailed by the city clerk to the applicant, person, or permittee who filed the appeal and the permit review committee at least three (3) days before the date set for hearing unless the applicant, person, or permittee shall waive notice in writing. Within five (5) days after the hearing, the permit appeals committee shall issue its decision. 
(b)  In any appeal, the permit appeals committee shall consider the application, the report submitted by the permit review committee and other pertinent information presented, and may grant or deny the permit subject to the conditions, terms and regulations set forth in this chapter. The decision of the permit appeals committee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
Sec. 6-7-153. - Decision review by permit review committee. 
(a)  The permit appeals committee may, on its own motion made within twenty (20) days after the decision of the permit review committee, review the issuance, denial, suspension or revocation of any permit, or review any condition, term or regulation attached thereto. 
(b)  If, after review, the permit appeals committee determines that the matter should be considered on appeal before such body, it shall order the city clerk to notify the applicant, person, permittee, permit review committee, and any other affected parties of the time and place of such consideration, as hereinabove provided. After such consideration, the permit appeals committee may grant or deny the permit subject to the conditions, terms and regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-1-92) 
CHAPTER 6-9. - PERMITS 

Sec. 6-9-1. - Grants generally. 
The grant or denial of a permit under this chapter shall be based on a consideration of the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order and convenience. The person who grants such a permit may suspend or revoke it, based on the same considerations. 
Sec. 6-9-2. - Due process. 
Any person who believes that he has been denied due process of law under this chapter in the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit shall be entitled to a hearing. Unless such hearing is requested within five (5) working days after the alleged denial of due process, such person shall be presumed to have accepted summary process. 
Sec. 6-9-3. - Sound trucks and sound amplifying devices or equipment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated in the city any sound amplifying devices or equipment for any purpose whatever, whether the same be stationary or operated from a vehicle or other carriage unless a permit has been obtained from the chief of police to do so. However, it shall be unlawful for any person to make any loud and raucous noise to the disturbance of the peace. Any person to whom a permit has been issued under this section, who abuses his discretion and causes or permits loud and raucous noises, shall subject the permit to immediate revocation. 
(b)  The words "sound amplifying devices or equipment" as used in this section shall mean any machine or device for the amplification of any sound. 
(Code 1958, § 3-6; Ord. No. 92-28, § 1, 7-21-92) 
Sec. 6-9-4. - Placing banner, etc., across streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to extend any banner or canvas sign across any public street, park or other way of the city without first having obtained permission from the city manager. 
(Code 1958, § 3-7) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 4-4. 
Sec. 6-9-5. - Solicitor's permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to beg or solicit alms for himself or on behalf of other persons before first securing a permit from the city marshal. 
(Code 1958, § 14-29.1) 
State Law reference— Begging, soliciting or selling on state grounds, OCGA § 50-9-9. 
Sec. 6-9-6. - Fortune-telling and related practices. 
(a)  Occupation tax certificate required, application. 
(1)  All persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of fortune-telling, astrology, phrenology, palmistry, clairvoyance, or related practices where a charge is made, or a donation is accepted for services, shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, make application for a business license in the form and manner prescribed by the city business license director. 
(2)  The application shall include but shall not be limited to the information required on all business license applications. 
(b)  Criminal background investigation required. Prior to the issuance of business license, and for all renewal licenses, a criminal background investigation shall be required for the owner(s), manager(s) and employee(s). 
(c)  General operating provisions. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a business license under this section to annually file, along with the renewal application for the business license, the names of all employees, their home address, home telephone number and any other places of employment. The holder of a business license issued under the provisions of this section must additionally report changes in the list of employees with the names and required supplemental information for new employees to be filed with the business license director within ten (10) days from the date of such change. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this section to maintain correct and accurate records of the name and address of the persons receiving services at such establishment; the type of service administered; and the name of the person at the establishment administering the services. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the business license director, or designee or the chief of police of the city. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to patronize any fortune-telling or related establishment unless such person carries with him at the time of such patronage, written permission of the underage person's parent or guardian. It shall be the duty of the holder of the business license to determine the age of the person attempting to patronize an establishment and to prohibit such patronage by an underage person. 
(4)  Records required to be maintained under this section shall be kept for a minimum of two (2) years beyond the expiration date of the business license. Records shall be made available to the business license director, at a location in the city, within ten (10) business days of any such request. 
(d)  Inspection of registered establishments. The city marshal or his designee or any city police officer shall have the authority to inspect establishments registered under this section during the hours in which the premises are open for business. Such inspection shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Applicant disqualification. No business license shall be granted to any person under the age of eighteen (18) or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten (10) years prior to the date of application for such certificate and has been released from parole or probation. 
(f)  Zones where establishments permitted. No fortune-telling, astrology, phrenology, palmistry, clairvoyance, or related business shall be located on any premises unless the location has been zoned general business zoning district (GB), light industrial zoning district (LI) or heavy industrial zoning district (HI) under the zoning laws of the city. 
(g)  Violations; penalty; additional remedies. 
(1)  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provisions of this section as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, or shall fail to do anything required by this section as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-1-7. Each person, firm, corporation, association or partnership shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this section is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, corporation, association or partnership and shall be punished accordingly. 
(2)  Any fortune-telling, astrology, phrenology, palmistry, clairvoyance, or related business operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this section shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to or in lieu of any other penalties or remedies, the city may commence an action or actions to enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be considered due cause for the suspension or revocation of any licenses issued by the city to the offending party. Such revocation or suspension shall occur by way of a hearing before the administrative hearing officer as provided in section 1-8-1. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § I, 3-6-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-06, § I, adopted March 6, 2007, amended § 6-9-6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 6-9-6 pertained to fortunetellers, clairvoyants and the like banned; advertising prohibited, and derived from Ord. No. 94-41, § I, adopted October 18, 1994. 
Sec. 6-9-7. - Sale of goods, articles, or services. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell goods, articles, or services of any nature on any street, park or other property of the city without first obtaining written permission from the city manager, or his designee, which permission will not be granted unless the request and proposed use of the property will be in full accordance and compliance with all written policies, procedures, guidelines and fees applicable to the property for which the use is being sought, which policies, procedures, guidelines, and fees have been approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, § I, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2006-52, § I, 10-17-06) 
CHAPTER 6-10. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, adopted Sept. 21, 2010, amended ch. 6-10 in its entirety as set out herein. The former ch. 6-10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 92-48, adopted Nov. 3, 1992; Ord. No. 93-39, §§ I—XII, adopted Aug. 17, 1993; Ord. No. 96-72, § 2—6, adopted Jan. 17, 1997; Ord. No. 97-47, § 2, adopted Oct. 7, 1997; Ord. No. 97-64, §§ 2, 3, adopted Nov. 4, 1997. 

Sec. 6-10-1. - Findings; public purpose. 
(a)  The governing body of the City of Gainesville is aware of the following evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the Mayor and City Council for the City of Gainesville, Georgia (hereinafter the "governing body"): 
(1)  Findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Rome, Georgia; Adams County, Colorado; Ellicottville, New York; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; Centralia, Washington; Whittier, California; Denver, Colorado; Dallas, Texas and environs; Fort Worth and Dallas, Texas; Jewett, New York; El Paso, Texas; Palm Beach, Florida; Oconee County, Georgia; City of Lilburn, Georgia; City of Roswell, Georgia; City of Sandy Springs, Georgia; City of Carrollton, Georgia; Manatee County, Florida; St. Paul, Minnesota; Troup County, Georgia; Gwinnett County, Georgia; Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas, and numerous other studies, articles, and court decisions, all of which have been presented to the mayor and city council in bound form and/or on diskette; 
(2)  Certain affidavit and other written evidence of criminal activity, improper conduct, and other adverse secondary effects in adult entertainment establishments operated in the City of Forest Park, Georgia, during the past (10) ten years; 
(3)  A report and written power point information by Dr. Richard McCleary of the University of California at Irvine, dated July 21, 2009, detailing the criminal activities and other adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment businesses, explaining the criminological theories supporting ties between adult entertainment and criminal activity, and documenting evidence of the adverse secondary criminological effects of adult entertainment establishments; 
(4)  The following three publications: "Do 'Off Site' Adult Businesses have Secondary Effects? Legal Doctrine, Social Theory, and Empirical Evidence" by Richard McCleary and Alan C. Weinstein; "Rural Hotspots—The Case of Adult Businesses" by Richard McCleary, Criminal Justice Policy Review; and "Do Peep Shows 'Cause' Crime?—A Response to Linz, Paul, and Yao" by Richard McCleary and James W. Meeker; 
(5)  The transcript of proceedings before the City Council of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, of December 20, 2007, and December 27, 2007, which documents extensive evidence of adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment; 
(6)  The following special reports relating to the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments on real property values: September 2004 Survey of Appraisers, Forth [Fort] Worth and Dallas, Texas; May 2008 Survey of Appraisers, Palm Beach County, Florida; and June 2008 Survey of Texas Appraisers, Texas City Attorneys Association; 
(7)  Certain documents and information consisting of thirty nine (39) pages relating to the guilty plea and plea agreement in the criminal prosecution case of former Fulton County Police Lieutenant Mark Timothy Lance; 
(8)  A report by BCI private investigators relating to adult bookstores in Sandy Springs, Georgia; and 
(9)  A report by BCI private investigators relating to adult cabarets in Sandy Springs, Georgia; and 
(10)  The February 16, 2010 decision of the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals in the case of Flanigan's Enterprises, Inc., of Georgia v. Fulton County, Georgia, No. 08-17035, 2010 WL 520542 (11 th Cir. 2010), detailing evidence of numerous adverse secondary effects resulting from the activities of adult entertainment establishments; and 
(11)  Other evidence presented at various hearings and meetings of the mayor and city council relating to adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment, which has been recorded and incorporated into the record of proceedings of the City of Gainesville, including past meetings of the governing body. 
(b)  Based upon all of this evidence, the City of Gainesville Governing Body finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, also known as adult entertainment establishments, lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that can be uncontrolled or inadequately controlled by the operators of the establishments. The commercial exploitation of human sexuality, in all forms in which such exploitation may be manifested, has a deleterious effect on the community where it takes place. Sexually oriented businesses cause an increase in criminal behavior in nearby areas, including, but not limited to, disorderly conduct, prostitution, solicitation, drug trafficking, drug use, assaults and batteries, and corruption of public officials. 
(2)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral sex, and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses. Offering or providing private or semi-private space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(3)  Adult entertainment establishments escalate and exacerbate undesirable community conditions, including, but not limited to, blight, diminished property values, increased need for law enforcement and emergency medical response resources, and increased burden on the judicial system as a result of the criminal behavior which the governing body finds such business establishments bring to a community. The negative secondary effects that are caused by such businesses are not limited to facilities that offer live or recorded performances with human nudity or the depiction of sexual acts, but also arise from other forms of sexually oriented businesses that also have a deleterious effect on nearby neighborhoods, commercial districts, and urban life in general. These other types of sexually oriented businesses include, but are not limited to, adult bookstores, peep shows, massage parlors, bath houses, adult gift and novelty shops, and lingerie or nude modeling studios. 
(4)  Persons frequent certain adult theatres, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
(5)  Communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses. 
(6)  AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components. 
(7)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(8)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(9)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in some areas of some sexually oriented businesses. 
(10)  The findings noted in paragraphs number (1) through (9) raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(11)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(12)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult entertainment establishments as defined herein. 
(13)  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(14)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually-transmitted diseases and other secondary negative effects as described herein. 
(15)  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(16)  The fact that an applicant for an adult entertainment license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter. 
(17)  The barring of such individuals from the management of adult entertainment establishments for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually-transmitted diseases. 
(18)  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the City of Gainesville will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. 
(c)  Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities as described above, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the City of Gainesville, Georgia; and based on the documentary and oral evidence presented at the public hearings before the mayor and city council (hereinafter "the governing body") held prior to the adoption of this article; and based on the evidence and statements of persons who have appeared before members of the governing body on other occasions, and on other documentary evidence submitted to the governing body, the Governing Body for the City of Gainesville, Georgia, takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
It is the finding of the governing body that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances in establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment," begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with commercial nudity and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are criminal activity, depression of property values, and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove referenced. The governing body finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the City of Gainesville, Georgia, as well, unless these regulations are adopted. 
Furthermore, it is the finding of the governing body that live nude or semi-nude entertainment and other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited to, adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in the city and surrounding communities. 
The governing body further finds that each separate adverse secondary effect of adult entertainment businesses and sexually oriented businesses constitutes a substantial government interest, that each substantial government interest includes, but is not limited to, preventing future adverse secondary effects of both pre-existing sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment businesses in the city and those that may open in the future, and the viability of each separate substantial government interest of the city addressed herein does not depend upon any comparative analysis between adult entertainment businesses and nonadult entertainment businesses. 
The governing body therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety, and morals of the city and the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the governing body of the city finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment, and finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions. The governing body further finds that licensing and regulations will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To all of these ends, this chapter is hereby adopted. 
Also based upon all of the information, studies, reports, statements, findings in court decisions, and testimony referenced above, as well as the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects caused by the commercial exploitation of commercial total nudity combined with the sale, dispensing and consumption of alcoholic beverages, the governing body also finds and concludes that the sale, dispensing, or consumption of alcoholic beverages of any kind in an adult entertainment establishment as defined herein tends to independently create, aggravate, exacerbate, and add to all of those negative secondary effects set forth in this section. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to address and forestall those negative secondary effects in the City of Gainesville, Georgia, within the permissible limits and parameters of the Georgia and United States constitutions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-2. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the foregoing book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. The following terms used in this chapter defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Adult bookstore means a commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, merchandise, books, magazines, or other periodicals or publications which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment wherein ten (10) or more square feet of the total floor space devoted to the sale or display of merchandise is dedicated to the sale or display of such materials and/or merchandise, or an establishment which derives five (5) percent or more of its annual net sales from such materials or merchandise. When an applicant applies for a city business license to operate a bookstore in which any such materials or merchandise will be sold, the applicant shall furnish the city marshal with a detailed drawing of the inside of the structure where the business will or is being operated with the square footage of the structure (as measured along the inside walls) and showing the location and square footage of the total space dedicated for the sale and/or display of materials and merchandise which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Upon request of the city marshal, the owner of a store selling or displaying any such materials or merchandise shall furnish a copy of its annual net sales from such materials and/or merchandise, and a copy of its overall annual net sales figures for the past five (5) years. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. For purposes of this chapter, adult entertainers include employees, as well as independent contractors, and "adult entertainer" also includes any person who exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas" in any adult entertainment establishment, even if such person is not compensated or paid. Adult entertainers also include persons who perform in a manner so as to feature, depict, display, or emphasize their genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts, even if their specified anatomical areas are opaquely covered. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or featuring of "specified anatomical areas." Adult entertainment includes performances by persons that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" as defined herein, and/or performances that feature, depict, display, or emphasize performers' genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts, even if their specified anatomical areas are opaquely covered. 
Adult entertainment establishment shall be defined to include the following types of businesses: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein; 
(2)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" as defined herein; 
(3)  Any commercial establishment in which persons perform live in a manner so as to feature, depict, display, or emphasize their genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks, or female breasts, even if their specified anatomical areas are opaquely covered; 
(4)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1), (2), and/or (3) herein; 
(5)  Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" as defined herein or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or having a segment or section comprising more than fifty (50) square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or which utilizes twenty-five (25) percent or more of its display area for the display or offer for sale or rental of such media or materials, or which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such media or material; 
(6)  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
(7)  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult dancing establishment, or adult video store, as defined herein; 
(8)  The definition of "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or mainstream theater, which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution, or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. For purposes of this subsection, such performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise at least eighty (80) percent of all annual performances or showings. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein paper currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other impact producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means a commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes, movies, merchandise, or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment wherein ten (10) square feet or more of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of merchandise is dedicated to the sale or display of such materials or merchandise, or an establishment which derives five (5) percent or more of its annual net sales from the sale or rental of video merchandise which is characterized or distinguished by its emphasis on matter depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. When an applicant applies for a city business license to operate a store selling or renting video tapes, movies, or other reproductions in which any such video tapes, movies, or other reproductions will be sold, the applicant shall furnish the city marshal with a detailed drawing of the inside of the structure where the business will or is being operated with the square footage of the structure (as measured along the inside walls) and showing the location and square footage of the total space dedicated for the sale and/or display of materials and merchandise which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Upon request of the city marshal, the owner of a store selling or displaying any such materials or merchandise shall furnish a copy of its annual net sales from such materials and/or merchandise, and a copy of its overall annual net sales figures for the past five (5) years. 
City means the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order: united under one (1) form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies, place where persons regularly assemble for worship, congregation, or organization for religious purposes. 
Convicted or conviction shall mean and include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime or an ordinance violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Good moral character means a person is of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony, sex-related crime, or a crime of moral turpitude, or the attempt to commit any such criminal act, in the past five (5) years. 
Minor means, for the purposes of this chapter, any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Specific anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, anus, buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
State means the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-3. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, without a valid adult entertainment license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years from the date employed the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers and/or models. 
(c)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer or model a person under the age of eighteen (18) years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(e)  An adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, shall be closed between 12:45 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. each day and on Christmas Day. 
(f)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this chapter. 
(g)  All dancing and/or modeling shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two (2) feet from the level of the floor. 
(h)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any other person on the premises to engage in any specified sexual activity. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-4. - Exceptions. 
This chapter applies only to commercial adult bookstores, adult dancing establishments, adult entertainment establishments, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult motion picture arcades, adult motion picture theaters, and adult video stores, and to employees and patrons thereof, including adult entertainers. It does not apply to mainstream performance houses, museums or theaters not specifically defined herein, nor does it apply to noncommercial activity in private residences (single-family or multiple-family) or private behavior. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-5. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation or limited liability company, or any other entity to engage in adult entertainment, or to conduct, promote, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, any adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter without a permit or license to do so. No permit or license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-6. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult dancing establishment, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater, adult video store, or any other adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or permit or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this chapter, provided that such license or permit is not under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-7. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-8. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, or give to any minor any service, material, device, or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment establishment, adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult video store, or adult dancing establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-9. - Location. 
No adult entertainment establishment restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within three hundred (300) feet of any parcel of land which is zoned inherently to allow multiple-family or single-family uses or purposes. 
(2)  Within three hundred (300) feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building which is simultaneously owned and occupied by a government entity, library, civic center, public park, or playground is located. 
(3)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment is located. 
(4)  Within any zoning category other than the following two (2) categories: 
a.  Light industrial (L-1) as defined in Gainesville City Code chapter 9-6-6. 
b.  Heavy industrial (H-I) as defined in Gainesville City Code chapter 9-6-7. 
For the purposes of this section, distances shall be by airline measurement from property line to property line using the closest property line of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, and designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-10. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this chapter. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, crime of moral turpitude, or drug-related or alcohol-related felony or an attempt to commit such crimes while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any premises requiring a license under this chapter for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or a bond forfeiture. The terms "employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee" and "worked on any licensed premises" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, such person shall file a notice of intended employment with the city police department on forms that require applicant's full name, current address, Social Security Number, date of birth, birth place, race, sex, telephone number, aliases, nationality, driver's license number, addresses for last five (5) years, business occupation and employment history for the last five (5) years, proof of age (certified birth certificate, photo I.D. from governmental agency) and complete information concerning the conviction of any crime within the past five (5) years. Upon the filing of the notice with the city police department, the applicant may become a conditional employee and work on the licensed premises. The city shall have forty-five (45) days to investigate the information furnished by the applicant. If the applicant is found to be of good moral character, and if the applicant has not falsified the application or failed to disclose information required on the application, the chief of police shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the applicant shall be issued an employee permit to work on the licensed premises. The permit shall be with the employee when the employee is on the licensed premises. 
(c)  Appeal. Notification of any denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit for employment in a licensed premises shall be in writing and served either in person or by certified mail to the address listed in the permit application (as updated) and shall contain the reasons for such action and the notice of the right to appeal the decision. 
(1)  Decisions of the chief of police denying, suspending, revoking, or otherwise adversely affecting or aggrieving an applicant or permit holder may be appealed to the administrative hearing officer, as provided in section 1-8-1 of this Code. All appeals shall be submitted in writing to the chief of police within ten (10) calendar days after notification of the adverse action, and shall contain the grounds for the appeal. 
(2)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within forty-five (45) days of the date of the filing of the written appeal, unless a continuance of such hearing is agreed to by the applicant and the chief of police, or unless the hearing is rescheduled by the hearing officer for good cause shown, otherwise, the permit is deemed granted. 
(3)  The appellant shall be notified in writing of the date and time of the hearing at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(4)  The findings of the administrative hearing officer shall be final unless appealed by certiorari to the Superior Court of Hall County within thirty (30) days of the date of the finding. 
(5)  Applicants and permit holders shall have the duty to furnish the city's police department with a new mailing address if the applicant's or permit holder's address shall change during the investigation/appeal period or term of employment at the licensed premises. 
(d)  Suspension, revocation of permit. Conviction of violating the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of their permit for a period of not less than one (1) year. Permit holders who are found to have falsified the application or failed to disclose information required on the application shall also have their permit suspended or revoked for a period of not less than one (1) year. 
(e)  Permits nontransferable. Employee permits are nontransferable and are valid only for the individual named on the permit. Each such permit is valid for the individual named while employed in any establishment licensed in the city. 
(f)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner of license of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(g)  Fees. A nonrefundable fee as designated in title 10 of this Code must be paid at the time of filing the notice of intended employment with adult entertainment establishments. The amount of the fee shall be calculated by the city to reimburse it for the time and expense of investigating each applicant for employment, and any other costs to the city necessitated by the permit process. 
(h)  Permit expiration. Permits issued under this section shall be active for a period of one (1) year. At the expiration of one (1) year from the date of the issuance of the permit, it shall be the duty of the employee to renew the permit by going through the process described in this section. In addition, employees who cease employment with the adult entertainment establishment with which they were employed when their permit was obtained for a period of six (6) months or more must also renew their permit before returning to adult entertainment in the city. Permitted employees whose information supplied to the city during the permitting process changes must inform the city of any such changes, otherwise, their permit is invalid. Employees who are convicted of an offense that may affect their good moral character under this chapter are under a duty to fully inform the city of any such conviction, and to supply sufficient documentation relating to the conviction to allow the city to fully investigate it. The failure to inform the city and/or provide documentation of any such conviction invalidates of an employee's permit. It shall also be the duty of the adult entertainment license holder to file with the city marshal's office, on a monthly basis, a report which lists all employees currently employed in a capacity that would require an employee permit. Each such report shall include the name and date of birth of all such individuals, as well as the same information on all such individuals who have terminated employment during the one-month employment period. Failure to submit said report to the city marshal's office by the twentieth day each month shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-11. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership, corporation or limited liability company, or any other entity desiring to obtain a license to engage in adult entertainment, or to operate, promote, or conduct any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city marshal, or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the director of the business license department in an amount designed to defray, at least in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The director of the business license department shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the city marshal at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The filing of an application for license does not, by itself, authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of, or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-12. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's full true name, Social Security Number, date of birth, place of birth, aliases, race, sex, and nationality. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(4)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, or directors and officers of a corporation must be included, depending upon the type of applicant. 
(5)  The business license history of the applicant and where such application, in previous operations in this or any other city, state, or territory under license has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and a description of any business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address, and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one (1) of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one (1) application fee shall be charged. 
(7)  If the applicant, any partners, or any corporate officers or directors (if the applicant is a corporation), have been convicted of any crime impacting their good moral character in the past five (5) years and if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction, and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(8)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any. 
(9)  At least three (3) character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral character. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(10)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(11)  Whether the premises are owned or rented. 
(12)  A plat by registered surveyor, licensed by the state, showing that the location of the proposed premises is consistent with the provisions obtained in section 6-10-9 hereof. 
(13)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If the applicant is a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If the applicant is a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If the applicant is a limited liability company, by its manager or a member; 
e.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(14)  In addition to the information required herein, the application shall disclose the name, address, social security number and date of birth of any and all persons who have a financial interest of any type in the entity which is applying for the license. 
(15)  A financial statement of the applicant shall be furnished as a part of the application for adult entertainment license on forms provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-13. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-14. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have forty-five (45) days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city marshal will grant the license within five (5) days of his or her completion of the investigation if the city marshal or his or her designated representative finds all of the following: 
(1)  The required license application fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application contains all of the information required by section 6-10-12; 
(3)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant (if an individual), or any officers or directors (if the applicant is a corporation), or any of the partners, including limited partners (if the applicant is a partnership), or any member(s) or manager(s) (if the applicant is a limited liability company) has not been convicted (as defined herein) in a court of competent jurisdiction of a sex-related crime, a drug-related or alcohol-related felony, or a crime of moral turpitude, or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one (1) or more of the above-mentioned offenses within the past five (5) years; 
(5)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause in this city or any other local government jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to the date of the application; 
(6)  The building, structure, equipment, and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable health, fire, safety, zoning, and distance laws, including section 6-10-9, and would qualify to receive a certificate of occupancy; 
(7)  The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(8)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, the applicant has represented that there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(9)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or the United States; 
(10)  The applicant has given assurances that the licensee shall maintain at all times a written listing at the licensed premises of the name, address and phone number of the manager or assistant manager in charge of the licensed premises and that there shall at all times be a manager in charge and on the premises during operation hours; 
(11)  The applicant has appeared before city council at all hearings or meetings on the issue of the grant or denial of the requested license as required by section 6-10-13; 
(12)  The city has not found evidence that any specified sexual activity has occurred in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, and the city has not found evidence that any solicitation for specified sexual activities has occurred on said premises in the past. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-15. - Persons prohibited as licensee. 
No license provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees, property taxes, and other taxes for a business at that location; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose directors are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose partners or members is not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any limited liability company, any of whose members or managers is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city; 
(7)  Any applicant who fails to meet all of the criteria specified in section 6-10-14. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-16. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this chapter. The renewal fee for adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be established by resolution of the city council. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to January 1 of the year for which such license is requested. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-17. - Licenses nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person(s) or entity. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other similar entity and one (1) or more of the partners, shareholders, or members should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners, shareholders, or members may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner(s), shareholder(s), or member(s) without effecting a surrender of termination of such license; and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner, shareholder, or member. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred, or assigned. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a partnership or limited liability company or other similar entity shall be deemed terminated and void if any interest in the partnership or limited liability company is sold, transferred, or assigned to a person or entity that was not a partner or member when the license was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-18. - Change of name. 
(a)  No licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his own name and/or the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(b)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-19. - License; refusal; appeal. 
If the city following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within forty-five (45) days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall within three (3) days, notify applicant by certified mail of such denial. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-20. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Any applicant who is denied a license may appeal such denial by filing a notice of appeal with the city marshal within ten (10) days of the date on which he is notified of the denial. The notice of appeal shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof) the grounds or basis for the appeal, the action requested, the name and address of the applicant, and the reasons why the license should be granted. 
The city marshal shall schedule a hearing before the administrative hearing officer at a time and place not more than forty-five (45) days after receiving the notice of appeal. At the hearing, the applicant shall have the opportunity to present argument and evidence as to why his application should not be denied. The city marshal shall also be given the opportunity to present argument and evidence as to why the application should be denied. The administrative hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in the hearing, but the rules governing evidence in administrative hearings shall apply. Both parties shall be afforded the opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The administrative hearing officer shall have the power to rule on the admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath, and consider documents and other tangible evidence presented. The administrative hearing officer shall either approve or deny the license application in writing, shall issue findings of fact with the reasons supporting his decision, and shall issue the findings of fact and the decision within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant. If the hearing is not held within forty-five (45) days as provided herein, or the decision is not rendered within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the hearing as provided herein, then the applicant's license application shall be deemed granted, unless the parties agree to a continuance, or the administrative hearing officer requests a continuance for good cause shown. 
(b)  The applicant or the city shall have the right to appeal the decision of the administrative hearing officer to the Superior Court of Hall County, Georgia, via certiorari as provided by Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-21. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-22. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal, or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be, per se, grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-23. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)  The city marshal shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license previously granted herein. In the event the city marshal seeks to suspend or to revoke a license, the city marshal shall give written notification to the licensee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and/or the reasons for the suspension or revocation. 
(b)  The city marshal shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license in the event of any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee has violated any provisions of this adult entertainment chapter; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of any drug-related or alcohol-related felony, any sex-related crime or any crime of moral turpitude, or any attempt to commit one (1) or more of such criminal acts; or 
(6)  A licensee fails to pay any fee, license fee, fine, or other amount of money due to the city under this chapter or any other licensing ordinance of the city. 
(c)  In the event the city marshal shall suspend any license hereunder, the suspension shall be for a period of not less than one (1) day nor more than five (5) years, within the discretion of the city marshal, provided, however, that the licensee shall be authorized to continue its business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (d) hereafter. No licensee or other applicant may apply for a license for the same operation or premises during any period of suspension or revocation. 
(d)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the city marshal, the licensee may appeal the decision of the city marshal using the same procedure designated in section 6-10-20 above. In the event the licensee does not file an appeal from the decision of the city marshal as provided in section 6-10-20, the decision of the city marshal shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-24. - License and annual renewal fees. 
There is hereby established a nonrefundable fee of three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) to be submitted with any and every application to operate an adult entertainment establishment pursuant to the ordinance providing for the issuance of such permit. The annual renewal fee for any such license shall be three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-22, § I, adopted Oct. 7, 2014, repealed § 6-10-25 in its entirety. Former § 6-10-25 pertained to advertising and posting and derived from Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, adopted Sept. 21, 2010. 
Sec. 6-10-26 - Premises open for inspection. 
The premises of any adult entertainment establishment shall be open at reasonable times for inspection by the city to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-27. - Compliance. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code, any adult entertainment establishment in existence on November 3, 1992, and which is in compliance with all of the terms, requirements and standards hereof, except for section 6-10-9, shall be a nonconforming use (section 9-1-8) and shall have the right to continue to operate in its present location so long as such adult entertainment establishment is in compliance with all of the terms, requirements, and standards hereof, except for section 6-10-9. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-28. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No person, association, partnership or corporation licensed under chapter 6-10 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Gainesville, Georgia, after the effective date of this chapter shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine or controlled substances upon the premises of any licensee. Any licensee whose license was granted prior to the effective date of this chapter shall not be subject to the restrictions in this amendment relating to alcoholic beverages, however, any licensee that is required to obtain a new license under the requirements of section 6-10-17 shall thereby lose its exemption from the alcoholic beverages prohibitions in this subsection. 
(b)  This section 6-10-28 shall not apply to nor prohibit the live performance of legitimate plays, operas, ballets at main stream theaters, concert halls, museums or educational institutions, which derive less than twenty (20) percent of their gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-29. - Booths and viewing areas 
All adult entertainment establishments which are otherwise permitted to have booths, rooms, cubicles or enclosed spaces, including all adult bookstores, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult motion picture arcades, adult motion picture theaters, and adult video stores shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type device or any view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room, or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms, and cubicles and any non public areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one (1) side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the adult entertainment establishment is located. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six (6) feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured, and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured, and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room, or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten (10) foot candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one (1) individual shall occupy a booth, room, or cubicle at any time. No occupant of any booth, room, or cubicle shall engage in any type of sexual activity, or cause any bodily discharge while therein. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room, or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 6-10-30. - Private dancing or modeling sessions prohibited. 
No adult entertainment establishment shall allow, and no dancer or model thereof shall engage in, private dancing or modeling sessions or other activities involving sexual displays in which one (1) dancer or model is placed in a one-on-one situation with one (1) customer, and a regular show area with open seating shall be required for such sessions or displays; neither shall any adult entertainment establishment or any dancer, model, or employee thereof allow personal physical contact between customers and models, dancers, or employees. 
(Ord. No. 2010-38, § I, 9-21-10) 
CHAPTER 6-11. - SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 6-11-1. - Declaration of findings and policy. 
It is hereby declared that excessive alarm calls within the corporate city limits of Gainesville, Georgia result in an inefficient use of emergency services resources, reduces faith in security alarm signals, and promotes complacency in police and fire investigation of alarm signals which creates a general public safety hazard detrimental to the protection and to the health, safety and welfare of citizens, and the emergency services personnel responsible for the investigation of alarm signals. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-2. - Administration and enforcement. 
The police department shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-3. - Operation and maintenance; transmission. 
The city shall operate and maintain equipment in the city public safety building designed to receive burglar and/or fire alarms over customer leased telephone lines. The city's obligation with respect to maintenance shall be construed to apply only to the equipment installed by the city and housed in the city public safety building. Alarm companies, alarm users or individuals transmitting alarms over leased lines to the police or fire departments are responsible for keeping their equipment in good working order and repair and the city shall have no obligation with respect thereto. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-4. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given: 
Alarm company means any corporation, partnership, business or individual (operated for profit) engaged in the business or the installation, maintenance, alteration, servicing, or monitoring of an alarm system or which responds to such alarm systems. 
Alarm response means any response to a premise by the police or fire department as a result of an alarm signal. Should the police or fire department discover evidence of an occurrence that the alarm signal was designated to detect, that errant should be considered an alarm response for the purpose of this chapter. 
Alarm signal means the activation of an alarm system resulting in a request for an alarm response regardless of cause. 
Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, designed to signal an occurrence of robbery, burglary, unauthorized entry, attempted entry, fire, smoke, heat or water application, or any other circumstance requiring urgent attention and to which police or fire personnel are expected to respond. 
Alarm user means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind who or which purchases, leases, contracts for, or otherwise obtains an alarm system, or the servicing, maintenance or monitoring of an alarm system from an alarm company. 
Automatic dialing device means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to a predetermined telephone number and which automatically transmits by recorded voice message or signal the existence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police or firefighters are expected to respond. 
City means the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
False alarms means any signal [of] an occurrence of robbery, unauthorized entry, heat, smoke or water application, or any other circumstance when there exists no actual or threatened criminal activity or emergency to which police or fire department personnel are expected to respond. 
Fire department means the City of Gainesville, Georgia Fire Department. 
Person means any individual, group of persons, firm, partnership, association of any kind, company or corporation. 
Police department means the City of Gainesville, Georgia Police Department. 
Protected premise means the premises upon which an alarm system has been placed for the purpose of detecting a hazard. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-5. - Intentional false alarms prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully activate a security alarm system to summon police or firefighters when there is no actual or threatened emergency or criminal activity. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-6. - Automatic dialing device restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain any automated dialing device which is programmed to transmit a prerecorded message or code signal directly to the city public safety building by public telephone lines. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-7. - Required equipment. 
(a)  An alarm system operated within the corporate city limits of the city shall be equipped in such a manner so as to prevent false alarms due to interruptions in electrical power. 
(b)  Any alarm system within the corporate limits of the city which is equipped with a horn, bell, siren or other noise device audible beyond the confines of the premise shall be adjusted in such a manner that it will not sound for longer than fifteen (15) minutes before resetting and silencing itself. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-8. - Notification of alarm system emergency information. 
(a)  Within ten (10) days of installing an alarm system, the alarm user shall furnish the police department all emergency information concerning the protected premises, the alarm user, and the alarm company. 
(b)  If, at any time, there is a change in the status of the protected premises which renders any part of the emergency information inaccurate, the alarm user shall supply the police department supplemental emergency information within ten (10) days of the change. 
(c)  Alarm users with alarm systems installed prior to March 1, 1994 shall comply with this section prior to October 1, 1994. 
(d)  Any alarm response which results from an alarm signal initiated by an alarm system which is not in compliance with this section shall be deemed to be an excessive alarm response and a violation of section 6-11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-9. - Excessive alarm responses prohibited. 
(a)  On and after thirty (30) days from the installation date of an alarm system, it shall be unlawful for any alarm user in the city to allow an excessive number of alarm responses to occur at a protected premise for which the alarm user is responsible. 
(b)  Alarm responses to a protected premise in excess of five (5) in any consecutive twelve-month period, or three (3) in any consecutive four-month period, or three (3) in any one (1) month are deemed to be an excessive number and shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  If an alarm user shows to the satisfaction of the chief of police and/or fire department or his designee that the false alarm was not the result of the negligence or improper maintenance by the alarm user, the administrative service fee sanction may be waived. 
(d)  Police and fire department personnel assigned to incidents which are determined to be an alarm response shall, whenever possible, leave written notice for the alarm user which provides the following information: 
Date and time of alarm response. 
Officer/firefighter's name and business telephone number. 
Brief synopsis of the alarm ordinance. 
Such notice shall not be left on the exterior of the protected premises, nor in such a position so as to be read by an individual on the exterior of the protected premise. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-10. - Inspection of alarm systems. 
An alarm user in violation of section 6-11-9 shall cause their alarm system to be inspected by an alarm company licensed to conduct business in the city. The inspection shall entail a complete examination of the alarm system including, but not limited to, satisfactory design and installation of the equipment, proper functioning of the equipment and user education in the operation of the equipment. The alarm company shall record the details of the inspection and make such record available to the alarm user. Notification of the requirements of this section shall be made by the police department in writing, within thirty (30) days of the violation, to the registered alarm user. The completed inspection report shall be returned to the police department by the alarm user within thirty (30) days of the initial notification by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-11. - Penalties for noncompliance with inspection. 
If the police department does not receive the completed inspection report within thirty (30) days of the notification as provided in section 6-11-10, an administrative service fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed against the alarm user. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-12. - Penalties for subsequent violations. 
(a)  If within twelve (12) months of the notification, as provided in section 6-11-10, there are more than two (2) alarm responses to a protected premise, administrative service fees, in accordance with the following fee schedule shall be assessed against the user for all subsequent alarm responses: 
(Proposed Administrative Service Fee Schedule) 
(1)  Third response ..... $ 20.00 
(2)  Fourth response ..... 50.00 
(3)  Fifth response ..... 75.00 
(4)  Sixth response ..... 100.00 
(5)  Seventh response ..... 125.00 
(6)  Responses in excess of seven, each ..... 150.00 
(b)  To ensure that the assessed amounts are representative of costs incurred by the city to provide alarm responses and to administer this chapter, the amounts contained in the administrative service fee schedule shall be evaluated and amended, as necessary, on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-13. - Application. 
Alarm companies desiring to have an alarm system connection to the city public safety building via an alarm board shall file an application with the police department. Written notice of the police department decision shall be mailed to the applicant at the address given on the application within thirty (30) days of the date of such application. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-14. - Initial permit forms and instructions to alarm users. 
Every alarm company selling, leasing or furnishing to any alarm user an alarm system which is installed on any premises located in the city shall furnish to the police department the user's initial permit forms in a completed form within ten (10) days of installing an alarm system. The alarm company shall also furnish the alarm user with instructions that provide information to allow the alarm user to operate the alarm system properly and to obtain service for the alarm system at any time. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-15. - Connection and termination requirements. 
All approvals by the police department for connection of alarm systems shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Applicant shall use only alarm equipment which meets minimum alarm device standards of Underwriters Laboratories and the National Fire Protection Agency (NFPA) and which is compatible with the city public safety building alarm equipment. 
(2)  All installation costs associated with connection to the city public safety building alarm system shall be borne by the applicant. 
(3)  All costs associated with disconnection or termination of service shall be borne by the applicant, whether such disconnection or termination is required by the police department or by choice of the owner. Such costs include the costs of termination and reconnection in the event the city public safety building alarm system is relocated. 
(4)  The police and fire department reserve the right to inspect any applicant's equipment at any time for any reason related to the efficient operation of the alarm system. Failure to allow inspection shall be cause for immediate removal. 
(5)  Applicant shall sign an agreement which holds the city, its agents and employees harmless for any and all damages or losses resulting directly or indirectly from an alarm system connection with the city public safety building alarm system. 
(6)  Council shall establish the fees for these services by resolution and shall be a part of the schedule of fees for the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-16. - Reporting requirement. 
All alarm companies located within the corporate limits of the city shall, within sixty (60) days from the effective date of the enactment of this chapter, provide to the police department, the name and last known address of all alarm users located within the corporate limits of the city from which the aforementioned businesses are currently collecting a monitoring fee. Any alarm company violation this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the alarm company fails and/or refuses to report the information required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-17. - Review committee. 
The city council shall appoint a review committee consisting of a representative of the police department, a representative of the fire department, a representative of an alarm company licensed to conduct business in the city and a member of the public safety committee of the city council, which is empowered to hear the appeal upon request of any alarm company or alarm user adversely affected by any decision of the police department or fire department. The representative to an alarm company shall serve for a period of two (2) years. 
(1)  Appeals to the review committee shall be within three (3) days from the date of service of written notice of a decision adversely affecting an alarm user or alarm company. 
(2)  Failure to file an appeal within such three-day period shall constitute a waiver of the right to such appeal. 
(3)  The decision of the review committee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
Sec. 6-11-18. - Penalties. 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person, alarm user or alarm company who violates any provision of this chapter or any rules, orders or regulations made pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-7. 
(Ord. No. 94-06, § I, 2-15-94) 
CHAPTER 6-12. - SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS 

Sec. 6-12-1. - Registration required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser or solicitor, calling at residences without the previous consent of the occupant for the purpose of soliciting orders, sale, subscriptions, or business of any kind, or for seeking information or donations without first having registered in the office of the city marshal. Each registrant shall give their complete identification, their signature, the name of their employer, the nature of the products or services in which they are interested, the names of the manufacturers of such products, or of the organization which they are representing, and the proposed method of operation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-52, § I, 1-3-95) 
Sec. 6-12-2. - Fee. 
Each registrant shall pay a regulatory fee in the amount provided in Title 10 for persons engaged in business as a canvasser or solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 94-52, § I, 1-3-95) 
Sec. 6-12-3. - Certificate. 
(a)  Each applicant who shows evidence of good character and who pays the fee provided for in this chapter shall be furnished a certificate by the chief of police and the city marshal indicating that he or she has registered and showing the dates covered by such registration. 
(b)  Each person shall at all times while soliciting or canvassing in the city carry upon his or her person the registration certificate and the same shall be exhibited by such registrant whenever he or she is required to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited. 
(c)  No certificate shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony within the past ten (10) years. 
(Ord. No. 94-52, § I, 1-3-95) 
Sec. 6-12-4. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
(Ord. No. 94-52, § I, 1-3-95) 
Sec. 6-12-5. - Revocation. 
Any such registration may be revoked by the mayor or the chief of police because of any violation by the registrant of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the city, or of any state or federal law, or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required in this chapter for the original registration. 
(Ord. No. 94-52, § I, 1-3-95) 
Sec. 6-12-6. - Grant or denial of certificate generally. 
The grant or denial of a certificate under this chapter shall be based on a consideration of the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order and convenience. The person who grants such a certificate may suspend or revoke it, based on the same consideration. 
(Ord. No. 94-52, § I, 1-3-95) 
Sec. 6-12-7. - Due process. 
Any person who believes that he or she has been denied due process of law under this chapter shall be entitled to a hearing, pursuant to section 1-8-1. Unless such hearing is requested within five (5) working days after the alleged denial of due process, such person shall be presumed to have accepted summary process. 
(Ord. No. 94-52, § I, 1-3-95) 
CHAPTER 6-13. - SIDEWALK CAFES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-19, § I, adopted Aug. 15, 2017, amended Ch. 6-13 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 6-13, §§ 6-13-1—6-13-6, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-29, § I, adopted Aug. 17, 2010; Ord. No. 2015-21, § I, adopted July 7, 2015. 

Sec. 6-13-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Sidewalk cafe means the location and use of tables and chairs and other associated equipment and furnishings on the public sidewalk or city-installed and/or approved parklet and operated as an extension of a licensed eating establishment or licensed alcoholic beverage premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-19, § I, 8-15-17; Ord. No. 2018-10, § I, 5-15-18) 
Sec. 6-13-2. - Sidewalk cafes allowed in the downtown dining district; license required. 
(a)  Sidewalk cafes shall be allowed in the downtown dining district, an area as established by resolution of mayor and council pursuant to section 6-4-87(f)(1) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Gainesville, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall operate a sidewalk cafe without first obtaining a license from the city manager or designee. 
(c)  All applications for a license shall be submitted to the city manager or designee and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, location, description and mailing address of the business applying for the license; and 
(2)  A drawing depicting the location, size and number of tables and chairs at the proposed location of the sidewalk cafe; 
(d)  The applicant shall procure and shall maintain comprehensive general liability and broad form property damage insurance as shall protect applicant from claims for damages for bodily injury, including accidental death, as well as from claims for property damages, which may arise from operation of a sidewalk cafe by the applicant, whether such operations are by the applicant or by any subcontractor or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by either of them. The amount of insurance shall not be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(e)  The applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance acceptable to the city which shall be attached to each signed application when transmitted for final approval. The city shall be named as an additional insured on all coverages. The certificates of insurance, and any subsequent renewals, shall reference the license. 
(f)  The certificate of insurance shall contain a statement that "Coverages afforded under the policies will not be canceled unless at least thirty (30) days prior to cancellation written notice has been given to the city." 
(Ord. No. 2017-19, § I, 8-15-17; Ord. No. 2018-10, § I, 5-15-18) 
Sec. 6-13-3. - General regulations. 
(a)  Each sidewalk cafe shall maintain a minimum of forty-eight (48) inches, clear and unobstructed sidewalk space for pedestrian traffic at all times subject to the following: 
(1)  On the following sidewalks of the downtown square, tables and chairs may be placed either in the area nearest the building or the area nearest the street, so long as a clear and unobstructed forty-eight (48) inch-wide path for pedestrian traffic is maintained at all times: 
i.  Bradford Street between Spring Street and Washington Street; 
ii.  Washington Street between Bradford Street and Main Street; and 
iii.  Main Street between Washington Street and Spring Street. 
iv.  Spring Street between Main Street and Bradford Street. 
(2)  On the sidewalks in other areas of the Downtown Dining District, the tables and chairs must be placed in the area nearest the building and allow a clear and unobstructed forty-eight (48) inch-wide path for pedestrian traffic at all times 
(b)  If a sidewalk has less than sixty (60) inches clear width, then passing spaces at least sixty (60) inches by sixty (60) inches shall be located at reasonable intervals not to exceed two hundred (200) feet along the sidewalk in order to ensure compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(c)  The area in which a sidewalk cafe is located shall not extend parallel in either direction beyond the outside walls of the building in which the restaurant is located. 
(d)  The number of patrons occupying the sidewalk cafe shall not be greater than the total number of chairs located at the tables within the sidewalk cafe. 
(e)  Permit holders shall maintain sidewalk cafe areas and all equipment and furnishings in such conditions as to be clean, sanitary and safe at all times. 
(f)  All trash generated from the sidewalk cafe shall be disposed of inside the restaurant and not in public trash receptacles provided and maintained by the city. Use of the city trash receptacles is cause for revocation of the sidewalk cafe; license. 
(g)  Receptacles for disposal of cigarettes shall be provided for the use of customers of the sidewalk cafe. 
(Ord. No. 2017-19, § I, 8-15-17; Ord. No. 2018-10, § I, 5-15-18) 
Sec. 6-13-4. - Regulations pertaining specifically to businesses holding alcoholic beverage licenses. 
(a)  Those businesses holding alcoholic beverage licenses shall store all alcoholic beverages inside their principal building. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the license holder or employees thereof to permit any person to leave the sidewalk cafe with an alcoholic beverage unless it is in compliance with the provisions of section 6-4-87(f) of the City of Gainesville Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-19, § I, 8-15-17; Ord. No. 2018-10, § I, 5-15-18) 
Sec. 6-13-5. - Revocation, suspension. 
(a)  Any violation of this chapter that may warrant revocation of a sidewalk cafe license shall be reported by any person to the city manager or designee who shall have the power, in his discretion, to suspend the license for a period not to exceed ten (10) days pending a hearing before the administrative hearing officer on the question of whether or not the license shall be revoked for cause. 
(b)  Upon a charge that there has been a violation of this chapter, the city manager or designee may order the use of the sidewalk cafe suspended, pending a hearing on the charge. 
(c)  Before the denial of any application for a license or for the revocation of any existing sidewalk cafe license subject to the provisions of this chapter, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, shall be given notice in writing from the city manager or designee to show cause before the administrative hearing officer at a time and place specified therein not less than three (3) days nor more than ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice, why such application for a license should not be denied, or why such license should not be revoked, as the case may be, stating the grounds therefor, and at the appointed time and place the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exist, why such application should not be denied or such license revoked, after which the administrative hearing officer shall take such actions as he or she in his or her judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. All decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be in writing with reasons therefore stated and mailed or delivered to the applicant, licensee, or the person in charge of the place of business if the license holder cannot be located. In addition, at any hearing as provided herein, the party afforded the hearing shall have the opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the administrative hearing officer to deny an application for a license applied for under the provisions of this chapter or the revocation or suspension of a license, shall have the right of appeal by certiorari to the Superior Court of Hall County from the decision of the administrative hearing officer, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-19, § I, 8-15-17; Ord. No. 2018-10, § I, 5-15-18) 
Sec. 6-13-6. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-19, § I, 8-15-17; Ord. No. 2018-10, § I, 5-15-18) 
CHAPTER 6-14. - SOLICITING RIDES, EMPLOYMENT OR BUSINESS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 97-06, § I, adopted February 4, 1997, repealed Ord. No. 96-61, which created §§ 6-14-1—6-14-25. Formerly, such sections pertained to excise tax on vehicle rentals. Subsequently, Ord. No. 97-23, § I, adopted April 1, 1997, added a new chapter 6-14. 

Sec. 6-14-1. - Soliciting rides, employment or business. 
(a)  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride. 
(b)  Except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97.1, no person shall stand on a highway, street or right-of-way thereof for the purpose of soliciting employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 97-23, § I, 4-1-97) 
CHAPTER 6-15. - FRANCHISES FOR CABLE SERVICES AND OTHER TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES 

Sec. 6-15-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
(b)  As used in this Chapter, the term: 
Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
City means the City of Gainesville. 
City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable or telecommunications services or both, to inhabitants within the franchise area. 
May is permissive. 
Ordinance means this Ordinance and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications services means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial cable, optical fiber, or satellite or microwave transmission, of one (1) or more audio, voice or data signals. Telecommunications services includes both cable services and non-cable telecommunications services. 
Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station, as set forth in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(20). 
Video service means the provision of video programming through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public rights of way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This term shall not include any video programming provided by a provider of commercial mobile service as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d) or video programming provided as part of and via a service that enables users to access content, information, e-mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
Video service provider means an entity providing video service as defined in this chapter. This term shall not include a cable service provider. 
(Ord. No. 97-70, § I, 12-2-97; Ord. No. 2008-01, § I, 2-5-08) 
Sec. 6-15-2. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and no person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications service other than cable services without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The city council may grant one (1) or more franchises in accordance with this chapter, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by amendment hereof. 
(c)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. 
(d)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services. 
(e)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city and for all or less than all telecommunications services, and for telecommunications services for all or less than all purposes. 
(f)  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, governing cable television franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 97-70, § I, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 6-15-3. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city; 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications or cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable or telecommunications system in the city; 
e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system or telecommunication franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable or telecommunication system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof; 
(3)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A description of the cable services and any other telecommunications services proposed to be provided; 
b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other telecommunications service charges; 
d.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable or telecommunications services; and 
f.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
(4)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and 
(5)  Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 97-70, § I, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 6-15-4. - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises. 
No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Gainesville. 
(Ord. No. 97-70, § I, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 6-15-5. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 97-70, § I, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 6-15-6. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 97-70, § I, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 6-15-7. - Evaluation criteria. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to be provided, including the type of telecommunications services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
(5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(6)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(Ord. No. 97-70, § I, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 6-15-8. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  If the city council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider one (1) or more applications, the city council shall set one (1) or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Ord. No. 97-70, § I, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 6-15-9. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the franchise; 
(2)  The franchise area and the cable services and other telecommunications services and purposes of such other telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of the franchise; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or canceled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee; 
(8)  The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the franchisee by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 97-70, § I, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 6-15-10. - Franchise fee for state-issued cable or video franchise; authorized designee. 
(a)  The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five (5) percent gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the state. 
(b)  The city authorizes the city manager, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five (5) percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, § II, 2-5-08) 
CHAPTER 6-16. - LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 6-16-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Pawnbroker and Secondhand Dealer Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-2. - Findings and intent. 
This chapter is adopted to address the interest of public safety, health and the welfare of the community and to aid and assist in the recovery of stolen property, and to aid and assist local law enforcement in fulfilling their public safety functions. This chapter is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Accepted identification means an official document, most commonly in the form of a plastic-coated/sealed card, issued for purposes of identification or driver's license. 
These documents must be issued by one (1) of the fifty (50) states or a branch of the U.S. Military, i.e., Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, Coast Guard, or current State of Georgia and counties of Georgia probation and parole cards. The identification must, at a minimum, bear a true photograph of the person presenting it, date of birth and description of the person. 
Annual pawnshop license means an official document issued for any person, association, partnership, corporation or limited liability company, or any other entity to engage in or operate a pawnshop, or to conduct, promote, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, any pawnshop establishment as defined in this chapter. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
Business occupation tax certificate means a tax levied for revenue raising purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business. 
City means the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
City marshal means the Marshal's Office of the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Deceptive business practice means any practices as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-50. 
Employee permit means an official document issued for permission to be employed or work in a pawnshop regulated by the City of Gainesville, or to be a pawnbroker. 
Employee means any person who works for a pawnbroker or in a pawnshop, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, regardless of whether remuneration is received or not. 
Interest in a pawnshop means the identification of any person involved or any member of his or her family being the outright owner of the pawnshop; a co-owner of the pawnshop; a partner in a partnership which owns all or part of the pawnshop; or a stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of the pawnshop. 
Managing agent means an owner or full-time employee that has day-to-day managerial oversight of the pawnshop and is actively engaged in the daily operations of the pawnshop and resident of the State of Georgia. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Month means that period of time from one (1) date in a calendar month to the corresponding date in the following calendar month, but if there is no such corresponding date, then the last day of such following month. 
New in box means any unused item in the original unopened, factory sealed boxes. 
OCGA means Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Pawnbroker means any person or employee engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this paragraph. 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a well-defined part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, motor vehicles, or any kind of personal property or title whatsoever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawn transaction means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the pledger or seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
Pledged goods means tangible personal property, including, without limitation, glass taken from buildings such as mantel mirrors, art glass, copper wire, or any kind of plumbing materials and all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this chapter, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle, and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. Pledged goods shall not include choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness. 
Police department means the Police Department of the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Registered agent means a resident of Hall County associated with the pawnshop upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-4. - Enforcement. 
The Police Department of the City of Gainesville, Georgia, and the City Marshal of the City of Gainesville, Georgia, shall see that the provisions of this chapter are observed and enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-5. - General policies and purposes. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers may operate only after the issuance of a license for such operation by the city and only in the manner permitted by such license. Pawn transactions may only occur through a licensee who complies with the rules and regulations of this chapter and with the laws, licensing, regulatory and revenue requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  All licenses are a mere grant or privilege subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and state law and subject to being revoked by the city. 
(c)  Each licensee of the city shall display the license issued under this chapter prominently at all times at the location for which the license is issued. A separate license must be issued for each location and a separate application must be made for each location. 
(d)  It is not the intent of this chapter to regulate traditional secondhand dealers of property where no pawn transaction occurs. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-6. - Qualifications for issuance of annual pawnshop license. 
Any person who desires to obtain a license for the operation of a pawnshop must meet the minimum qualifications set forth in this chapter. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner must meet the qualifications of any individual license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the application process. If the applicant is a corporation, the majority stockholder and each principle officer of the corporation must meet the qualifications as part of the application process. 
(1)  Any person applying to operate a pawnshop for which a license is sought shall not have been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to violating any provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, or rules or regulations of the city and shall not have been convicted of any crime involving a felony theft, burglary, robbery, or fraud, or have been convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one (1) or more of the above-mentioned offenses, for a period of ten (10) years from the date of such convictions, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. For purposes of this section, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere entered and terms completed for the above mentioned offenses under the Georgia First Offender Act, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., shall be ignored. Provided, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender status or committed another crime and the sentencing court ruled an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(2)  Every managing agent applicant for a license shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age, a U.S. citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residency, and a resident of the State of Georgia, and shall make application on forms furnished by the city marshal and in connection therewith, shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information and furnish all certificates, affidavits, bonds and other supporting data as required thereby. 
(3)  All licensed pawnshops must have and continuously maintain in Hall County a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of Hall County. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written, notarized consent of such agent with the city in such form as may be prescribed. 
(4)  All persons filing an application for a license will be required to complete a waiver in order for the applicant's criminal history to be obtained. 
(5)  No person shall have, own or enjoy any ownership, interest in, share in the profits from, or otherwise participate in the business of any pawnshop in the city unless a full description of such interest is disclosed upon the filing of an application for the original annual license. Said person shall be subject to the same qualifications as the license holder. Failure to qualify may be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(6)  The city marshal may approve all applications for renewal of an existing license upon payment of the license fees for renewal of licenses, where no objections have been filed and the application clearly shows no change in the ownership, managing agent, location, or operation of the business. If objections have been filed or if there have been any changes in the ownership, managing agent, location, or operation of the business, a new application must be approved by the city council. The city license issued shall be valid for the calendar year indicated thereon and shall expire at midnight December 31 each year unless renewed by the city marshal prior to expiration. Renewal licenses for subsequent calendar years become effective upon approval of the city marshal. A licensee that desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make application for and pay the required fees each year, on or before December 1. 
(7)  No license shall be granted where the applicant has had any pawnshop license issued by any county, municipality, or other governmental subdivision which has been suspended or revoked. 
(8)  No license shall be granted for a location that is not in compliance with all federal, state, or local regulation, rule or ordinance. 
(9)  No license shall be issued where the applicant has supplied false information in the license application or where any required fee has not been paid by such applicant, including any fees or assessments owed to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-7. - Annual pawnshop license application. 
Before operating a pawnshop any person desiring to do so shall first file an application for a license with the City of Gainesville City Marshal to operate a pawnshop, pursuant to the following: 
(1)  The application shall be made on an annual basis. 
(2)  All applications for a license shall be made in person by the applicant to the city marshal in writing on forms furnished by the city marshal, the same shall be required on all owners, interest holders and partners, a signed affidavit by the applicant shall contain but not be restricted to the following statements and information: 
a.  The applicant(s)'s full true and legal name(s) and any other aliases or name changes used in the last five (5) years. 
b.  The telephone number, present address and length of residency of the applicant(s). 
c.  Acceptable written proof that the applicant(s) is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
d.  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant(s) for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
e.  The pawnshop permit history of the applicant(s) and whether, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory, the applicant(s) has had such permit revoked or suspended. If such permit has been revoked or suspended, the applicant(s) must state the reason, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
f.  If the owner(s) is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the owner(s) is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners. If the owner(s) is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate filed with the county clerk or secretary of state. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. 
g.  If any of the owners, partners or interest holders have been convicted of any crime in the past ten years, a completed description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of the disposition have been fully completed. 
h.  If the owner is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name, properly recorded, must be provided. If owner is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name, affidavit, if any, and the last annual report, if any, must be provided. 
i.  Address of premises to be regulated. 
j.  Whether the premises are owned or rented and must provide a copy of the deed or rental agreement. 
k.  Each application for a license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by all owners, partners and interest holders. 
l.  The applicant must disclose any ownership interest in any other pawnshop, whether it is located locally or out of state and must disclose the nature of such ownership interest. 
m.  Each applicant shall certify on the application that they have read this chapter and, if the license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the premises. 
n.  Any other information that may be required by the city marshal or police department to include, but not limited to, source of financing and any other information obtained during the investigative process for the business operation. 
(3)  The written application for the license shall be a permanent record which the licensee must maintain current as required by this chapter. Failure to maintain a current application shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(4)  No license shall be issued until a fee in an amount established by action of the city council, as provided in title 10, is paid to the city by the applicant. 
(5)  The city marshal shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall report to the city council whether such applicant is a person of good character and has not been convicted of a criminal offense as indicated in this chapter. All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall automatically serve as grounds to deny the application. An applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for questioning any person or persons who are considered relevant to the ascertainment of facts relative to such license, as may be required by the city council, the city marshal, or other official designated by the city council. The failure to produce such person within thirty (30) days after being requested to do so may result in denial of the application. 
(6)  No pawnbroker shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), has been paid to the city and approval has been obtained from the city marshal. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the City Code have been met. 
(7)  In the event the "managing agent" changes, the licensee shall notify the city within five (5) days of the change. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged for the processing of an application for the change of the "managing agent," and such applicant must be approved by the city marshal. If the applicant does not meet the qualifications for managing agent as required by this chapter and the application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision of the city marshal as set out in section 6-16-18. 
(8)  In the event the "registered agent" changes, the licensee shall notify the city within five (5) days of the change. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be charged for the processing of a change in the "registered agent." 
(9)  No pawnbroker shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on a pawnbroker business under any name other than the name of the business as specified on the license. 
(10)  The owner shall notify the city marshal and the police department of any change in the information, material or data set out in the original application. 
(11)  Upon completion of the review of the application by the city marshal the matter shall be placed on an agenda for mayor and council who may grant or deny the application consistent with this chapter. No application shall be acted upon by the city council until a notice of such application in a local newspaper is published for at least four (4) different days prior to the regular meeting at which such application is to be presented and considered. 
(12)  No application shall be acted upon by the city council except at a regular meeting of the council. 
(13)  Any applicant who is denied a license may appeal such denial by filing a notice of appeal pursuant to the appeal procedure set forth in section 6-16-18. 
(14)  Upon approval by the city council of the application for a license, the city marshal shall issue a license in accordance with the approved application. If the applicant is an individual, the license shall be issued in the name of the individual. If the application is a corporation, the license shall be issued in the name of the corporation. If the application is a partnership, the license shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one (1) of the partners. All licenses issued shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a license before July 1 shall pay the full license fee without proration. License fees for licenses granted on or after July 1 shall be one-half (½) the annual license fee. License fees are not refundable once paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-8. - Annual employee permit application. 
All persons before being employed at a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn shall first file an application with the police department for a permit to work in such business. The issuance of such permit by the police department will be based on a criminal history and background investigation of the applicant. A non-refundable fee as designated in title 10 of the Code must be paid at the time of filing the notice of intended employment with a pawnshop and for the renewal of the permit thereafter. The amount of the fee shall be calculated by the city to reimburse it for the time and expense of investigating each applicant for employment, and any other costs to the city necessitated by the permit process. The fee is non-refundable in the event an applicant, for any reason, is not issued an employee permit. The permit will expire at midnight one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(1)  All required applications for an annual license shall be in writing and on forms provided by the police department that require the applicant's full name, current address, Social Security Number, date of birth, birth place, race, sex, telephone number, aliases, nationality, driver's license number, addresses for the last five (5) years, business occupation and employment history for the last five (5) years, proof of age, and complete information concerning the conviction of any crime within the past five (5) years. Each applicant must be photographed by the police department. The police department shall have forty-five (45) days to investigate the information submitted by the applicant. If the applicant has not been convicted of a criminal offense as indicated in this chapter and if the applicant has not falsified the application or failed to disclose information required on the application, the police department shall grant an approval of employment; and issue an annual personal identification card authorizing the person to be employed by a pawnshop. The permit shall be with the employee when the employee is on the licensed premises. 
(2)  Every employee must disclose any ownership or interest in any other pawnshop, whether it is located locally or out of state and must disclose the nature of such ownership or interest as defined in this chapter. 
(3)  Employees of a pawnshop, as defined herein, shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age. Any employee who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to violating any provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, or rules or regulations of the city, or any felony theft, burglary, robbery, or fraud, or has been convicted in any state of any offense which if committed in this state, would have been punishable as one (1) or more of the above-mentioned offenses, shall not be issued a permit to work on the premises of a pawnshop for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. For purposes of this section, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere entered and terms completed for the above-mentioned offenses under the Georgia First Offender Act, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., shall be ignored. Provided, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender status or committed another crime and the sentencing court ruled an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(4)  All applications shall be completed by the applicant and sworn to and signed by the applicant in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(5)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall automatically serve as grounds to deny the application. An applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for questioning any person or persons who are considered relevant to the ascertainment of facts relative to such permit, as may be required by, the police department. The failure to produce such person within thirty (30) days after being requested to do so may result in denial of the application. 
(6)  All permits issued through administrative error can be terminated and seized by the police department. 
(7)  Replacements permits will be issued within thirty (30) days of original date, upon paying one-half (½) of the fee charged for the original pawnshop permits. After thirty (30) days of original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(8)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the police department, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the police department or city marshal. 
(9)  No pawnshop owner shall allow any employee or manager to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in their possession a current valid city permit. Upon the filing of the notice with the police department, the applicant may become a conditional employee and work on the licensed premises with a receipt issued by the police department until such time the investigation is completed and approval or denial of the permit is issued. 
(10)  For the purpose of this section, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or managing agent of any pawnshop. 
(11)  Employee permits are nontransferable and are valid only for the individual named on the permit. Each such permit is valid for the individual named while employed in any establishment licensed in the city. 
(12)  Permits issued under this section shall be active for a period of one (1) year. At the expiration of one (1) year from the date of the issuance of the permit, it shall be the duty of the employee to renew the permit by going through the process described in this section. In addition, employees who cease employment with a pawn shop establishment with which they were employed when their permit was obtained for a period of six (6) months or more must also renew their permit before returning to a pawn shop establishment in the city. Renewal permits fees shall be one-half (½) of the fee charged for the original permits. After thirty (30) days of the original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(13)  Employees after receiving their permit must notify the city marshal and the police department of any changes involving information originally provided to obtain an employee permit; otherwise, their permit is invalid. Employees who are convicted of an offense that may affect their employment under this chapter are under a duty to fully inform the police department of any such conviction, and to supply sufficient documentation relating to the conviction to allow the city to fully investigate it. The failure to inform the police department and/or provide documentation of any such conviction invalidates an employee's permit and shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the permit. 
(14)  It shall also be the duty of the pawn broker to file with the city marshal and the police department, on a monthly basis, a report which lists all employees currently employed in a capacity that would require an employee permit. Each such report shall include the name and date of birth of all such individuals, as well as the same information on all such individuals who have terminated employment during the one-month employment period. Failure to submit said report by the twentieth day each month shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(15)  Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial by filing a notice of appeal pursuant to the appeal procedure set forth in section 6-16-18. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-9. - Commencement for business—Forfeiture of license. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this chapter shall, within six (6) months after the issuance of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license, unless such period is extended by the city council. Failure to open the licensed establishment as referred to in this subsection within the six-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(b)  Any holder of a license under this chapter who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of three (3) consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity for any further action by the city marshal or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-10. - License transfer. 
No license granted for a pawnshop shall be transferable except upon application to the city marshal in the same form and manner, and subject to the same requirements with respect to the transferee as are applicable in an original application. Any such license may be transferred only to another applicant doing the same business at the same location as the license holder to whom the license was originally issued provided and excepting, however, that if the license holder is a partnership and one (1) or more of the partners should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without affecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the license upon notification to the city shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. When permission for transfer has been granted, the original licensee or transferee shall cease doing business and deliver the license to the city marshal, who shall record such transfer, and the transferee shall pay a fee therefore as a condition precedent to engaging in operations under the license. The fee for such transfer shall be established from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-11. - Record of transactions. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent electronic record of its pawn transactions in which an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop can be transmitted to the police department via an electronic automated reporting system. Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnbroker and shall be made at the time of each transaction, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase, pawn or sale of the property. 
(2)  The full name, street address and telephone number of the customer making the pledge, trade or sale. 
(3)  The pawnshop shall require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property to show accepted identification as defined in section 6-16-3 prior to conducting a pawnshop transaction. 
(4)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card which contains a photograph of the customer. 
(5)  A description of the pledged or purchased property by serial, model or other number, if available, and by any identifying marks (e.g., brand name, color, style, etc.). 
(6)  The number of the receipt or pawn transaction issued for the property pawned or bought. 
(7)  The price paid or the amount loaned. 
(8)  The maturity date of the transaction, if a pawn. 
(9)  A photograph of the customer and the item pawned or bought which will be taken with the electronic automated reporting system at the time of the transaction. 
(10)  The pawnshop shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any property, the fingerprint of the right-hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. An electronic digital fingerprint scanner will be the primary method of entry required. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging, or selling the property. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one (1) pawn transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature should be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property. 
(11)  The signature of the customer. 
(12)  The tag bearing the pawnshop transaction number must remain attached to the item until the property is disposed of by sale, trade, or other lawful means. This paragraph does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however the pawnshop shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this paragraph. 
(b)  Every pawnbroker shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system or may elect to upload electronically via the internet a batch file of all transactions for each business day to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system immediately at the conclusion of each business day. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the police department. 
(c)  The pawnshop shall store the above records, digital images, and fingerprints for a period as designated by state statute and make them available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(d)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, or the system is terminated pawnbrokers will be notified as soon as possible, by the administrator of the system. Pawnshops that incur electronic system failures or other events that would cause partial or complete loss of electronic reporting, should immediately notify the police department with the reason of the failure. In these events, the pawnbrokers will be required to make records of transactions in paper form. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in paragraph (a) of this section. Pawnbrokers shall maintain a three-day supply of these paper forms. On a daily basis, all transactions not reported in the electronic automated reporting system, will be delivered to the police department by the pawnshop within twenty four (24) hours of the end of the business day for every day until the event has been corrected. 
(e)  Any duly authorized law enforcement officer authorized by the chief of police, may, during the ordinary hours of business or any other reasonable time, inspect any pawnbroker's electronic or paper records or any goods in his possession at the pawnbroker's place of business to ensure compliance not only with this section, but this chapter and state law. 
(f)  The chief of police or his designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system and required equipment needed. A fee will be assessed to each pawnshop for each reported transaction: said fee shall be an amount set by the chief of police equal to that charged by the administrator of the automated reporting system. The assessed fee to the pawnshops shall not exceed the actual cost charged by the City of Gainesville or by the third-party administrator. This fee will be invoiced to the pawnbroker and collected by the chief of police or his designee, which may be a third-party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-12. - Disposal of articles. 
Any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop who makes a loan on pledged goods, or buys pledged goods on the condition that the seller may repurchase said goods, shall hold said goods for at least thirty (30) days or longer if directed by the police department, before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Non-pledged goods bought under this section shall be held for at least seven (7) calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-13. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker to receive goods in pawn, trade, purchase or sale from a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive in pawn, pledge or sale, goods of any character or description any item which is a new in box item unless a receipt or other proof of purchase is provided. 
(c)  (1)  No employee of the city who has any interest in a pawnshop, as defined herein, shall be assigned to work in any area or division of the city which regulates the business of pawnshops. 
(2)  No employee of the city with regulating authority may own, work in or be employed (paid or unpaid) by a pawnshop inside the city limits of the city. Regulating authority, for purposes of this section, is defined as any person involved in or assigned to the inspection of the premises, approval of the occupation tax certificate applications, annual pawnshop license applications, or annual employee permit applications; and granting or denying of such applications, or enforcement of this chapter and its provisions. 
(3)  No employee of the city with regulating authority as defined herein, may regulate a pawnshop where such is owned or operated by any person related to the employee of the city within a third degree of kinship. The term third-degree kinship shall include, for purposes of this chapter, children, grandchildren, mother, father, brothers and sisters, aunts and uncles, first cousins and in-laws. 
(4)  The definition of employees of the city does not include elected officials of the city. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  A pawnbroker selling goods other than those pledged may add new merchandise to its stock of the same type as that on which loans are made, up to a value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month, without having to pay an additional occupation tax as would otherwise be imposed according to the terms of the business taxes of the city. The pawnbroker must maintain all records, invoices, and bills of sale for such merchandise which shall be subject to inspection and review by any duly authorized law enforcement. No article(s) shall be maintained on the premises for sale on a consignment basis for any citizen, employee or pawnbroker. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 2014-04, § I, 4-15-14) 
Sec. 6-16-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-04, § II, adopted April 15, 2014, repealed § 6-16-14 in its entirety, which pertained to location of operation and derived from Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, adopted Nov. 20, 2012. 
Sec. 6-16-15. - Lost or stolen items. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating or employed by a pawnbroker to report to the police department any article or goods sold or pawned to the pawnbroker if that person shall have a reason to believe that the article or goods was stolen or lost when presented by the seller or customer. 
(b)  With respect to any item(s) which would normally have a serial number or other means of identification, any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker who becomes aware that such items have had the identification removed, defaced or destroyed, such fact shall be immediately reported to the police department. 
(c)  If it is determined that an item bought, sold, traded or pawned by a seller or customer to the pawnbroker or his employee is the subject of any reported theft, then the surrender of said item to the police department shall be done upon demand. The police officer receiving the item shall give the pawnbroker a receipt for the item. 
(d)  The police department has the authority to place property that is the subject of police investigation on "police hold". In that event, the police department shall notify the pawnshop of the need for a police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnshop to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from the police hold status or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-16. - Denial, transfer, suspension, revocation or forfeiture of annual pawnshop license. 
Denial, immediate suspension, revocation, or forfeiture of an issued license shall occur only after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the administrative hearing officer consistent with the procedures set forth in section 6-16-18, appeal procedure, and only on the following occurrences: 
(1)  Any license issued under this chapter for a pawnbroker shall be immediately revoked in the case of bankruptcy, receivership or levy of legal process upon the licensed outlet, pawnbroker or property therein. 
(2)  A license application may be denied to any applicant where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(3)  Except as provided in the transfers, section 6-16-10, transfers, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed location shall be grounds for the city council to revoke any license issued under this chapter. 
(4)  A license shall be immediately suspended or revoked by the city marshal upon learning that a licensee furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license, or omits information required in the application for a license, or fails to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter and the Code of Ordinances of the city, or engages in deceptive business practices as defined in this chapter. 
(5)  The license of any licensee does not meet the qualifications set forth in this chapter at any time such information becomes known to the city council. 
(6)  The pawnbroker has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to violating any provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, or rules or regulations of the city, or felony theft, burglary, robbery, or fraud, or has been convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one (1) or more of the above-mentioned offenses, within ten (10) years of the date of such conviction unless a longer time is ordered by a jury of competent jurisdiction. For purposes of this section, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere entered and terms completed for the above-mentioned offenses under the Georgia First Offender Act, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., shall be ignored. Provided, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender status or committed another crime and the sentencing court ruled an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-17. - Denial, suspension, revocation or forfeiture of annual employee permit. 
Denial, immediate suspension, revocation, or forfeiture of an issued permit shall occur only after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the administrative hearing officer consistent with the procedures set forth in section 6-16-18, appeal procedure, and only upon the following occurrences: 
(1)  The pawnshop employee has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to violating any provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, or rules or regulations of the city, or felony theft, burglary, robbery, or fraud, or has been convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one (1) or more of the above-mentioned offenses, within five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a jury of competent jurisdiction. For purposes of this section, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere entered and terms completed for the above-mentioned offenses under the Georgia First Offender Act, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., shall be ignored. Provided, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender status or committed another crime and the sentencing court ruled an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-18. - Annual pawnshop license and annual employee permit appeal procedure. 
Any pawnbroker whose license or any employee whose permit has been denied, suspended, revoked, or forfeited, may appeal same by filing a notice of appeal with the city marshal, in cases involving annual pawnshop licenses, or to the police department in cases involving annual employee permits, within ten (10) business days of the date on which the applicant is notified of same. The notice of appeal shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof) the grounds or basis for the appeal, the action requested, the name and address of the applicant, and the reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended, revoked or forfeited. The city marshal, in cases involving annual pawnshop licenses, or the police department in cases involving annual employee permits, shall schedule a hearing before the administrative hearing officer at a time and place not more than thirty (30) calendar days after receiving the notice of appeal. At the hearing, the applicant shall have the opportunity to present argument and evidence as to why the annual pawnshop license or annual employee permit should be approved or should not be denied, suspended, revoked or forfeited. The city marshal or police department shall also be given the opportunity to present argument and evidence as to why the license or permit should not be approved, or should be denied, suspended, revoked or forfeited. The administrative hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in the hearing, but the rules governing evidence in administrative hearings shall apply. Both parties shall be afforded the opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The administrative hearing officer shall have the power to rule on the admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath, and consider documents and other tangible evidence presented. 
The administrative hearing officer shall either approve issuance of a license, or permit or the suspension, revocation or forfeiture of the license or permit in writing and shall issue findings of fact with the reasons supporting his decision within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be mailed or delivered to the appellant. If the hearing is not held within forty-five (45) days as provided herein, or the decision is not rendered within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the hearing as provided herein, then the applicant's license or permit shall be deemed to remain in effect, or if applicable the appellant's license or permit shall not be denied, suspended, revoked or forfeited unless the parties agree to a continuance, or the administrative hearing officer requests a continuance for good cause shown. 
The appellant or the city shall have the right to appeal the decision of the administrative hearing officer to the Superior Court of Hall County, Georgia, via certiorari as provided by Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 6-16-19. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, whether or not such person or employee is the holder of a current valid license or permit issued according to the terms of this chapter. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this chapter or other rules, ordinances and regulations as may be passed by the city council for conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, shall upon conviction, have the license or permit to conduct business revoked. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in an application for any license or permit provided for in this chapter. 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by the terms of this chapter. 
(3)  Violate any criminal law of this state while acting in the course of business as a pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § I, 11-20-12) 
CHAPTER 6-17. - USE OF CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 6-17-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
(b)  As used in this chapter, the term: 
Access permit means a permit to authorize activities associated with the development, installation, and maintenance of telecommunications services infrastructure within the city's rights-of-way. 
City means the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
City council means the mayor and council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto, which is the governing authority of the city. 
City manager means the city manager of the city. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services, but shall not mean an access permit. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted an access permit. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Public necessity means the works or improvements required for the protection of the health, welfare, and safety of the public for which no other reasonable alternative exists. 
Public right-of-way shall mean the surface, the airspace above the surface and area below the surface of any street, highway, alley, avenue, boulevard, sidewalk, pedestrian/bicycle lane or trail, driveway, bridge, utility easement or any other public ways owned, dedicated by plat, occupied or used by the public and within grantor's geographical limits or boundaries established by applicable law. 
Telecommunications services means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial cable, optical fiber, or satellite or microwave transmission, of one (1) or more audio, voice or data signals. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § I, 12-27-12) 
Sec. 6-17-2. - Administration and regulations of the use of city rights-of-way. 
(a)  (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except a franchisee as provided in section 6-15-1 et seq. or one holding an access permit, to install, construct, move, or relocate pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, and other equipment, facilities or appliances upon, under, along, and over the right-of-way without the approval of the city manager or his/her designee. Such access permit shall be granted only for a specified portion of particular and the issuance of an access permit. 
(2)  Such access permit shall be granted only for a specified portion of particular right-of-way. 
(3)  Such access permits shall be granted only for a specified time period as deemed necessary by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(b)  Such approval shall be obtained from the municipality via an access permit. 
(1)  The access permit shall specify the name of the streets and/or right-of-way involved, the purpose for which the pipes, wire, cable or conduit is run, the type and length of pipe, wire, cable or conduit and any other utility infrastructure to be run, and the time allowed for performance of the work. 
(2)  The city manager or his/her designee shall review applications for conformance to the utility accommodations policy and standards of the Georgia Department of Transportation, as well as city standards and policies before issuing an access permit. An access permit holder does not grant a person exclusive right to use of the right-of-way. If the installation interferes with the safe use of the right-of-way or a street construction improvement, then the person shall remove, relocate or repair its facility to remove such interference, upon notification by the city manager or his/her designee at the permit holder's expense. 
(3)  All plan documents must be reviewed by the planning review committee. 
(4)  Once plans are approved, the community development department will issue the access permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § I, 12-27-12) 
Sec. 6-17-3. - Compensation by access permit grantee for use of the city's rights-of-way. 
(a)  The access permit grantee shall provide for due compensation to the city in an amount equal to the maximum amounts specified or allowed by applicable state or federal law, rule, or regulation. 
(b)  For purposes of computing due compensation relating to access permit obtained pursuant to the provisions of Title 10 of O.C.G.A. § 45-5-1 et seq., the term "retail end user customer" shall mean any person or owner provided with a telecommunications service or other services for its own consumption and not for resale in whole or in part. 
(c)  Any due compensation required pursuant to chapter [title] 10 of this Code shall be remitted to the city on a quarterly basis, which must be submitted within thirty (30) days of calendar quarter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § I, 12-27-12) 
Sec. 6-17-4. - Liability of holder of an access permit. 
The holder of an access permit shall at all times be responsible to the public and hold the city harmless for any property damage or personal injury caused or occasioned by the installation, maintenance or occupancy of any wire, cable or conduit and any other utility infrastructure under, upon, along, and over the public roads and highways and right-of-way as permitted in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § I, 12-27-12) 
Sec. 6-17-5. - Authority to require relocation. 
The city manager or his/her designee shall be authorized to require that any person holding an access permit shall relocate their pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, and other equipment, facilities, or appliances if such relocation is a public necessity as determined by the city manager or his/her designee. The city manager or his/her designee may also require an overhead wire, cable, fiber or other utilities system to be relocated underground if the street involved should convert from an overhead system to an underground system. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § I, 12-27-12) 
Sec. 6-17-6. - Insurance and bonding requirements. 
(a)  (1)  Any person seeking to obtain an access permit shall provide proof of general liability insurance or self-insurance with the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) to the finance department of the city. Such insurance shall cover all work done by such person upon, under, along and over the city right-of way and shall be maintained during all periods such work is being done. The city shall be named as an additional insured. Proof of the renewal certificate of the general liability insurance policy must be provided to the finance department of the city annually before the expiration date. 
(2)  The insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement: 
"This insurance policy may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse until thirty (30) days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the insurance company of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
a.  If deemed necessary, the city may require any person seeking to obtain an access permit to provide a surety bond before issuance of the permit. Such bond shall cover all work done by such person upon, under, along, and over the city rights-of-way and shall be maintained during all periods such work is being done. 
b.  In situations where the city requires the person to provide a surety bond, the person shall deposit with the city a surety bond in an amount determined by the city to be sufficient to ensure satisfactory completion of the work from a surety company authorized to do business in Georgia and fulfillment of the warranty provided for herein and in a form approved by the city attorney. Said bond shall guarantee completion to the satisfaction of the city of all work required by this chapter and by the conditions of the permit within the time limits set by the permit. Said bond shall further guarantee that all work shall be free from defects in workmanship or materials for a period of two (2) years after the date said work is completed and accepted by the city. The bond shall be conditioned to protect and save harmless the city, the city council and all agents, servants, employees and city attorney from all claims and damages for cleaning or repairing any damage by the person and will be used to reimburse the city for any cost incurred to clean or repair city rights-of-way, to re-ditch or repair existing ditch structure or for other damage caused as a result of the actions of the person after the issuance of the right-of-way access permit. 
c.  In instances where the city has required a surety bond under paragraph (a) the person may opt to secure their permit by providing an irrevocable bank letter of credit attesting to solvency to the city in the amount determined by the city to ensure satisfactory completion of work. 
d.  Such surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall protect the city against any damage caused by such person tendering the surety bond or letter of credit, or any agent, employee or contractor or said person and will be used to reimburse the city for any cost incurred to clean or repair city rights-of-way, stormwater infrastructure, other utilities, landscaping, to re-ditch or repair existing ditch structure or for other damage caused as a result of the actions of the person after the issuance of the permit. The person responsible for operations under the permit will be given notice of the damage and allowed seventy-two (72) hours to restore the street to a safe and operable condition as determined by the city manager or his/her designee. All repairs, material used and final releasing condition shall be approved and accepted by the city manager or his/her designee. 
e.  The surety bond or letter of credit may be released by the city manager or his/her designee upon notification of completion by the person or firm obtaining the permit and only upon final inspection and approval of the sites and all affected rights-of-way. The surety bond or letter of credit may be retained against future or continuing operations by the person in the city. 
f.  A surety bond shall be issued by a surety acceptable to the city, and shall contain the following endorsement: 
"This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse until thirty (30) days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
g.  The city may require verification of continuing coverage by the surety bond, as needed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § I, 12-27-12) 
Sec. 6-17-7. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § I, 12-27-12) 
CHAPTER 6-18. - FRANCHISES FOR ELECTRIC SUPPLIER OR PROVIDER[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-03, § I, adopted February 19, 2008, amended chapter 6-18 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 6-18 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2006-63, § 1, adopted December 19, 2006. 

Sec. 6-18-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the term "distribution facilities" means poles, lines, wires, cables, conductors, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections, and other apparatus installed by or on behalf of an EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider in the streets, alleys, or public places of the city for the purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for light, heat, power and other purposes for which electrical current may be or becomes useful or practicable for public or private use, within the present and future limits of the city. Distribution facilities do not include any of the following: 
(1)  Electric transmission lines with a design operating voltage of forty-six (46) kilovolts or greater (hereafter referred to as "transmission lines"); 
(2)  Poles, towers, frames, or other support structures for transmission lines (hereafter referred to as "transmission structures"); 
(3)  Transmission lines and related wires, cables, conductors, insulators, or other apparatus attached to transmission structures; 
(4)  Lines, wires, cables, or conductors installed in concrete-encased ductwork; or 
(5)  Network underground facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2008-03, § I, 2-19-08) 
Sec. 6-18-2. - Grant of franchise to Jackson Electric Membership Corporation. 
Jackson Electric Membership Corporation, which is an electric membership corporation defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1, et seq., its successors, lessees and assigns (the "EMC") or any other secondary electric supplier or provider, is hereby granted the authority, right, permission and consent, for a period of thirty-five (35) years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the present and future limits of the said city as from time to time the EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for light, heat, power and other purposes for which electric current may be or become useful or practicable for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as the EMC or any secondary electric supplier or provider may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of the EMC or other secondary electric supplier or provider, to ensure safe and efficient service. 
(Ord. No. 2008-03, § I, 2-19-08) 
Sec. 6-18-3. - Considerations, terms and conditions. 
The rights, permission and consents herein contained are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider shall pay to the city on or before the first day of March, 2008 a sum of money equal to four (4) percent of the gross sales of electric energy to all of the residential, commercial and industrial customers of such EMC or such other secondary electric supplier or provider served within the corporate limits of the city during the period beginning on the date this chapter becomes effective, through and including December 31, 2007 and on or before the first day of March of each year thereafter during the term of the franchise herein granted a sum of money equal to four (4) percent of the gross sales of electric energy to all of the residential, commercial and industrial customers of such EMC or such other secondary electric supplier or provider served within the corporate limits of the city during the preceding year. 
(2)  The amount, if any, of any tax, fee, charge or imposition of any kind required, demanded or exacted by the city on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of home appliances, shall operate to reduce to the extent of such tax, fee, charge or imposition the amount due from the percentage of gross sales as provided herein in subsection (1). 
(3)  The EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from all damages to person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires or other apparatus, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom, for which the said city would otherwise be liable. 
(4)  The EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires and other apparatus, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power by the city. Nothing contained herein, however, shall require the EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider to surrender or limit its property rights created hereby without due process of law, including adequate compensation, for any other purpose at the instance of the city or for any other purpose at the instance of any other entity, private or governmental. 
(5)  The city, the EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider benefit from economic development with the city. Accordingly, when it is necessary to relocate any of the EMC and any other secondary electric supplier or provider's facilities (whether distribution facilities, transmission lines, transmission structures, or other facilities) within the city, the city and the EMC and any other secondary electric supplier or provider shall work cooperatively to minimize costs, delays, and inconvenience to both parties while ensuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations. In addition, the city and the EMC and any other secondary electric supplier or provider shall communicate in a timely fashion to coordinate projects included in the city's five-year capital improvement plan, the city's short-term work program, or the city's annual budget in an effort to minimize relocation of the EMC and any other secondary electric supplier or provider's facilities. Such communication may include, but is not limited to: 
a.  Both parties' participation in the Georgia Utilities Coordinating Council, Inc. (or any successor organization) or a local utilities coordinating council (or any successor organization), and 
b.  Both parties' use of the National Joint Utility Notification System (or any successor to such system mutually acceptable to both parties). 
(6)  With regard to each streetscape project undertaken by or on behalf of the city, the city shall pay the EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider in advance for the EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider's estimated cost to relocate any of the EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider's facilities (whether distribution facilities, transmission lines, transmission structures, or other facilities) in connection with such project. 
(Ord. No. 2008-03, § I, 2-19-08) 
Sec. 6-18-4. - Additional conditions. 
In addition to the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter, the EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider's occupancy and use of the streets, alleys, and public places of the city as authorized in this chapter are subject to the following terms and conditions: 
In the event that the city reasonably believes that the EMC's or any other secondary electric supplier or provider's distribution facilities either (i) constitute an obstruction or interference with the use or safe operation of the city's streets, alleys, or public places, or (ii) will interfere with contemplated construction or maintenance of such streets, alleys or public places, then the EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider shall relocate, at its expense, the distribution facilities affected by such project or improvement. The EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider's obligations under this paragraph shall not affect the amounts paid or to be paid to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, the EMC or any other secondary electric supplier or provider shall not be obligated to relocate, at its expense, any of the following: 
(1)  Distribution facilities that are located on private property at the time relocation is requested or demanded; 
(2)  Distribution facilities that are relocated in connection with sidewalk improvements (unless such sidewalk improvements are related to or associated with road widenings, the creation of new turn lanes, or the addition of acceleration/deceleration lanes); 
(3)  Streetscape projects or other projects undertaken primarily for aesthetic purposes; or 
(4)  Distribution facilities that are converted from an overhead configuration or installation to an underground configuration or installation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-03, § I, 2-19-08) 
CHAPTER 6-19. - LIBERTY ENERGY (GEORGIA) CORPORATION[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as the gas franchise has been assigned from Atmos Energy Corporation, Kentucky/Mid-State Division to Liberty Energy (Georgia) Corporation pursuant to Ord. No. 2013-01, § I, adopted March 5, 2013, the title of chapter 6-19 has been amended to read as herein set out at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-19-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this agreement, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Commission refers to and is the Georgia Public Service Commission, the state utility regulatory commission having jurisdiction over the rates, services and operations of grantee within the state or other administrative or regulatory authority succeeding to the regulatory powers of the commission. 
Force majeure shall mean any and all causes beyond the control and without the fault or negligence of grantee. Such causes shall include but not be limited to acts of God, acts of the public enemy, insurrections, terrorism, riots, labor disputes, boycotts, labor and material shortages, fires, explosions, flood, breakdowns of or damage to equipment of facilities, interruptions to transportation, embargoes, acts of military authorities, or other causes of a similar nature whether or not foreseen or foreseeable which wholly or partly prevent grantee from performing one or more of its obligations hereunder. 
Franchise shall mean the rights and privileges granted by grantor to grantee under the terms and provisions of this franchise. 
Grantee shall mean Liberty Energy (Georgia) Corporation. 
Grantor shall mean Gainesville, Georgia. 
Public right-of-way shall mean the surface, the airspace above the surface and area below the surface of any street, highway, alley, avenue, boulevard, sidewalk, pedestrian/bicycle lane or trail, driveway, bridge, utility easement or any other public ways owned, dedicated by plat, occupied or used by the public and within grantor's geographical limits or boundaries established by applicable law. 
Revenues refer to and are those amounts of money which grantee receives from its customers within grantor's geographical limits or boundaries for the retail sale of gas under rates, temporary or permanent, authorized by the commission and represents amounts billed under such rates. "Revenues" shall include adjustments for refunds, net write-offs of uncollectible accounts, corrections or other regulatory adjustments. "Revenues" do not include miscellaneous service charges, including but not limited to turn ons, meter sets, non sufficient funds, late fees and interest, which are related to but are not a part of the actual retail sale of gas. 
System shall mean the system of works, pipes, pipelines, facilities, fixtures, apparatus, lines, machinery, equipment, structures, appliances, appurtenances or other infrastructure reasonably necessary for the storage, transportation, distribution or sale of natural, artificial or mixed gas to residential, commercial and industrial customers and the public generally, within the geographical limits or boundaries of grantor. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § I, 7-7-09; Ord. No. 2013-01, § I, 3-5-13) 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as the gas franchise has been assigned from Atmos Energy Corporation, Kentucky/Mid-State Division to Liberty Energy (Georgia) Corporation pursuant to Ord. No. 2013-01, § I, adopted March 5, 2013, the definition of "grantee" has been amended to read as herein set out at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 6-19-2. - Grant of franchise. 
(a)  There is hereby created and granted unto grantee a non-exclusive franchise to enter upon, acquire, construct, operate, maintain and repair in the public right-of-way the system, subject to the provisions of this agreement. The franchise granted hereunder shall be extended to territories that are annexed by grantor upon the same terms and conditions herein, subject to the approval of the commission, if any such approval is required. 
(b)  The franchise granted to grantee by grantor shall not be exclusive and grantor reserves the right to grant a similar franchise to any other person or entity at any time. In the event grantor shall grant to another person or entity during the term hereof a franchise for a gas distribution system within the geographical boundaries or limits of grantor similar to the one herein granted to grantee, it is agreed that the terms of any such franchise agreement shall be no more favorable to such new additional grantee than those terms contained herein. Additionally, it is agreed that any such new/additional grantee shall have no right to use any portion of the system without grantee's written consent. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § I, 7-7-09) 
Sec. 6-19-3. - Term, effective date, and acceptance of franchise. 
(a)  The term of this franchise shall be for an initial term of fifteen (15) years from and after its passage and approval; provided, this franchise and all rights and privileges herein provided shall be extended for one (1) successive period of five (5) years unless grantor by notice given to grantee by ordinance duly enacted and approved at least six (6) months before the end of such initial term shall declare such termination effective. 
(b)  The franchise created hereby shall become effective upon its final passage and approval by grantor, in accordance with applicable laws and regulations, and upon acceptance by grantee by written instrument within sixty (60) days of passage by the governing body, and filed with the clerk of the grantor. If grantee does not, within sixty (60) days following passage of this chapter, express in writing its objections to any terms or provisions contained therein, or reject this chapter in its entirety, grantee shall be deemed to have accepted this chapter and all of its terms and conditions. 
(c)  The terms and conditions of Ordinance 79-5 are superseded by the terms and conditions hereof. 
(d)  On the expiration of this franchise, in the event the same is not renewed, or on the termination of any renewal of said franchise, or on termination of said franchise for any other reason, the plant and facilities of grantee installed, constructed and operated hereunder may, at the option of the city become the property of the city, upon payment to grantee, its successors and/or assigns, of a fair valuation thereof, such fair valuation to be determined by agreement between the city and grantee, its successors and/or assigns. Grantor agrees that, at the time of such transfer of facilities, it shall assume grantee's contractual and regulatory obligations maintained in connection with the system. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § I, 7-7-09) 
Sec. 6-19-4. - Grantee's rights in and to public right-of-way. 
Grantee shall have the right and privilege of constructing, erecting, laying, operating, maintaining, replacing, removing and/or repairing a gas distribution system through, along, across and under the public right-of-way within the geographical boundaries or limits of grantor as it now exists or may hereafter be constructed or extended, subject to the inherent police powers conferred upon or reserved unto grantor and the provisions of this agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § I, 7-7-09) 
Sec. 6-19-5. - Operation of system; excavation of public right-of-way. 
(a)  The system shall at all times be installed, operated and maintained in good working condition as will enable grantee to furnish adequate and continuous service to all of its residential, commercial and industrial customers. The system shall be designed, installed, constructed and replaced in locations and at depths which comply with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations regarding minimum safety standards for design, construction, maintenance and operation of gas distribution systems. 
(b)  Grantee shall have the right to disturb, break, and excavate in the public right-of-way as may be reasonable and necessary to provide the service authorized hereby. 
(c)  Grantee will repair any damage caused solely by grantee to any part of the public right-of-way and will restore, as nearly as practicable, such property to substantially its condition immediately prior to such damage, within a reasonable time, and shall not unnecessarily obstruct or impede traffic upon the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Grantee shall use reasonable care in conducting its work and activities in order to prevent injury to any person and unnecessary damage to any real or personal property. 
(e)  Grantee shall, when reasonably practicable, install all pipelines underground at such depth and in such manner so as not to interfere with the existing pavement, curbs, gutters, underground wires or cables or water or sewer pipes owned or controlled by grantor. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § I, 7-7-09) 
Sec. 6-19-6. - Degradation/restoration of public right-of-way. 
(a)  In the event that grantor or any other entity acting on behalf of grantor requests or demands that grantee remove, move, modify, relocate, reconstruct or adjust any part of the system from their then-current locations within the streets, alleys, and public places of grantor in connection with a public project or improvement, then grantee shall relocate, at its expense, the system facilities affected by such project or improvement. Grantee's obligations under this paragraph shall apply without regard to whether grantee has acquired, or claims to have acquired, an easement or other property right with respect to such system facilities and shall not affect the amounts paid or to be paid to grantor under the provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, grantee shall not be obligated to relocate, at its expense, any of the following: 
(1)  System facilities that are located on private property at the time relocation is requested or demanded; 
(2)  System facilities that are relocated in connection with sidewalk improvements (unless such sidewalk improvements are related to or associated with road widening projects, the creation of new turn lanes, or the addition of acceleration/deceleration lanes); 
(3)  Streetscape projects or other projects undertaken primarily for aesthetic purposes; or 
(4)  System facilities that are converted from an overhead configuration or installation to an underground configuration or installation. 
(b)  Grantor and grantee recognize that both parties benefit from economic development within the boundaries of grantor. Accordingly, when it is necessary to relocate any of grantee's facilities within the boundaries of grantor, grantor and grantee shall work cooperatively to minimize costs, delays, and inconvenience to both parties while ensuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations. In addition, grantor and grantee shall communicate in a timely fashion to coordinate projects included in grantor's five-year capital improvement plan, grantor's short-term work program, or grantor's annual budget in an effort to minimize relocation of grantee's facilities. Such communication may include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Both parties' participation in the Georgia Utilities Coordinating Council, Inc. (or any successor organization) or local utilities coordinating council (or any successor organization), and 
(2)  Both parties' use of the national joint utility notification system (or any successor to such system mutually acceptable to both parties). 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § I, 7-7-09) 
Sec. 6-19-7. - Compensation for use of public right-of-way and consideration for franchise. 
(a)  In consideration for the granting and exercise of the rights and privileges created hereunder, and in further consideration of the grant to the franchisee of the right to make use of public right-of-way, grantee shall pay to grantor, during the entire life of the franchise, a sum equal to five (5) percent of its revenues. The fee prescribed herein shall be paid to grantor quarterly on or before the 30th day after the end of each calendar quarter after the effective date hereof, and grantee shall furnish to grantor quarterly a statement of grantee's revenues. 
(b)  Grantee may add a line-item surcharge to the monthly bills of each of its customers located within the geographical boundaries or limits of grantor, which surcharge may be designated as a franchise fee, in an amount that is sufficient to recover the portion of the franchise fee paid by grantee to grantor that is attributable to the revenue derived by grantee from such customer. 
(c)  The franchise fee provided herein, together with any charges of grantor for water, sewage and garbage services provided by grantor to grantee, and any applicable occupational license fees or sales, ad valorem or other taxes payable to grantor by grantee under applicable law, shall constitute the only amounts for which grantee shall be obligated to pay to grantor and shall be in lieu of any and all other costs, levies, assessments, fees or other amounts, of any kind whatsoever, that grantor, currently or in the future, may charge grantee or assess against grantee's property. The franchise fee herein contemplated shall be uniformly and equally applied to all natural gas utilities, of like services or any other natural gas service that competes with grantee, such that grantee will be excused from collecting and paying franchise fees and/or taxes if grantee's competitors are not also required to do so. 
(d)  Grantee as the holder of the franchise privilege hereunder is responsible for the payment of all franchise fees payable hereunder. Grantor through its authorized representative or representatives shall have the right to inspect and audit the books and records of grantee for the purpose of determining the amount of its revenues received from the sale of natural gas within grantor's boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § I, 7-7-09) 
Sec. 6-19-8. - Service to new areas. 
If during the term of this franchise the boundaries of grantor are expanded, grantor will promptly notify grantee in writing of any geographic areas annexed by grantor during the term hereof ("annexation notice"). Any such annexation notice shall be sent to grantee by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall contain the effective date of the annexation, maps showing the annexed area and such other information as grantee may reasonably require in ascertaining whether there exist any customers of grantee receiving natural gas service in said annexed area. To the extent there are such customers therein, then the revenue of grantee derived from the retail sale of natural gas to such customers shall become subject to the franchise fee provisions hereof effective on the first day of grantee's billing cycle immediately following grantee's receipt of the annexation notice. The failure by grantor to advise grantee in writing through proper annexation notice of any geographic areas which are annexed by grantor shall not relieve grantee from any obligation to remit any franchise fees to grantor which are actually billed and collected by grantee based upon revenues derived by grantee from the retail sale of natural gas to customers within the annexed area. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § I, 7-7-09) 
Sec. 6-19-9. - Breach of franchise; remedies. 
In the event of a breach by grantee of any material provision hereof, grantor may terminate the franchise and rights granted to grantee hereunder, provided, however, that such termination shall not be effective unless and until the procedures described below have been followed: 
(1)  Grantor must deliver to grantee, by certified or registered mail, a written notice signed by the mayor or other duly authorized member of grantor's governing body or the city manager, attested by grantor's secretary. Such notice must: 
a.  Fairly and fully set forth in detail each of the alleged acts or omissions of grantee that grantor contends constitutes a breach of any material provision hereof; 
b.  Designate which of the terms and conditions hereof grantor contends grantee breached; and 
c.  Specify the date, time, and place at which a public hearing will be held by the governing body of grantor for the purpose of determining whether the allegations contained in the notice did in fact occur, provided, however, that the date of such hearing may not be less than thirty (30) days after the date of such notice. 
(2)  Within thirty (30) days following the adjournment of the public hearing described in subsection (1), grantor must deliver to grantee, by certified or registered mail, a written notice signed by the mayor or other duly authorized member of grantor's governing body, attested by grantor's secretary, setting forth: 
a.  The acts and omissions of grantee described in the first notice that the governing body of grantor determines to have in fact occurred, and 
b.  The specific terms and conditions hereof listed in the first notice that the governing body of grantor determines to have in fact been breached by such acts or omissions of grantee. 
(3)  Grantor must permit grantee the opportunity to substantially correct all of the breaches hereof set forth in the written notice described in subsection (2) within sixty (60) days after grantee's receipt of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § I, 7-7-09) 
Sec. 6-19-10. - Additional requirements; miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Grantee shall at all times indemnify and hold harmless grantor from and against any and all claims for injury to any person or property by reason of grantee's or its employees' failure to exercise reasonable care in installing, maintaining and operating the system. Provided, however, that none of the provisions of this paragraph shall be applicable to the extent grantor, its officials, officers, employees, contractors, or agents, were negligent and such negligence was the sole or contributing factor in bringing about injury to any person or property. In such event, any liability shall be apportioned between grantor and grantee based upon the percentage of fault assigned to each by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Grantee may remove all or any part of its system upon the expiration or termination of the franchise and rights granted hereby. 
(c)  Grantee may transfer or assign the franchise created by this agreement to any other person, proprietorship, partnership, firm or corporation with written permission of grantor, which permission shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(d)  This agreement shall extend to, be binding upon, and inure to the benefit of, the parties hereto, and their respective successors and assigns. 
(e)  To the extent that any other ordinances of grantor or portions thereof are in conflict or inconsistent with any of the terms or provisions hereof, then the terms of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § I, 7-7-09) 
Sec. 6-19-11. - Right of customer to select natural gas supplier. 
It is further ordained that nothing contained in this chapter shall limit or restrict the right of customers within the corporate limits of grantor to select a natural gas supplier as may hereafter be provided by law. The provisions of this section are applicable only in the event grantee becomes an "electing distribution company" under the Georgia Natural Gas Competition and Deregulation Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 46-4-150, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § I, 7-7-09) 
Sec. 6-19-12. - Conflicts. 
Be it further ordained that upon such acceptance of all laws and ordinances, and all agreements between grantee and grantor with respect to grantee's occupancy and use of grantor's streets, alleys, and public places, in actual conflict herewith be and the same shall thereupon stand repealed and terminated, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § I, 7-7-09) 
Chapter 6-20. - [ATLANTA GAS AND LIGHT COMPANY FRANCHISE] 

Sec. 6-20-1. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Dedicated design day capacity means the sum of the individual capacity in Dekatherms attributable to all firm customers, as defined below, located within the city limits of the city, which as of the date hereof is 748.61. 
Firm customers means all residential and business customers who purchase gas service that ordinarily is not subject to interruption or curtailment. 
Fiscal year means the twelve-month period ending September 30 of each year. 
Franchise fee factor means fourteen dollars and fifty-nine cents ($14.59), as periodically adjusted pursuant to section 6-20-4. 
Franchise fee factor adjustment means the percent change in the cost of gas distribution service as determined by the GPSC as a result of a base rate case proceeding in respect of the company. 
GPSC means the Georgia Public Service Commission or such successor regulatory body having general regulatory authority over the company. 
(Ord. No. 2015-37, § I, 1-5-16) 
Sec. 6-20-2. - Grant of franchise. 
In exchange for making the franchise fee payments as provided in this agreement, the city grants to the company, its successors and assigns, a non-exclusive right to lay, construct, extend, maintain, renew, replace and repair gas pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances and all appurtenances and appendages under, along, through and across any streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks, rights-of-way and other public places in the city (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "city's property") and to use and occupy the city's property for the purpose of therein laying, constructing, extending, maintaining, renewing, replacing and repairing mains, pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances and all appurtenances and appendages thereto, used and useful for the manufacture, transmission, distribution and sale of gas within and through the present or future territorial limits of the city, such right, when exercised as herein provided, to commence as of November 1, 2015 and to continue for a term for fifteen (15) years from the date of approval of this chapter. In acknowledgment of the company's prior use of city streets and rights-of-way since November 2004, company also agrees to make a one-time up-front payment of eighteen thousand six hundred ninety-three dollars and fourteen cents ($18,693.14) when this agreement has been executed by both parties. 
(Ord. No. 2015-37, § I, 1-5-16) 
Sec. 6-20-3. - Term, effective date, and acceptance of franchise. 
(a)  The term of this franchise shall be for an initial term of fifteen (15) years from and after its passage and approval; provided, this franchise and all rights and privileges herein provided shall be extended for one (1) successive period of five (5) years unless city by notice given to grantee by ordinance duly enacted and approved at least six (6) months before the end of such initial term shall declare such termination effective. 
(b)  The franchise created hereby shall become effective upon its final passage and approval by city, in accordance with applicable laws and regulations, and upon acceptance by grantee by written instrument within sixty (60) days of passage by the governing body, and filed with the clerk of the city. If company does not, within sixty (60) days following company's receipt of notice from city regarding city's passage of this chapter, express in writing its objections to any terms or provisions contained therein, or reject this chapter in its entirety, company shall be deemed to have accepted this chapter and all of its terms and conditions. 
(c)  Subject to the last sentence of this subsection (c), on the expiration of this franchise, in the event the same is not renewed, or on the termination of any renewal of said franchise, or on termination of said franchise for any other reason, the plant and facilities of grantee installed, constructed and operated hereunder may, at the option of the city become the property of the city, and city receiving all legally required regulatory approvals, including, but not limited to, approval of the Georgia Public Service Commission (GPSC), upon payment to company, its successors and/or assigns, of a fair valuation thereof, such fair valuation to be determined by agreement between the city and grantee, its successors and/or assigns. City agrees that, at the time of such transfer of facilities, it shall assume grantee's contractual and regulatory obligations maintained in connection with the system. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, upon the expiration or termination of this franchise for any reason, company may, at its election, remove or retire all or part of its system upon the expiration or termination of the franchise and rights granted hereby. 
(Ord. No. 2015-37, § I, 1-5-16) 
Sec. 6-20-4. - Considerations, terms and conditions. 
(a)  Company shall be entitled to charge for gas distribution service furnished by it at such rates as are prescribed by the GPSC or other lawful regulatory body of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The franchise fees due to the city for each fiscal year during the term of this chapter shall equal the product of the franchise fee factor, as periodically adjusted pursuant to this section 6-20-4, and the dedicated design day capacity in the city as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. 
The following formula quantifies this payment: FF = FFF x DDDC 
Where: 
FF = total franchise fees due city for each Fiscal Year 
FFF = the Franchise Fee Factor 
DDDC = the Dedicated Design Day Capacity in the City as of the last day of the previous Fiscal Year 
(c)  The franchise fee factor shall be adjusted periodically by multiplying the franchise fee factor and the franchise fee factor adjustment. Such adjustment shall occur only in the fiscal year immediately following a resolution of a base rate case proceeding with the GPSC in respect of the company. 
(d)  The company as the holder of the franchise privilege hereunder is responsible for the payment of all franchise fees payable hereunder, and shall file such reports and returns as required by this ordinance. In addition, the company shall report annually to the city the names of all gas marketers for which company is transporting natural gas on the distribution system within the city. Company shall make the franchise fee payments to city on the same schedule and with such supporting documentation as company provides to other municipalities in Georgia. 
(e)  The franchise fee payments required hereunder shall be in lieu of any franchise fee, license fee, permit fee, administrative fee, occupation tax or other payment for the use of the rights-of-way by the company for the provision of gas distribution service, but shall not prohibit imposition of a license fee or an occupation tax on gas marketers. The mayor and council of the city through its authorized representative or representatives shall have the right to inspect and audit the books and records of company for the purpose of determining the amount of its revenues received from the provision of gas distribution service as set forth above within said territorial limits. The company shall comply with the city's utility right-of-way permitting process, as enacted, so long as such process does not conflict with O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92 and is not more restrictive than rules and regulations as promulgated by the Georgia Department of Transportation. The city will not charge the company any other franchise fee, occupation tax, or regulatory fee, as prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16, or any other fee prohibited by state law. Company reserves the right to reduce the annual franchise fee payable to the city for any and all fees, taxes or charges assessed by the city in contravention of this section in connection with the granting of permits to perform company's work on city's property during such fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2015-37, § I, 1-5-16) 
Sec. 6-20-5. - Rights granted. 
All rights herein granted and authorized by the city shall be subject to and governed only by this chapter; provided, however, that the city expressly reserves unto itself all of its police power to adopt general ordinances necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the general public in relation to the rights hereby granted not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-37, § I, 1-5-16) 
Sec. 6-20-6. - Operation of system; excavation of public right-of-way. 
(a)  Company, upon making an opening in the city's property, for the purpose of laying, repairing or maintaining gas facilities, shall use due care and caution to prevent injury to persons, and shall replace and restore the city's property to its former condition as nearly as practicable, and within a reasonable time, and shall not unnecessarily obstruct or impede traffic upon the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other places of the city. In the event that city or any other entity acting on behalf of city requests or demands that the company move to remodify, relocate, reconstruct or adjust any part of the system from their then current locations within the streets, alleys and public places of the city in connection with a public project or improvement, then company shall relocate, at its own expense, the system facilities affected by such project or improvement. If the number of company's active customers within the geographical boundaries of the city does not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200), company's obligations under this paragraph shall apply without regard to whether the company has acquired, or claims to have acquired, an easement or other property right with respect to such system facilities and shall not affect the amounts paid or to be paid to city under the provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, company shall not be obligated to relocate, at its expense, any of the following: 
(1)  System facilities that are located on private property at the time relocation is requested or demanded; 
(2)  System facilities that are relocated in connection with sidewalk improvements (unless such sidewalk improvements are related to or associated with road widening projects, the creation of new turn lanes, or the addition of acceleration/deceleration lanes); or 
(3)  Streetscape projects or other projects undertaken primarily for aesthetic purposes. 
(b)  When the city reasonably determines it necessary to have a gas facility removed, relocated, or adjusted, resulting from a city street improvement project as set forth above, the city shall give to the company at least sixty (60) days written notice directing it to begin the physical removal, or relocation, or adjustment of such gas facility obstruction or interference. Such notice to company shall include the submission of a letter and a set of preliminary plans for the proposed improvement project. 
(Ord. No. 2015-37, § I, 1-5-16) 
Sec. 6-20-7. - Hold harmless by company. 
Company shall save and keep harmless the city from any and all liability by reason of damage or injury to any person or persons whomsoever, on account of negligence of the company in the installation, maintenance and repair of its mains and pipe lines located in the city's property, provided the company shall have been notified in writing of any claim against the city on account thereof and shall have been given ample opportunity to defend the same. 
(Ord. No. 2015-37, § I, 1-5-16) 
Sec. 6-20-8. - Insurance. 
Throughout the term of this franchise agreement, the company shall, at its own cost and expense, maintain comprehensive general liability insurance and provide the city certificates of insurance designating the city as additional insured and demonstrating that the company has obtained the insurance required in this section. Such policy or policies shall be in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any one person, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any two (2) or more persons resulting from one (1) occurrence, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one (1) accident. Such policy or policies shall be non-cancelable except upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the city. The company shall provide workers' compensation coverage in accordance with applicable law. The company shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any workers' compensation claims to which the company may become subject during the term of this franchise agreement. Alternatively, and in lieu of the foregoing insurance requirements, the company may elect to self-insure or insure through its captive insurance carrier, provided that company or its parent company have sufficient net worth to do so, as determined by customary practice in the natural gas utility industry. 
(Ord. No. 2015-37, § I, 1-5-16) 
Sec. 6-20-9. - Granting of additional franchise. 
If city grants a franchise to any other person, firm or corporation, for the distribution and sale of gas in the certificated territory then served by company, or if the city elects to establish a municipal system for the distribution and selling of gas, any proposed facilities within the certificated area of company, city shall obtain necessary approvals as required by law or applicable regulations. City shall notify, or shall require any person, firm or corporation franchised for distribution and sale of gas to notify the GPSC and company of their intention to install facilities within the company's certificated service territory at least thirty (30) days prior to such installation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-37, § I, 1-5-16) 
Sec. 6-20-10. - Notices. 
Any and all notices required to be given under this agreement shall be in writing and shall be delivered by U.S. Mail, return receipt requested, commercial overnight courier or hand delivery and shall be deemed delivered when received or rejected for receipt by the recipient. 
(Ord. No. 2015-37, § I, 1-5-16) 
Title 8 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1; municipal utilities, Tit. 5; licenses, permits and business regulations, Tit. 6; schedule of fees, Tit. 10. 
Related law reference— Special authorities and commissions, § 3.1.1 et seq. 
State Constitution reference— Local planning and zoning, Art. 9, § 2, para. 4. 
State Law reference— Acts not repealed by official Code of Georgia Annotated, OCGA Section 1-1-10; state plans for soil conservation, OCGA § 2-6-5; state aid for utilities in planned communities, OCGA § 12-5-41; urban redevelopment, OCGA § 36-61-1 et seq.; condominiums, OCGA § 44-3-114; time-share interval form of ownership, OCGA § 44-3-164; office of planning and budget to provide for state development program, OCGA § 45-12-178; department of community affairs, OCGA § 50-8-1 et seq. 

CHAPTER 8-3. - PROPERTY NUMBERING; STREET NAMES 

Sec. 8-3-1. - Established. 
There is hereby established a uniform system for numbering property and buildings along all streets, avenues and other public ways within the city. 
(Code 1958, § 19-34) 
Sec. 8-3-2. - Base lines defined; base line map established. 
The base lines for the uniform system for numbering property and buildings within the city shall be defined as follows and shall be described on a map entitled Property Numbering Base Line Map of the City of Gainesville: 
(1)  North/south base line. The base line known as the north-and-south base line, which shall divide the city into a northern section and southern section, shall be defined as follows: 
Beginning at a point where land lots #5, #6, #171 and #172 intersect; thence along the boundary line between land lots 171 and 170 to a point where land lots 171, 170, 164 and 165 intersect; thence along the boundary line between land lots 171 and 164 to a point where it intersects with Washington Avenue; thence along Washington Avenue to its intersection with State Highway 53; thence in an easterly direction along State Highway 53 to Washington Street; thence along Washington Street to its intersection with Prior Street; thence in a southerly direction on Prior Street to its intersection with Spring Street; thence in an easterly direction along Spring Street to its intersection with U.S. Highway 23; thence in an easterly direction along U.S. Highway 23 to its point of intersection with that part of East Main Street in New Holland which is not a part of U.S. Highway 23. 
(2)  North and south streets. All streets north of the north-and-south base line and running generally in a northerly-southerly direction shall be known as north streets. And likewise all streets south of the north-and-south base line running generally in a northerly-southerly direction shall be known as south streets. 
(3)  East/west base line. The base line known as the east-and-west base line, which shall divide the city into an eastern section and a western section, shall be defined as follows: 
Beginning at a point where South Bradford Street projected would intersect with the Gainesville Militia District boundary line; thence in a northerly direction along the line of South Bradford Street projected to the beginning of South Bradford Street; thence in a northerly direction along South Bradford Street to North Bradford Street; thence in a northerly direction along North Bradford Street to intersection with Academy Street; thence in an easterly direction along Academy Street to its intersection with North Green Street; thence in a northerly direction along North Green Street to its intersection with Thompson Bridge Road; thence in a northerly direction along Thompson Bridge Road to its intersection with Fairway Drive. 
(4)  East and west streets. Streets east of the east-and-west base line and running in a generally easterly-westerly direction shall be known as west streets. 
(Code 1958, § 19-35) 
Sec. 8-3-3. - Quadrants. 
(a)  Designated. The area north of the north-and-south base line and east of the east-and-west base line shall be designated as northeast. The area north of the north-and-south base line and west of the east-and-west base line shall be designated as northwest. The area south of the north-and-south base line and east of the east-and-west base line shall be known as southeast. The area south of the north-and-south base line and west of the east-and-west base line shall be known as southwest. 
(b)  Name of streets, avenues, etc., to carry quadrant designation. Any streets, avenues and other public ways shall hereafter include as a part of its name a designation indicating the quadrant in which it is located. 
(c)  Building number and address to carry quadrant designation. All buildings in the city shall carry a number and address which shall indicate the quadrant in which they are located. 
(Code 1958, § 19-36) 
Sec. 8-3-4. - Diagonal streets. 
All buildings on diagonal streets shall be numbered the same as buildings on north-south streets if the diagonal is in a north-south direction and shall be numbered the same as buildings on east-west streets if the diagonal is in an east-west direction. 
(Code 1958, § 19-37) 
Sec. 8-3-5. - Numbering. 
(a)  Property; odd and even numbers. The numbering of property on each street shall begin at the appropriate base line, and such numbers shall change from one hundred (100) to the next higher hundred on the basis of grid lines shown on the base line map. All numbers shall be assigned on the basis of one (1) number for each 13.2 feet of property frontage along a street. All property on the right hand side of a street as one leaves a base line and proceeds outward shall bear even numbers, and likewise all buildings on the left hand side of the street as one leaves a base line and proceeds outward shall bear odd numbers. 
(b)  Building numbers. A building shall be assigned the number assigned to the 13.2-foot interval of street frontage in which its main entrance lies. If the main entrance of the building is exactly upon the line which divides a 13.2-foot interval from another 13.2-foot interval, the number assigned to either interval may be assigned to the building entrance. 
(c)  Multiple entrances. Where a building has a number of entrances, each serving a separate occupant, then each entrance shall be assigned a separate number provided that there shall be enough numbers assigned to the lot on which the building is located to provide a number for each entrance. In the event there are not sufficient numbers assigned to the lot to serve each separate entrance, then each separate entrance shall carry the principal number plus a suitable letter suffix. 
(d)  Multifamily dwellings. A multifamily dwelling having only one (1) main entrance shall be assigned only one (1) number, and separate apartments in the building will carry a letter designation such as A, B, C, in addition to the number assigned to the main entrance of the building. 
(e)  Apartment projects with more than one building. In the case of an apartment project containing two (2) or more apartment buildings, one (1) of the numbers assigned to the property on which it is located shall be assigned to the total project. In addition, each building shall be numbered beginning with the number 1. Finally, each apartment in a particular building shall be assigned a letter designation in addition to the number of the building in which it is located. 
(f)  Extended streets. All buildings facing streets not extended through to the base line shall be assigned the same relative number as if the street had extended to the base line. 
(Code 1958, § 19-38) 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 7-1. 
Sec. 8-3-6. - Responsibility for placement of numbers on buildings. 
After a house or building shall be assigned its respective number or numbers, the owner, occupant or agent shall place or cause to be placed upon each house or building controlled by him the number or numbers assigned to such house or building under the system established by this article. 
(Code 1958, § 19-39) 
Sec. 8-3-7. - Effective date of numbers. 
All numbers assigned to houses and buildings shall be placed on such houses and buildings within twenty (20) days after such numbers are assigned. 
(Code 1958, § 19-40) 
Sec. 8-3-8. - Cost of numbers responsibility of property owners. 
The cost of numbers shall be borne by the property owner. The numbers used shall be not less than three (3) inches in height and shall be made of durable and clearly visible material. 
(Code 1958, § 19-41) 
Sec. 8-3-9. - Location of numbers. 
The numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above on or at the side of the proper door of each building or house so that the number can be seen plainly from the street line. Whenever any building or house is situated more than fifty (50) feet from the street line such number shall be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to such building or house, or upon a gate post, fencepost, tree or other appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the sidewalk. 
(Code 1958, § 19-42) 
Sec. 8-3-10. - Plat book of property numbers; established; open to public. 
For the purpose of facilitating a correct numbering system, a plat book of all streets, avenues and public ways, showing the proper numbers of all property fronting upon all streets, avenues or public ways shall be prepared and shall be on file in the office of the planning director. These plats shall be open to inspection of all persons during office hours. Duplicate copies of such plats shall be furnished to the director of public works, the chief building inspector and such other departments or department directors as shall have need for such plats. Duplicate copies of such plats shall also be furnished to the United States Postal Service. 
(Code 1958, § 19-43) 
Sec. 8-3-11. - Administration by planning director. 
It shall be the duty of the planning director to inform any party applying therefor of the number or numbers belonging to or embraced within the limits of any lot or property as provided by this article. In the case of conflict as to the proper number to be assigned to any building, the planning director shall determine the number of such building. 
(Code 1958, § 19-44) 
Sec. 8-3-12. - New buildings; numbers required, prerequisite to issuance of building permit and final approval of structure. 
Whenever any building shall be erected or located in the city, the owner shall procure the correct number or numbers as designated by the chief building inspector for the property and shall immediately fasten the number or numbers so assigned upon such building as provided by this article. A building permit shall not be issued for any house, building or structure until the owner has procured from the planning director the official number of the premises. Final approval of any structure erected, repaired or altered or modified shall be withheld by the chief building inspector until permanent and proper numbers have been affixed to such structure. 
(Code 1958, § 19-45) 
Sec. 8-3-13. - Street names; planning commission to examine, make recommendations. 
For the purpose of clarifying and systematizing the street names in the city, the planning commission shall examine all street names within the city, and when it shall find duplication of street names or similarity of street names which might cause confusion, or when it shall find street names that will cause difficulty in the assigning of numbers, it shall then recommend appropriate name changes to the city council. 
(Code 1958, § 19-46) 
Sec. 8-3-14. - New subdivisions—Plats to show street names; certification by planning commission. 
Every subdivision plat submitted to the planning commission shall show the proposed names of all streets, and the planning commission shall certify that these proposed names do not conflict with existing street names before such street names are officially adopted. 
(Code 1958, § 19-47) 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, Ch. 8-2. 
Sec. 8-3-15. - Same—Numbering. 
The various lots shown on plats of new subdivisions shall be numbered in accordance with the uniform numbering system established by this article. The numbers assigned to the various lots shall be approved by the planning director. 
(Code 1958, § 19-48) 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, Ch. 8-2. 
Title 10 - SCHEDULE OF FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General government, Tit. 1; fiscal affairs, Tit. 2; public works and health, Tit. 4; municipal utilities, Tit. 5; licenses, permits and business regulations, Tit. 6; planning, Tit. 8; personnel, Ch. 1-6; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-4; animals, Ch. 4-1; cemeteries, Ch. 4-2; solid waste, Ch. 4-3; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 4-4; advertising, Ch. 6-3; theaters, carnivals and amusements, Ch. 6-7; pet dealers, kennel or stable operators and animal shelters, § 4-1-101 et seq. 

CHAPTER 10-1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1-1. - Price of cemetery lots, burial fees. 
(a)  The price of the grave spaces in Alta Vista Cemetery under chapter 4-2 shall be determined and fixed by the governing body of the city. All cemetery sales and cemetery-related fees are to be paid to cemetery staff or other authorized city employee and shall be regulated by the governing body of the city. 
(b)  The price of cemetery grave spaces and burial permits shall be as follows: 
_____ 
(1)  Cemetery grave space fees: 
a.  All grave spaces located in sections developed before 2004, city residents per space ..... $1,000.00 
b.  All grave spaces located in sections developed before 2004, non-city residents per space ..... 1,200.00 
c.  All grave spaces located in sections developed after 2004, city residents per space ..... 1,200.00 
d.  All grave spaces located in sections developed after 2004, non-city residents per space ..... 1,500.00 
(2)  Burial permit fees: The governing body of the city may, from time to time, set burial permit fees as they deem necessary. 
(3)  Mausoleum prices: 
a.  Crypt prices: 

 
_____ 
b.  A cremation may be added as a second interment to a crypt at an additional fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
c.  Niche prices: 

 
d.  The price for opening and closing fees associated with the final disposition of remains: 
1.  Grave space opening and closing fee: 
i.  Eight hundred dollars ($800.00) during normal business hours, 
ii.  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on weekends and after normal operating hours. 
2.  Burial of cremains: One hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
3.  Niche interment: 
i.  One hundred dollars ($100.00) during normal business hours, 
ii.  One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) on weekends and after normal operating hours. 
4.  Crypt interment: 
i.  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) during normal business hours, 
ii.  Three hundred dollars ($300.00) on weekends and after normal operating hours. 
(Code 1958, § 7-10; Ord. No. 89-78, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 93-30, § I, 6-15-93; Ord. No. 2002-58, § I, 10-28-02; Ord. No. 2004-66, § I, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 2005-19, § I, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 2014-30, §§ I—VI, 1-6-15) 
Sec. 10-1-2. - Hotel-motel excise tax. 
As provided in Chapter 2-1, there is hereby set and levied on each occupant of a guest room of any hotel located within the corporate limits of the city a tax in the amount of six (6) percent of the rent of such occupancy. 
(Code 1958, § 21-4; Ord. No. 2000-74, §§ I, II, 11-7-00) 
Sec. 10-1-3. - Offenses against public health. 
The fee for work done by the city under section 3-5-12 shall be the actual cost thereof as determined by the city manager, plus a fee of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Code 1958, § 14-17.6) 
Sec. 10-1-4. - Solid waste collection fee schedule. 
(a)  For solid waste services defined in chapter 4-3 of this Code, the fee shall be thirty-two dollars and ten cents ($32.10) per month. 
(b)  Fee for the collection and disposal of up to an additional ninety-six (96) gallons of garbage per collection shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month. 
(c)  An excessive disposal fee for the special pick-up of garbage exceeding ninety-six (96) gallons shall be determined by the public works director or his designee, but shall not be less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(d)  For any load of refuse or yard trimmings which is in excess of the normal service provided to the residential premises and requires a special pick-up, the public works director shall be authorized to charge the customer a special service fee according to the fee schedule established and kept on file at the public works department. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Code 1958, §§ 11-6, 11-11, 11-12, 11-14; Ord. No. 91-50, § 1, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 92-49, §§ 1—4, 11-17-92; Ord. No. 2000-70, § I, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 2001-43, § I, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2002-23, § I, 6-4-02; Ord. No. 2003-37, § I, 6-17-03; Ord. No. 2004-49, § I, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 2008-20, § I, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 2009-23, § I, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 2010-34, § I, 9-21-10) 
Sec. 10-1-5. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(a)  Permit. The fee paid to the City of Gainesville under Chapter 4-6 for a soil erosion permit shall be forty dollars ($40.00) for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. In addition, a fee of forty dollars ($40.00) for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area shall be submitted by the permit applicant directly to the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Bond. The bond which the public works department may require of an applicant prior to issuance of a soil erosion permit shall be an amount up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre of the proposed land-disturbing activity. 
(Code 1958, § 18A-4; Ord. No. 90-75, § 1, 12-27-90; Ord. No. 2004-51, § I, 6-15-04) 
Sec. 10-1-6. - Zoning and land disturbing activity fees. 
(a)  The fee for a heliport permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  Application to the planning and appeals board and/or city council: 
(1)  Annexations, amendments to the zoning ordinance or maps for planning review and/or city council review shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(2)  Special uses permitted subject to the approval of city council after review and recommendation by the planning and appeals board shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00). 
(3)  Variances from terms of this chapter shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00); or six hundred dollars ($600.00) if the work has already begun. 
(4)  Road abandonments or renaming shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(5)  Amendments to the unified land development code or the comprehensive plan shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00). 
(6)  Interpretation of chapter questions shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(c)  Applications for land disturbing permits: 
(1)  Civil plan submittal shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) per disturbed acre. 
(2)  Subdivision review shall be as follows: 

 
(3)  Tree removal and minor land disturbance shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(4)  Resubmittal of plans for review shall be half of the original submittal fee. 
(d)  Other fees: 
(1)  Plat review shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(2)  Zoning certification letters shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Code 1958, §§ 26-41, 26-64; Ord. No. 2004-62, §§ I—XVII, 8-17-04; Ord. No. 2016-23, § I, 10-4-16) 
Sec. 10-1-7. - Technology fee. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by state law, any person who is charged with an offense in the Municipal Court of the City of Gainesville, for a violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the City of Gainesville or the laws of the State of Georgia shall be subject to an additional cost in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per violation to be used for the improvement or enhancement of information technology for the following departments and divisions of the city: the police department, the municipal court, the code enforcement division, and the city marshal's office. 
Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be accounted for by the city and shall be used only for the purposes authorized in this section at the direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2010-39, § I, 10-5-10) 
Sec. 10-1-8. - Court processing fee. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by state law, any person who is charged with an offense in the Municipal Court of the City of Gainesville for a violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the City of Gainesville or the laws of the State of Georgia shall be subject to an additional cost in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) per violation to be used for the processing of citations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, § I, 6-21-11) 
Sec. 10-1-9. - Municipal court fees. 
The amounts imposed for each copy of records held by Gainesville Municipal Court shall be as follows: 
Disposition ..... $1.00 
Citation ..... 1.00 
(Ord. No. 2013-26, § I, 12-27-13) 
Sec. 10-1-10. - Certification of records. 
The city may provide official certification of copies if the certification is at the behest of the person requesting records and for the purpose of legally verifying the public record. Certification of records is an additional fee, which shall be as follows: 
Certification of first record ..... $1.00 
Certification of each record thereafter ..... 0.50 
(Ord. No. 2013-26, § II, 12-27-13) 
Secs. 10-1-11—10-1-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 10-1-16. - Classification of users. 
For the purpose of establishing sewer service charges under chapter 5-1, users are classified as follows effective July 1, 2005: 
(1)  Residential; 
(2)  Multi-family; 
(3)  Commercial; 
(4)  General industry. 
(Code 1958, § 18-55; Ord. No. 92-50, § 1, 11-17-92; Ord. No. 2005-36, § I, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 10-1-17. - Sanitary sewer service fees charged. 
(a)  Monthly account servicing fees and monthly per unit (one hundred (100) cubic feet) sanitary sewer service fees: 
(1)  Account servicing fees. All classes of sanitary sewer users inside or outside the corporate limits of the city who purchase water from the city shall pay no monthly account servicing fee on the sanitary sewer portion of the utility bill when billed with the water service. 
(2)  All classes of sanitary sewer users whether located inside or outside the corporate limits of the city whose sewer flow is metered and billed separately from their water meters shall pay a monthly account servicing fee in accordance with fees established in subsection 10-1-41(b). 
(3)  Monthly per unit (one hundred (100) cubic feet) sanitary sewer service fees for all classes of users by district: 

 
Effective January 1, 2017 Residential classification users will be capped at twelve (12) ccfs per month with a return factor of ninety-three (93) percent. 
(b)  The director shall notify all classes of users biennially of the actual cost of operation and maintenance of the system. 
(c)  In addition to the above, all classes of users except residential and multifamily shall be billed, as a surcharge, a fee based upon their pollutant load in excess of that found in the maximum residential waste effluent. The director, in accordance with the standard practice for sample taking and sample analysis, shall compute monthly for each class of user, the amount of waste pollutants in mg/l/ccf (milligrams per liter per hundred cubic feet) introduced in the sewer system in excess of the residential criteria hereafter established. Computation shall be based on sample(s) taken in a water service period. In the event there are no samples taken in a service period, the most recent sample shall be used for the monthly computation for up to four (4) consecutive monthly computations. 
(d)  In addition to surcharges, all classes of users except residential and multifamily shall be billed, as a penalty, a fee based upon their pollutant load of oil and grease in excess of that found in the maximum residential waste effluent. The director in accordance with the standard practice for sample taking and sample analysis, shall compute monthly for each class of user, the amount of waste pollutants in mg/l/ccf (milligrams per liter per hundred cubic feet) introduced in the sewer system in excess of residential criteria hereafter established. Computation shall be based on sample(s) taken in a water service period. In the event there are no samples taken in a service period, the most recent sample shall be used for the monthly computation for up to four (4) consecutive monthly computations. 
(e)  Waste effluent contaminants to be analyzed and measured for surcharge and penalty are: 
(1)  Biochemical oxygen demand; 
(2)  Suspended solids; 
(3)  Oil and grease; 
(4)  Phosphorus; 
(5)  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen. 
(f)  The criteria hereby established for maximum or upper limit residential waste is: 
(1)  Biochemical oxygen demand, 250 mg/l; 
(2)  Suspended solids, 250 mg/l; 
(3)  Oil and grease, 100 mg/l; 
(4)  Phosphorus, 7 mg/l; 
(5)  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen, 40 mg/l. 
(g)  The surcharge to industrial and commercial users for excess pollutants over the maximum residential criteria each month will be computed as follows: 
(1)  Biochemical oxygen demand. Nineteen-hundredths of a cent ($0.0019) per milligram per liter (mg/l) of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of residential criteria up to five hundred (500) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(2)  Total suspended solids. Fourteen-hundredths of a cent ($0.0014) per milligram per liter (mg/l) of total suspended solids (TSS) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of residential criteria up to five hundred (500) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(3)  Phosphorus. Two and two-tenths cents ($0.022) per milligram per liter (mg/1) of total phosphorus (P) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of residential criteria up to eleven (11) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(4)  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen. Five-tenths of a cent ($0.005) per milligram per liter (mg/l) of total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of residential criteria up to seventy-five (75) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(h)  The penalty to industrial and commercial users for excess pollutants over the maximum residential criteria each month will be computed as follows: 
(1)  Fats, oil, and grease. Five-tenths of a cent ($0.005) per milligram per liter (mg/1) of total fat, oil and grease (FOG) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of residential criteria up to one hundred twenty-five (125) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(i)  A minimum fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) shall be charged for monitoring a minor stream spill of zero (0) to ten thousand (10,000) gallons. A minimum fee of four thousand, five hundred dollars ($4,500.00) shall be charged for monitoring a large spill greater than ten thousand (10,000) gallons. 
(j)  Fees for testing private water samples for contaminates are as follows: 
BOD 5 ..... $30.00 
COD ..... 20.00 
Coliform, fecal ..... 45.00 
Coliform, total ..... 45.00 
Nitrogen, ammonia ..... 20.00 
Nitrogen, nitrate ..... 20.00 
Nitrogen, total Kjeldahl ..... 40.00 
Oil and grease ..... 35.00 
pH ..... 5.00 
Orthophosphate, total ..... 30.00 
Phosphorus, total ..... 30.00 
Solids, total ..... 10.00 
Solids, total suspended ..... 11.00 
(Code 1958, § 18-56; Ord. No. 88-13, § 1, 4-5-88; Ord. No. 88-33, § 1, 6-21-88; Ord. No. 89-81, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 92-07, § 1, 2-18-92; Ord. No. 92-50, §§ 2—4, 11-17-92; Ord. No. 94-34, § I, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 94-38, § I, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 97-04, § I, 2-4-97; Ord. No. 97-44, § I, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 98-64, § I, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 99-93, § I, 1-4-00; Ord. No. 2000-58, § I, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 00-96, § I, 12-21-00; Ord. No. 2001-14, § I, 3-6-01; Ord. No. 2001-35, § I, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2001-71, §§ I, II, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2002-29, § I, 6-18-02; Ord. No. 2002-54, § I, 10-8-02; Ord. No. 2003-38, § I, 6-17-03; Ord. No. 2003-39, § I, 6-17-03; Ord. No. 2004-52, § I, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 2004-53, § I, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 2005-36, § I, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 2006-25, § I, 7-5-06; Ord. No. 2006-61, § I, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 2006-62, §§ I, II, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 2007-27, § I, 7-3-07; Ord. No. 2008-44, § I, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 2009-30, § I, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 2009-44, § I, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 2010-20, § I, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 2011-04, § I, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 2011-06, §§ I, II, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2011-11, § I, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § I, 7-17-12; Ord. No. 2013-08, § I, 6-18-13; Ord. No. 2014-21, § I, 9-16-14, eff. 1-1-15; Ord. No. 2015-22, § I, 8-4-15, eff. 1-1-16; Ord. No. 2016-06, § I, 6-21-16, eff. 1-1-17) 
Sec. 10-1-18. - Calculation of charges. 
(a)  The monthly sewer charge for residential users who are located both inside and outside the city limits shall be calculated based on a percentage of the usage calculated from the monthly water meter readings. The percentage used for calculation of the monthly bill shall be eighty-five (85) percent of the metered water usage. The percentage calculation shall apply to all residential users except for multiple use served by a single or master meter on which the sewer charge shall be calculated on each month's entire water usage. 
(b)  The sewer charge for all other classes of users who are located both inside and outside the city limits of the city and who are served by the sewers shall be calculated on each month's water usage as shown by the water meter. In the event that any user receives a water supply from sources other than the city's system, such additional sources shall be metered, and the sewer charge shall be based upon the monthly total of all metered water supplied. 
(c)  In the event a portion of the water supply can be shown, to the satisfaction of the director, not to be discharged into the city's sewerage system, credit may be allowed by the city for that portion not discharged. 
(Code 1958, § 18-57; Ord. No. 92-50, § 5, 11-17-92; Ord. No. 2003-41, § I, 7-1-03) 
Sec. 10-1-19. - Excess contaminated waste. 
Wastewater acceptable for treatment without violating the provisions of this chapter is sewage with: 
(1)  Generally. 
a.  BOD of five hundred (500) mg per liter or less. 
b.  Total suspended solids of five hundred (500) mg per liter or less 
c.  Total phosphorus of eleven (11) mg per liter or less. 
d.  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) of seventy-five (75) mg per liter or less. 
e.  Fats, oil and grease of one hundred twenty-five (125) mg per liter or less. 
f.  Any wastewater accepted with effluent contaminants in excess of the limits of subsections (1)a.—d. of this section shall be charged a surcharge to be computed as follows: 
1.  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). 
i.  Five-tenths of a cent ($0.005) per milligram per liter (mg/1) of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of five hundred (500) milligrams per liter (mg/l) up to seven hundred (700) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
ii.  Fifty-seven-hundredths of a cent ($0.0057) per milligram per liter (mg/l) of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of seven hundred (700) milligrams per liter (mg/l) to nine hundred (900) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
iii.  One and twelve-hundredths of a cent ($0.0112) per milligram per liter (mg/l) of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of nine hundred (900) milligrams per liter (mg/l) 
2.  Suspended solids. 
i.  Thirty-five-hundredths of a cent ($0.0035) per milligram per liter (mg/l) of total suspended solids (TSS) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet, (CCF) in excess of five hundred (500) milligrams per liter up to seven hundred (700) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
ii.  Thirty-nine-hundredths of a cent ($0.0039) per milligram per liter (mg/l) of total suspended solids (TSS) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of seven hundred (700) milligrams per liter (mg/l) up to nine hundred (900) milligrams per liter (mg/1). 
iii.  Seventy-two-hundredths of a cent ($0.0072) per milligram per liter (mg/1) of total suspended solids (TSS) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of nine hundred (900) milligrams per liter (mg/1). 
3.  Phosphorus. 
i.  Four and nine-tenths ($0.049) per milligram per liter (mg/l) of total phosphorus (P) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of eleven (11) milligrams per liter (mg/l) up to fifteen (15) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
ii.  Five and eight-tenths cents ($0.058) per milligrams per liter (mg/l) of total phosphorus (P) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of fifteen (15) milligrams per liter (mg/l) up to twenty (20) milligrams per liter (mg/1). 
iii.  Eleven and two-tenths cents ($0.112) per milligram per liter (mg/1) of total phosphorus (P) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of twenty (20) milligrams per liter (mg/1). 
4.  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen. 
i.  One and three-tenths of a cent ($0.013) per milligram per liter (mg/1) of total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of seventy-five (75) milligrams per liter (mg/1) up to one hundred (100) milligrams per liter (mg/1). 
ii.  One and six-tenths cent ($0.016) per milligram per liter (mg/1) of total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of one hundred (100) milligrams per liter (mg/l) up to one hundred thirty-five (135) milligrams per liter (mg/1). 
iii.  Three and two-tenths cent ($0.032) per milligram per liter (mg/1) of total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of one hundred thirty-five (135) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
g.  Any wastewater accepted with effluent contaminants in excess of the limits of subsections (1)e. of this section shall be charged a surcharge to be computed as follows: 
1.  Fats, oil and grease. 
i.  One and two-tenths of a cent ($0.012) per milligram per liter (mg/l) of total fats, oil and grease (FOG) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of one hundred twenty-five (125) milligrams per liter (mg/1) up to one hundred fifty (150) milligrams per liter (mg/1). 
ii.  One and four-tenths cent ($0.014) per milligram per liter (mg/1) of total fats, oil and grease (FOG) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of one hundred fifty (150) milligrams per liter (mg/l) up to one hundred seventy-five (175) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
iii.  Two and eight-tenths cent ($0.028) per milligram per liter (mg/1) of total fats, oil and grease (FOG) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (CCF) in excess of one hundred seventy-five (175) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
Provided, however, that payment of the surcharge as provided for herein shall not excuse the violator from any other penalty, termination of service or legal or equitable relief pursued by the city to terminate such violation. 
(Code 1958, § 18-58; Ord. No. 92-07, § 2, 2-18-92; Ord. No. 99-22, § I, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 2001-71, § III, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2011-06, § III, 6-7-11) 
Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 92-07, adopted Feb. 18, 1992, provided that section 10-1-19(1)f.4.a, b. and c. be effective with the first billing rendered in January, 1993. 
Sec. 10-1-20. - Tapping and other fees. 
The following fees are hereby established for tapping into the sewer system of the city: 
(1)  For a six-inch service line serving a single dwelling or commercial unit, connecting an outfall, truck or collector sewer, the fee shall be nine hundred dollars ($900.00) for both inside city and outside city customers. 
(2)  In all cases the city shall make the final determination as to the size of the service line to be provided. 
(3)  Service lines larger than six (6) inches may be installed for a fee based on the city's actual cost for each additional inch of diameter. 
(Code 1958, § 18-59; Ord. No. 92-60, § 6, 11-17-92; Ord. No. 2002-26, § I, 6-18-02; Ord. No. 2009-30, § II, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 2014-21, § II, 9-16-14, eff. 1-1-15) 
Note— Section XIII of Ord. No. 2009-30 states that subsection (1) shall become effective January 1, 2010. 
Sec. 10-1-21. - Sanitary sewer system connection fee. 
(a)  Users subject to fee. Users of the sewer system shall pay a sewer connection fee before new or additional service will be made available. Applications for new or additional sewer service must include the street address for a specific lot or lots where the service is to be provided. Applications for sewer service shall expire unless all fees have been paid to the finance department no later than ten (10) calendar days after the date of application issuance by the utilities department. Sewer service approved for a specific lot shall not be transferred to any other lot or property. Existing users shall be subject to the fee when their existing water service tap is inadequate to deliver the volume of water desired and requires an increase in the water service tap and meter size. New users will be subject to the fee at the time new service is requested. All users shall be subject to the sewer connection fee regardless of location (inside or outside city corporate limits) of the service tap. 
(b)  Determination of connection fee. 
(1)  The sanitary sewer system connection fee shall be imposed according to the following schedule: 

 
The sanitary sewer system connection fee shall be paid at the time of application for sanitary sewer service and in addition to the meter and sanitary sewer system tapping fees. 
(2)  The minimum connection fee for any new sanitary sewer service, regardless of the meter size, shall be three thousand five hundred seventy dollars ($3,570.00). 
(c)  Changing tap and meter size. 
(1)  After the original sewer connection fee has been paid and installation made, any customer requesting a change in water tap size resulting in a smaller water meter shall make proper application at the water and sewer department for this change. Such change shall be made without cost to the customer. No credit shall be given for sewer connection fees or water meter costs paid on the existing larger water meter. The water meter removed shall remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the city. 
(2)  After the original sewer connection fee has been paid and installation made, any customer requesting a change in water tap size resulting in a larger water meter shall make proper application at the water and sewer department for this change. The customer shall pay a sewer connection fee equal to the difference between the current applicable sewer connection fee for the existing water meter size and the current applicable sewer connection fee for the requested water meter size. The water meter removed shall remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the city. 
(d)  Payment of fee. 
(1)  Existing users shall pay the sewer connection fee at the time the application is made with the water and sewer department to increase the size of the existing water service tap on meter. 
(2)  New users shall pay the sewer connection fee at the time the application is made with the water and sewer department for sewer service. 
(e)  Revenue restrictions. 
(1)  All revenues received from each sewer system connection fee service area shall be accounted for separately and distinctly from any other system revenues. Available sewer system connection fee balances shall be invested and all interest earned on these investments shall be accounted for as part of the sewer system connection fee revenues for each service area. The accounting system shall be established so that sewer system connection fee collections from each service area, interest earned, and expenses can be clearly tracked on a monthly basis and so that connection fees are properly deposited, accounted for and expended in accordance with section 10-1-21(e). 
(2)  Sewer connection fee funds from each service area shall be expended only for costs related to system improvements, as defined in O.C.G.A § 36-71-2(19), as amended, that provide capacity to serve new connections to the sewer system located within that service area. All costs permitted under O.C.G.A. § 36-71-3(18), as amended, shall be permitted under this section. Such costs include, but are not limited to, planning, design, engineering, land acquisition, land improvement, surveying, and construction or reconstruction costs as well as principal, interest and other financing costs on contracts, bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the city to finance such system improvements. Sewer connection fee funds shall not be expended for maintenance or repair of system improvements nor for operational expenses. 
(f)  Applicant contributions of system improvements; credits/reimbursements. 
(1)  Project improvements are the responsibility of the developer or property owner and no credits against connection fees shall be made for project improvements. Project improvements include all lot or building improvements necessary to provide service (including for example the building sewer and cleanout and pre-stubs if required) and main extensions of eight (8) inches in diameter and up to one hundred (100) feet in length from the property line or project boundary as required to connect to the nearest main. Project improvements also include any other sewer system facilities, including but not limited to pump stations and larger diameter lines, that are planned, designed and are necessary to provide service to a particular development project in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-17-2(14), as amended. Tap costs are covered by the tapping fee imposed pursuant to the Code of the City of Gainesville section 10-1-20. 
(2)  Upon application for new or increased sewer service, the sewer connection fee otherwise due shall be reduced by any applicable credits for the contribution of money or dedication of land for or the construction of system improvements, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-17-2(19), as amended, within the service area where the new connection is located and serving the new connection and required or accepted by the city from the applicant or his predecessor in title or interest. In the event that the amount of credit due exceeds the total sewer connection fees due, an agreement between the applicant and the utilities department shall govern the amount and timing of reimbursement payments to the applicant. The city shall have the option of reimbursing an applicant by a lump sum payment or periodic payments and from existing funds or from sewer connection fees collected in the future. 
(3)  The amount of applicable credit/reimbursement, if any, shall be determined based on credible evidence submitted by the applicant on forms provided by the city utility department, which: (a) describes the contribution for which credit/reimbursement is claimed, (b) establishes the original cost and date of the construction, contribution or dedication, (c) identifies the specific development project for which the construction, contribution or dedication was made, including the location, land use, size, number of buildings or number of dwelling units in the original development project, and (d) describes the development project for which the credit/reimbursement against sewer connection fees is requested, if different from the project described in subsection (c). Credits/reimbursements may not be transferred from one development project to another project. All costs related to submitting the credit/reimbursement application and any additional information requested by the utilities director are the responsibility of the applicant. 
(4)  The director of utilities shall determine the amount of credit/reimbursement due per connection, if any, based on consideration of the original and current or depreciated value of the contribution or dedication, the facilities required to serve the development project, the ability of the contribution or dedication to provide service to other development, and, if the contribution or dedication is determined to be a system improvement which is eligible for credit/reimbursement, the per connection share of the present value of the construction, contribution and dedication. System improvements shall be determined based on accepted engineering principles and data produced by a registered engineer. The burden of establishing eligibility for a credit/reimbursement is on the applicant claiming the credit/reimbursement. All costs incurred by the utilities department, including the value of staff time and/or consultant fees as well as expenses, related to applications for credit/reimbursement shall be the responsibility of and charged to the applicant. Regardless of the results of any appeal of a determination of the utility director by the applicant, utilities department costs billed to and paid by the applicant shall not be refunded. 
(g)  Annual report. At least once every year, the director of utilities and director of finance shall jointly prepare a report on the sewer connection fees. Such report shall include: (1) the total amount of sewer connection fees collected within each service area during the past fiscal year, (2) the total expenditures and projects funded in part or in whole by sewer connection fees within each service are during the past fiscal year, (3) the sewer connection fee interest earned and account balance for each service area, (4) the sewer system projects within each service area anticipated to be funded in whole or in part by sewer connection fees, (5) any proposed changes to the sewer connection fee schedule or sewer connection fee calculation methodology, and (6) any other recommendations as the director of utilities or the director of finance deem appropriate or as may be requested by the city council. 
(h)  Appeal process. 
(1)  Applicants for a new or changed water meter may appeal any determination of the utilities director regarding the meter or line size required to serve the property or the amount of credits and/or reimbursement due for contributions of system improvements to the utilities review committee. Appeals to the utilities review committee must be filed with the city clerk no later than thirty (30) days after the date of determination by the utilities director. The utilities review committee shall provide the applicant with a written explanation of its determination within sixty (60) calendar days of filing of the appeal with the city clerk. Appeals shall be submitted to the city clerk on a form provided by the utilities department. 
(2)  Appeals and determinations of the utilities review committee may be made to the administrative hearing officer as provided pursuant to chapter 1-8 of the Gainesville City Code. 
(i)  Authority to establish an administrative fee. 
(1)  A reasonable fee to cover all or a portion of the administrative costs incurred in administering and managing the sewer connection fee system may be established by resolution of the city council. Such administrative fee may include, but is not limited to, the following costs to the extent the costs are related to the administration and operation of the connection fee system: reasonable charges for city staff time, consultant fees and expenses, and computer equipment/software or other equipment the costs of which are not included in the sewer connection fee calculations. 
(2)  The administrative fee adopted by resolution of the city council shall be paid at the time of application for new or changed sewer service and shall be paid in addition to the cost of the meter, sewer system connection fees and sewer system tapping fees. 
(Code 1958, § 18-59.1; Ord. No. 93-33, §§ I—IX, 7-20-93; Ord. No. 94-55, §§ I, II, 1-17-95; Ord. No. 95-55, §§ I, II, 12-19-95; Ord. No. 96-59, §§ I, II, 12-03-96; Ord. No. 97-66, §§ I, II, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 00-83, §§ I, II, 12-21-00; Ord. No. 2006-25, §§ II—IV, 7-5-06; Ord. No. 2006-61, §§ II—IV, 12-19-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-25, § II, adopted July 5, 2006, changed the title of § 10-1-21 from "Sewer system connection fee" to "Sanitary sewer system connection fee." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 10-1-22. - Fund to cover costs of sewer line installation; connection and tapping fees to be paid into funds. 
All fees for tapping into the sewer system lines shall be paid into the water and sewer operational fund. All revenues received from the sewer system connection fees shall only be used for debt service payments, for capital improvements or deposited into the water and sewer construction fund for construction and purchase of capital improvements. All sewer lines installed in the city shall be paid from moneys of the water and sewer construction fund. 
(Code 1958, § 18-60; Ord. No. 95-18, § II, 6-6-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-18, § I, adopted June 6, 1995, repealed former § 10-1-22, which pertained to the deposit of sewer tapping fees. 
Sec. 10-1-23. - Fees where the water discharged into the city's sanitary sewer system is not purchased from the city. 
(a)  Meter requirement. All classes of sanitary sewer users located inside or outside the corporate limits of the city who do not purchase water from the city that is discharged into the sanitary sewers of the city, shall cause all such water to pass through a meter that is approved by the city and is set at a location that is approved by the city. The meter shall be read each month and a sum computed and paid monthly by the owner of the water as applicable in section 10-1-18. 
(b)  Account servicing fees. All classes of sanitary sewer users whether located inside or outside the corporate limits of the city who do not purchase water from the city, shall pay a monthly account servicing fee in accordance with fees established in subsection 10-1-41(e). 
(c)  Monthly per unit (one hundred (100) cubic feet) sanitary sewer service fees. In addition to the monthly account servicing fee all classes of sanitary sewer users whether located inside or outside the corporate limits of the city who do not purchase water from the city, shall pay a monthly per unit sanitary sewer service fee as established in subsection 10-1-17(a)(3). 
(Ord. No. 2006-25, § V, 7-5-06; Ord. No. 2006-61, § V, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 2006-62, §§ III, Iv, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 2007-27, § II, 7-3-07; Ord. No. 2008-44, § II, 12-16-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-25, § V, adopted July 5, 2006, amended § 10-1-23 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 10-1-23 pertained to charges where the water discharged into sewers not purchased from city, and derived from the Code of 1958, § 18-61; Ord. No. 89-81, §§ II, III, adopted December 19, 1989; Ord. No. 92-60, § 7, adopted November 17, 1992; Ord. No. 94-34, § II, adopted July 5, 1994; Ord. No. 94-38, § II, adopted September 6, 1994; Ord. No. 97-04, § II, adopted February 4, 1997; Ord. No. 97-44, § II, adopted September 16, 1997; Ord. No. 98-64, § II, adopted December 1, 1998; Ord. No. 99-93, § II, adopted January 4, 2000; Ord. No. 2001-14, § II, adopted March 6, 2001; Ord. No. 2001-71, § IV, adopted December 18, 2001; Ord. No. 2002-29, § II, adopted June 18, 2002; Ord. No. 2002-54, § II, adopted October 8, 2002; Ord. No. 2003-38, § II, adopted June 17, 2003; Ord. No. 2003-39, § II, adopted June 17, 2003; Ord. No. 2004-52, § II, adopted June 15, 2004; Ord. No. 2004-53, § II, adopted June 15, 2004; Ord. No. 2005-36, § III, adopted July 19, 2005. 
Sec. 10-1-24. - Disposition on discontinuance of service. 
(a)  In the event of failure of any person to pay any charge herein provided, execution therefor may be issued by the secretary of the city council, and the same may be enforced by levy and sale of any property with which city sewers are connected and to which such water is supplied. 
(b)  In event of failure of any person to pay any charge herein provided, the city may discontinue sewer service to the property at which the water was used and may not reinstate sewer service to such property until the amount owing has been paid. 
(c)  Upon failure to pay the monthly fees prescribed, the city shall have the right after five (5) days' notice to the party in default to discontinue water service to the party in default, if using city water, and to disconnect the sewer from such party's property, or both, until all sewer charges have been paid in full. 
(Code 1958, § 18-62) 
Sec. 10-1-25. - Service outside city; application, fees, costs. 
Any person located outside the city limits desiring to connect sanitary sewers with the sewer lines of the city shall be permitted to do so only after compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  Application for permission to connect a sanitary sewer to the city sewer line shall be made on forms to be furnished by the city. 
(2)  All costs of construction, including materials, shall be paid by the property owner(s) who shall likewise bear all costs of maintenance and repair which shall be done by the city and paid for by the property owner(s). Original construction shall be done under supervision of the city and shall be done in accordance with the specifications of the plumbing code of the city. The plumbing inspector shall approve by inspection all connections and tap-ons before being completed. 
(3)  Fees prescribed in the plumbing code of the city for service inside the city for connections, inspections, etc., shall be paid as though the work was being done inside the city. 
(Code 1958, § 18-63) 
Sec. 10-1-26. - User charge system for operation and maintenance costs. 
(a)  Basis for user charge. The wastewater characteristics which are used to determine user charge are: 
(1)  BOD, 
(2)  Suspended solids, 
(3)  Flow volume, 
(4)  Oil and grease and 
(5)  Phosphorus. 
Normal wastewater dischargers and industrial wastewater dischargers of normal strength wastewaters, shall be charged a basic user charge in which flow volume is the wastewater characteristic for determining the charge. 
(b)  Basic user charge. The formula for determining basic user charge which applies to normal strength discharges shall be as follows: 

 
(c)  Surcharged wastewater. When BOD, suspended solids, oil and grease or phosphorus concentrations in a user's wastewater discharge is in excess of the range of concentration in normal strength wastewater, a surcharge shall be added to the base charge. 
(d)  Surcharge determination. When BOD, suspended solids, oil and grease and phosphorus exceed the range of concentration of those pollutants in normal strength wastewater, a surcharge shall be added in the basis charge. The surcharge shall be determined as follows: 

 
(e)  Unit value determination. The basic unit, C t , which shall be revised not less frequently than biennially, shall be determined as follows: 

 
C t ,B;sub  \sub;,S;sub  \sub;,G;sub  \sub; and P;sub  \sub; are as defined in subsections (b) and (d). B d ,S d ,G d and P d shall be revised not less frequently than biennially and shall be determined by dividing actual wastewater treatment plant loading less total surcharged loading by total annual volume contribution by domestic waste water dischargers. 
V;sub  \sub;,B;sub  \sub;,S;sub  \sub;,G;sub  \sub; and P;sub  \sub; shall be revised not less often than two (2) years by dividing their respective annual maintenance and operation costs by their respective annual loadings. Wastewater discharge volume (V m ) for dischargers of normal strength wastewater shall be one hundred (100) percent of the amount of water metered. For industrial waste- water dischargers which discharge surcharged waste, the wastewater discharge volume (V u ) shall be one hundred (100) percent of the amount of water metered, unless it can be shown that the volume of wastewater discharge is less. 
(f)  Biennial review. The total cost of operation and maintenance of the treatment works, its approved user charge system and the contribution of the users shall be reviewed not less than every two (2) years. Charges for users shall be revised to maintain the distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and to generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance cost necessary to the proper operation and maintenance of treatment works equipment. 
(g)  Inconsistent agreements. The user charge system shall take precedence over any terms, conditions of agreements or contracts between the city and the user, including industrial users, districts, other municipalities or federal agencies which are inconsistent with the requirements of Section 204(b)(1)(a) of the Clean Water Act and these regulations. 
(h)  Excess revenue. Revenues collected in excess of revenues used to defray operation, maintenance and renewal and extension costs in any year shall be applied to the costs of operation and maintenance for the next year, and the user charge adjusted to absorb the excess. 
(i)  Toxic pollutants. Each user which discharges any toxic substance to the publicly owned sewer, which causes an increase in the costs of managing the effluent or the sludge of the treatment works, shall pay for the increased costs. 
(j)  Extraneous flows. Maintenance and operation costs for all flows not attributable to users shall be distributed among all users in proportion of flow volume of the user discharge. 
(k)  Notification. Each user shall be notified no less than annually with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. 
(l)  Implementation. The city shall implement the user charge system as soon as it is approved by the director of the environmental protection division. For the first year of operation, operation and maintenance charges shall be based upon past experience and judgment. After one (1) year of documentation of operation and maintenance cost and user loadings, user charges will be revised based on actual data. User charges shall be reviewed annually and revised to reflect actual operation and maintenance cost of the treatment plant works. 
(m)  Records. The city shall document the various waste treatment plant loading categories and the operation and maintenance costs attributable to each category, record user charge revenues and demonstrate that the user charge derived is a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs. 
(Code 1958, § 18-64.1) 
Sec. 10-1-27. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  The application fee to start service related to discharging private wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(b)  The cash bond required for discharging wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facility shall be in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(c)  The fee for discharging private wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works or storage facility shall be two hundred ninety-two dollars ($292.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons or a portion thereof. 
(Code 1958, §§ 18-11, 18-16.1; Ord. No. 92-50, § 8, 11-17-92; Ord. No. 94-38, § III, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 95-55, § III, 12-19-95; Ord. No. 2002-27, § I, 6-18-02) 
Sec. 10-1-28. - Commercial waste transporter permit fee. 
A commercial waste transporter permit fee will be assessed on an annual basis at a rate of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first truck and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional truck owned by the same company for tank trucks inspected and permitted by the city to haul commercial waste. 
(Ord. No. 2005-21, § I, 6-21-05) 
Secs. 10-1-29—10-1-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - WATER 

Sec. 10-1-41. - Classification of users and rate schedule. 
(a)  Classification of users. For the purpose of establishing water service charges under chapter 5-2, users are classified as follows effective July 1, 2007: 
(1)  Residential; 
(2)  Multi-family; 
(3)  Commercial; 
(4)  General industry; 
(5)  Irrigation (commercial and residential). 
(b)  Account servicing fees. Effective January 1, 2010, all classes of water users whether located inside or outside the corporate limits of the city shall pay a monthly account servicing fee as determined by an annual review of costs to service billing accounts and as identified in subsection 10-1-41(e). 
(c)  Meter requirement. All classes of water users whether inside or outside the corporate limits of the city shall have a water meter installed by the city or its designated contractor and be charged an account servicing fee and monthly per unit water service fees as provided for in this chapter. Units are measured by each one hundred (100) cubic feet (ccf) of water used. 
It shall be unlawful to obstruct access to any water meter connected to the city's water system. Meters must not be obstructed by any method including, but not limited to, landscaping, debris or vehicles. If the customer fails to correct the violation after receiving notification, the public utilities department can take action to remedy the situation. Any expenses incurred by the utility will be the responsibility of the customer. 
(d)  Conservation pricing. The city hereby implements water conservation pricing. All classes of water users whether inside or outside the corporate limits of the city shall be charged for the water they use in hundred cubic feet. The structure of the water conservation rates is as follows: 
(1)  Residential classes of customers whether inside or outside the corporate limits of the city shall be charged for their consumption in blocks based on specific consumption amounts. 

 
(2)  Commercial and multi-family classes of customers whether inside or outside the corporate limits of the city shall be charged for their consumption in blocks based on averaging. 

 
Until an average is established, commercial and multi-family classes whether inside or outside the corporate limits of the city shall be charged for their consumption at the block 1 water service fee. 
(3)  General industry classes of customers will not be subject to a conservation rate and shall be charged for their consumption at the block 1 water service fee. 
(4)  Irrigation classes of customers whether inside or outside the corporate limits of the city shall be charged for their use at the block 3 water service fee. 
(e)  Fees charged. 

 
(Code 1958, § 25-1; Ord. No. 89-80, § I, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 92-50, § 9, 11-17-92; Ord. No. 94-34, § III, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 95-55, § IV, 12-19-95; Ord. No. 97-44, § III, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 98-64, § III, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 99-93, § III, 1-4-00; Ord. No. 2000-58, § II, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 00-96, § II, 12-21-00; Ord. No. 2001-35, § II, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 2001-71, § V, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2002-29, § III, 6-18-02; Ord. No. 2002-54, § III, 10-8-02; Ord. No. 2003-38, § III, 6-17-03; Ord. No. 2003-39, § III, 6-17-03; Ord. No. 2004-52, § III, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 2004-53, § III, 6-15-04; Ord. No. 2005-36, § IV, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 2006-25, §§ VI, VII, 7-5-06; Ord. No. 2006-61, §§ VI, VII, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 2007-27, § III, 7-3-07; Ord. No. 2008-44, §§ III, IV, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 2009-30, § III, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 2009-44, § III, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 2010-20, § II, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 2011-04, § II, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 2011-11, § II, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 2012-22, § II, 7-17-12; Ord. No. 2013-08, § II, 6-18-13; Ord. No. 2014-21, § III, 9-16-14, eff. 1-1-15; Ord. No. 2015-22, § II(1), 8-4-15, eff. 1-1-16) 
Sec. 10-1-42. - Tapping fees. 
(a)  For making taps into the city water mains or water lines, the city shall charge according to the following schedule: 

 
(b)  The foregoing charges shall include not more than one hundred (100) feet of pipe to convey water to property line. If additional pipe is used to convey water to customer's property line, the cost of such additional pipe and installation thereof shall be paid by customer in addition to the foregoing charges at actual cost of such additional footage. 
(c)  After the original tapping fee has been paid and installation made, should the customer request a change in tap size resulting in a smaller meter, the customer shall make proper application at the water department for this change, and such change shall be made without cost to the customer. The meter removed shall remain the property of the city, shall be returned to the city and no credit given for tapping fees paid on the existing larger meter. 
(d)  After the original tapping fee has been paid and installation made, should the customer request a change in tap size resulting in a larger meter, the customer shall make proper application at the water department. A credit of sixty (60) percent of the tapping fee applicable to the existing meter in use will be deducted from the applicable tapping fee on the increased meter size, and the customer shall pay the net difference due in advance. The meter removed shall remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the city. 
(e)  Each water customer shall reimburse to the city all fees and costs paid by the city to any other governing body or authority. 
(f)  Deposit of tapping fees. All fees for tapping into the water system mains or lines shall be paid into the water and sewer operation fund. 
(Code 1958, § 25-1.1; Ord. No. 92-50, § 10, 11-17-92; Ord. No. 93-34, § X, 7-20-93; Ord. No. 2002-28, § I, 6-18-02; Ord. No. 2006-25, § VIII, 7-5-06; Ord. No. 2006-61, § VIII, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 2006-62, § V, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 2009-30, § IV, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 2014-21, § IV, 9-16-14, eff. 1-1-15) 
Note— Section XIII of Ord. No. 2009-30 states that subsection (a) shall become effective January 1, 2010. 
Sec. 10-1-43. - Deposit fees; disposition of deposit on discontinuance of service; discontinuance and late fee charges for nonpayment of bill; discontinuance for nonpayment of bill to provide deposit fees; to provide for deposits from all customers based on meter size. Effective August 1, 2012. 
(a)  Premises where water and/or sanitary sewer service are provided. Customers applying for service to premises where water and/or sanitary sewer are provided by the city shall be required to make the following cash deposits with the city before water and/or sewer service is begun, based on the meter size at said premise: 
5/8 ″ or ¾″ inside or outside city limits ..... $155.00 
1″ inside or outside city limits ..... 350.00 
1½″, 2″ or 3″ inside or outside ..... 400.00 
4″ or larger inside or outside ..... 500.00 
Upon failure to pay the monthly fees prescribed in subsections 10-1-17(a) and 10-1-41(b), the city shall require additional deposit(s) according to the following schedule: 
First cutoff for nonpayment within a continuous twenty-four-month period, deposit increased to the current deposit rate established for that customer meter size classification. 
Second cutoff for nonpayment within a continuous twenty-four-month period, deposit increased by fifty (50) percent of the current deposit rate established for the customer meter size classification. 
Third cutoff for nonpayment within a continuous twenty-four-month period, deposit increased by one hundred (100) percent of the current deposit rate established for that customer meter size classification. 
(b)  Disposition of deposit on discontinuation of service. Upon discontinuation of water service to a customer having made a deposit, such deposit shall be applied on unpaid water bills of the customer, on the cut-off service fee charged the customer and the balance, if any, shall be applied to any other indebtedness due the city, and the balance remaining, if any, shall be refunded to the customer. 
(c)  Due date established, nonpayment or partial payment of bills grounds for discontinuing service, late payment fee. 
(1)  A due date of twenty (20) days from the billing date for the monthly fees prescribed in section 10-1-17(a) and 10-1-41(b) is hereby established for all classes of water and sewer customers. 
(2)  Utility services to a customer shall be discontinued when one (1) month's bill is ten (10) days past due or when partial payment is made on accounts over thirty (30) days past due. 
(3)  A fee of ten (10) percent of the total monthly bill shall be assessed as a late payment fee for payments received after twenty (20) days of the billing date. 
(4)  No classes of customers shall be exempt from late payment fees, including federal institutions, without the approval of the city manager or designated representative. 
(Code 1958, § 25-1.3; Ord. No. 93-6, § I, 1-18-94; Ord. No. 94-38, § IV, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 99-78, §§ I, II, 11-2-99; Ord. No. 2009-30, § V, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 2012-22, § I, 7-17-12) 
Sec. 10-1-44. - Connection fee. 
(a)  Users subject to fee. Users of the water system shall pay a water connection fee before new or additional service will be made available. Applications for new or additional water service must include the street address for a specific lot or lots where the service is to be provided. Applications for water service shall expire unless all fees have been paid to the finance department no later than ten (10) calendar days after the date of application issuance by the utilities department. Water service approved for a specific lot shall not be transferred to any other lot or property. Water meters shall be installed by the city at the address specified in the application for water service no later than forty (40) days after payment of all fees due by the applicant. Existing users shall be subject to the fee when their existing water service tap is inadequate to deliver the volume of water needed and requires an increase in the water service tap. New users will be subject to the fee at the time new water service is requested through the purchase of a water meter. All users shall be subject to the water connection fee regardless of location (inside or outside city corporate limits) of the water meter. 
(b)  Determination of connection fee. 
(1)  The water system connection fee shall be imposed according to the following schedule: 

 
The water system connection fee shall be paid in addition to the cost of the meter and water system tapping fees. 
(2)  The minimum connection fee for any new water service, regardless of the meter size, shall be one thousand seven hundred twenty-six dollars ($1,726.00). 
(c)  Changing tap and meter size. 
(1)  After the original water connection fee has been paid and installation made, any customer requesting a change in the tap size resulting in a smaller meter at the same location shall make proper application at the water department for this change. Such change shall be made without cost to the customer. No credit shall be given for water connection fees or water meter costs paid on the existing larger meter. The meter removed shall remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the city. 
(2)  After the original water connection fee has been paid and installation made, any customer requesting a change in tap size resulting in a larger meter at the same location shall make proper application at the public utilities department for this change. The customer shall pay a water connection fee equal to the difference between the current applicable water connection fee for the existing water meter size and the current applicable water connection fee for the requested water meter size. A credit of sixty (60) percent of the tap and meter cost applicable to the existing meter in use will be deducted from the tap and meter cost of the increased tap and meter size. The meter removed shall remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the city. 
(d)  Payment of fee. 
(1)  Existing users shall pay the water connection fee at the time the application is made with the water department to increase or decrease the size of the existing water service tap or meter size. 
(2)  New users shall pay the water connection fee at the time the application is made with the water department for a water meter. 
(e)  Revenue restrictions. 
(1)  All revenues received from the water system connection fees shall be accounted for separately and distinctly from any other system revenues. Available water system connection fee balances shall be invested and all interest earned on these investments shall be accounted for as part of the water system connection fee revenues. The accounting system shall be established so that water system connection fee collections, interest earned, and expenses can be clearly tracked on a monthly basis and so that connection fees are properly deposited, accounted for and expended in accordance with section 10-1-44(e). 
(2)  Water connection fee funds shall be expenses only for costs related to system improvements, as defined in O.C.G.A § 36-71-2(19), as amended, that provide capacity to serve new connections to the water system. All costs permitted under O.C.G.A. § 36-71-3(18), as amended, shall be permitted under this section. Such costs include, but are not limited to, planning, design, engineering, land acquisition, land improvement, surveying, and construction or reconstruction costs as well as principal, interest and other financing costs on contracts, bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the city to finance such system improvements. Water connection fee funds shall not be expended for maintenance or repair of system improvements nor for operational expenses. 
(f)  Applicant contributions of system improvements; credits/reimbursements. 
(1)  Project improvements are the responsibility of the developer or property owner and no credits against connection fees shall be made for project improvements. Project improvements include all lot or building improvements necessary to provide service (including for example the building water and cleanout and pre-stubs if required) and main extensions of eight-inch diameter and up to one hundred (100) feet in length from the property line or project boundary as required to connect to the nearest main. Smaller mains of two (2) inches to six (6) inches in diameter may be allowed where the main will permanently terminate within a particular property or project. Project improvements also include any other water system facilities, including but not limited to larger diameter mains extensions, that are planned, designed and are necessary to provide service to a particular development project in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-17-2(14), as amended. Tap and meter costs are covered by the tapping fee imposed pursuant to the Code of the City of Gainesville section 10-1-42. 
(2)  Upon application for new or increased water service, the water connection fee otherwise due shall be reduced by any applicable credits for the contribution of money or dedication of land for or the construction of system improvements, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-17-2(19), as amended, serving the new connection and required or accepted by the city from the applicant or his predecessor in title or interest. System improvements shall be determined based on accepted engineering principles and data produced by a registered engineer. Analysis of the water distribution system shall be performed using the Hardy Cross hydraulic mathematical model. In the event that the amount of credit due exceeds the total water connection fees due, an agreement between the applicant and the utilities department shall govern the amount and timing of reimbursement payments to the applicant. The city shall have the option of reimbursing an applicant by a lump sum payment or periodic payments and from existing funds or from water connection fees collected in the future. 
(3)  The amount of applicable credit/reimbursement, if any, shall be determined based on credible evidence submitted by the applicant on forms provided by the city utility department, which: (a) describes the contribution for which credit/reimbursement is claimed, (b) establishes the original cost and date of the construction, contribution or dedication, (c) identifies the specific development project for which the construction, contribution or dedication was made, including the location, land use, size, number of buildings or number of dwelling units in the original development project, and (d) describes the development project for which the credit/reimbursement against water connection fees is requested, if different from the project described in subsection (c). Credits/reimbursements may not be transferred from one development project to another project. All costs related to submitting the credit/reimbursement application and any additional information requested by the utilities director are the responsibility of the applicant. 
(4)  The director of utilities shall determine the amount of credit/reimbursement due per connection, if any, based on consideration of the original and current or depreciated value of the contribution or dedication, the facilities required to serve the development project, the ability of the contribution or dedication to provide service to other development, and, if the contribution or dedication is determined to be a system improvement which is eligible for credit/reimbursement, the per connection share of the present value of the construction, contribution and dedication. The burden of establishing eligibility for a credit/reimbursement is on the applicant claiming the credit/reimbursement. All costs incurred by the utilities department, including the value of staff time and/or consultant fees as well as expenses, related to applications for credit/reimbursement shall be the responsibility of and charged to the applicant. Regardless of the results of any appeal of a determination of the utility director by the applicant, utilities department costs billed to and paid by the applicant shall not be refunded. 
(g)  Annual report. At least once every year, the director of utilities and director of finance shall jointly prepare a report on the water connection fees. Such report shall include: (1) the total amount of waste connection fees collected during the past fiscal year, (2) the total expenditures and projects funded in part or in whole by water connection fees during the past fiscal year, (3) the water connection fee account balance earned, (4) the water system projects anticipated to be funded in whole or in part by water connection fees, (5) any proposed changes to the water connection fee schedule or water connection fee calculation methodology, and (6) any other recommendations as the director of utilities or the director of finance deem appropriate or as may be requested by the city council. 
(h)  Appeal process. 
(1)  Applicants for a new or changed water meter may appeal any determination of the utilities director regarding the meter or line size required to serve the property or the amount of credits and/or reimbursement due for contributions of system improvements to the utilities review committee. Appeals to the utilities review committee must be filed with the city clerk no later than thirty (30) days after the date of determination by the utilities director. The utilities review committee shall provide the applicant with a written explanation of its determination within sixty (60) calendar days of filing of the appeal with the city clerk. Appeals shall be submitted to the city clerk on a form provided by the utilities department. 
(2)  Appeals and determinations of the utilities review committee may be made to the administrative hearing officer as provided for pursuant to chapter 1-8 of the Gainesville City Code. 
(i)  Authority to establish an administrative fee. 
(1)  A reasonable fee to cover all or a portion of the administrative costs incurred in administering and managing the water connection fee system may be established by resolution of the city council. Such administrative fee may include, but is not limited to, the following costs to the extent the costs are related to the administration and operation of the connection fee system: reasonable charges for city staff time, consultant fees and expenses, and computer equipment/software or other equipment the costs of which are not included in the water connection fee calculations. 
(2)  The administrative fee adopted by resolution of the city council shall be paid at the time of application for new or changed water service and shall be paid in addition to the cost of the meter, water system connection fees and water tapping fees. 
(Code 1958, § 25-1.4; Ord. No. 93-34, §§ I—IX, 7-20-93; Ord. No. 94-55, §§ III, IV, 1-17-95; Ord. No. 95-55, §§ V, VI, 12-19-95; Ord. No. 96-59, §§ III, IV, 12-3-96; Ord. No. 97-66, §§ III, IV, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 00-82, § I, 12-21-00; Ord. No. 2006-25, §§ IX—XII, 7-5-06; Ord. No. 2006-61, §§ IX—XII, 12-19-06) 
Sec. 10-1-45. - Rate schedule for water service for fire protection purposes; fire hydrant meter rental fees. 
(a)  Sprinkler systems service: Installations inside the corporate city limits will be charged a one-time application fee and a minimum monthly fee per fire line tap based on the size of the fire line tap as listed below: 

 
Installations outside the corporate city limits will be charged a one-time application fee and a minimum monthly fee per fire line tap based on the size of the fire line tap as listed below: 

 
All water consumed through the detector meter for inside/outside corporate limits will be charged at the current Block 3 unit fee. 
(b)  Fire hydrant meter rental service: An application fee and a deposit, based on meter size, shall be charged for rental of fire hydrant meters, in addition to charges for the water consumed. A late read fee shall be charged for any meter not returned for reading by the scheduled deadline. Charges for the water consumed each month will be calculated using the Block 3 unit fee. The deposit shall be refunded upon return of the undamaged meter. Should a meter be returned damaged, the repair cost shall be deducted from the deposit. Deposits will not be refunded for lost or stolen meters. The application fee, deposit, and late read fee shall be as follows: 

 
(c)  Fire hydrant flow testing fee: A fee shall be charged by the utility for work performed for purposes of testing fire hydrants for adequate flow and pressure, and to meet fire flow requirements. This fee shall be one hundred ten dollars ($110.00) per flow test. 
(Code 1958, § 25-2.2; Ord. No. 2003-42, § I, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 2009-30, § VI, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 2012-22, § IV, 7-17-12; Ord. No. 2013-08, § III, 6-18-13; Ord. No. 2014-21, § V, 9-16-14, eff. 1-1-15; Ord. No. 2015-22, § III, 8-4-15, eff. 1-1-16; Ord. No. 2016-06, § II, 6-21-16, eff. 1-1-17) 
Sec. 10-1-46. - Charges for discontinuance and resumption of service. 
A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged to each customer discontinuing use of city water. A fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be charged to each water customer resuming use of, or applying for new service from the city system. 
(Code 1958, § 25-4.1; Ord. No. 99-69, § I, 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2009-30, § VII, 8-4-09) 
Note— Section XIII of Ord. No. 2009-30 states that this section shall become effective January 1, 2010. 
Sec. 10-1-47. - Charges for reconnection after nonpayment of bill; charges for returned checks. 
(a)  When water has been cut off for the nonpayment of a water bill, or if it is necessary for the service worker to go to the premises for the purpose of cutting water off for nonpayment of bill, the consumer or owner shall pay a charge of forty dollars ($40.00) with payment being made at the utilities department office. In cases where customers have vacated premises leaving unpaid water bills, they will not be furnished with water elsewhere until such bill have been paid. 
(b)  When payment of a water bill occurs with a check which is subsequently returned by the bank or other financial institution upon which it is written, the customer shall pay a returned check charge as provided in section 2-2-1 of this Code to be paid at the water department office. Such charge shall be considered part of the water bill in determining nonpayment under paragraph (a) of this section. 
(Code 1958, § 25-5; Ord. No. 92-50, §§ 11, 12, 11-17-92; Ord. No. 97-26, § I, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 00-98, § I, 1-2-01; Ord. No. 2009-30, § VIII, 8-4-09) 
Sec. 10-1-48. - Cost of extending water service. 
Whenever a water service extension project is undertaken, the cost of such project shall be allocated as hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  City's portion of cost. Whenever the city shall have money appropriated for water service extension projects, it shall participate in financing the cost of approved water service extension projects provided, however, that the city's financial participation in any project shall not exceed the amounts set forth below: 
a.  Residential structure. In the case of projects to serve in-city property, the city shall spend not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each residential structure or equivalent thereof to be served by the project. In the case of projects to serve out-of-city properties, the city shall spend not more than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each residential structure or equivalent thereof to be served by the project. When a residential structure contains two (2) or more dwelling units, each dwelling unit which has a separate water meter tap shall be counted as a separate residential structure. 
b.  Commercial structures. Whenever a water service extension project is undertaken to serve commercial structures, the city's share of the cost of the project shall not exceed an amount equal to ten (10) times the estimated net annual earnings from the sale of water to the commercial structures to be served by the project. 
(2)  Petitioner's portion of cost. Whenever the estimated cost of a water service extension project is found to be greater than the amount the city is authorized to spend on the project, then the petitioners for service shall be required to pay the difference between the city's authorized portion of the cost of the project and the total cost of the project. 
(3)  Payment in advance. Whenever a petitioner is required to pay a portion of the cost of a water service extension project, he shall make such payment in advance of construction along with other required fees. Such payment shall be deposited into the fund the city has established for water service extension purposes. This payment shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1958, § 25-42) 
Sec. 10-1-49. - Water shortage management surcharges. 
(a)  For first violation of water shortage management restrictions. For the first violation of water shortage management restrictions, water customers in noncompliance with chapter 5-2, article 3 shall be assessed a surcharge of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  For second and subsequent violation of water shortage management restrictions. For a second and subsequent violation of water shortage management restrictions, water customers determined to be in noncompliance shall have water supply terminated and be assessed a surcharge of two hundred dollars ($200.00). Water supply shall not be restored until payment of the surcharge and a reconnection fee as described in section 10-1-47. 
(c)  For egregious violation of water shortage management restrictions. For egregious violation of water shortage management restrictions, water customers shall have water supply terminated and, upon authorization of the director, be assessed a surcharge of up to twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Water supply shall not be restored until payment of the surcharge and a reconnection fee as described in section 10-1-47. 
(d)  Procedures. 
(1)  The city manager shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this section by discontinuance of water service in the event any person violated the provisions of this section after receiving oral or written notice of the violation from the city. 
(2)  Whenever the city manager determines that a person is violating, or has violated any provision of this section and determines that the violation of this section endangers the public health, safety or general welfare of the community, the city manager shall have the power and authority to immediately terminate that person's water service, which termination shall be in writing. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by having the water supply terminated by the city manager shall have the right to appeal the termination to the administrative hearing officer as provided in section 1-8-1 within ten (10) days of the date of termination by the city manager. 
(4)  If an appeal is made, then the city manager shall have the power and authority to reinstate the water supply until the administrative hearing officer renders a decision in order to avoid undue hardship, if the city manager is reasonably assured that the violation(s) for which the water supply was terminated will not continue. 
(Code 1958, § 25-77; Ord. No. 89-19, § VI, 5-16-89; Ord. No. 2006-42, § I, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2007-52, § I, 11-6-07) 
Sec. 10-1-50. - Water and sanitary sewer permitting/inspection fees; building inspection coordination fee; backflow inspection fee; commercial wastewater inspection fee. 
(a)  Water main and sanitary sewers permitting/inspection fees. For all installations of water mains and sanitary sewers not constructed or contracted by the utility, both inside and outside the corporate city limits, a fee shall be charged for permitting/inspection of the installations to meet utility specifications. The permitting/inspection fee shall be one dollar and forty-nine cents ($1.49) per linear foot for water mains, and three dollars and sixty-two cents ($3.62) per linear foot for sanitary sewers. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Backflow inspection fee. For all installations of a backflow device on private water service lines connected to the utility's water mains a fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) shall be charged for permitting/inspection of the installation to meet utility specifications. 
(d)  Commercial wastewater inspection fee. For all installations of wastewater sample stations for grease traps and oil-water separators a fee of fifty-five dollars ($55.00) shall be charged for permitting/inspection of the installation to meet utility specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2003-43, § I, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 2004-80, § I, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2005-35, § I, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 2006-25, § XIII, 7-5-06; Ord. No. 2006-61, § XIII, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 2007-27, § IV, 7-3-07; Ord. No. 2009-30, § IX, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 2015-22, § IV, 8-4-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-30, § IX, adopted August 4, 2009, changed the title of section 10-1-50 from "Water and sanitary sewer permitting/inspection fees; building inspection coordination fee" to "Water and sanitary sewer permitting/inspection fees; building inspection coordination fee; backflow inspection fee; commercial wastewater inspection fee." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Note— Section XIII of Ord. No. 2009-30 states that this section shall become effective January 1, 2010. 
Sec. 10-1-51. - Fees for providing monthly water meter consumption readings to outside entities. 
A fee of one dollar ($1.00) per meter read, per month, will be charged to outside entities to provide same with meter consumption information. 
(Ord. No. 2009-30, § X, 8-4-09) 
Note— Section XIII of Ord. No. 2009-30 states that this section shall become effective January 1, 2010. 
Secs. 10-1-52—10-1-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - BUSINESS AND OTHER LICENSE FEES 

Sec. 10-1-61. - Regulatory and license fees. 
The business or profession upon which regulatory fees and license fees is imposed and the amount imposed, are as follows: 
(1)  Regulatory fees. 

 
(2)  License fees. 

 
(Ord. No. 94-50, § I, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 96-58, § I, 12-3-96; Ord. No. 98-05, § I, 2-3-98; Ord. No. 99-59, § I, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 99-87, § I, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2001-56, § I, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 2002-31, § I, 7-2-02; Ord. No. 2012-32, § I, 11-20-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-50, § I, adopted Jan 3, 1995, repealed former § 10-1-61, which pertained to business and alcoholic beverage license fees, and added a new § 10-1-61 to read as herein set out. 
_____
Sec. 10-1-62. - Wrecker service fees. 
The maximum fees or rates charged by a wrecker service under section 6-1-1 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Services of light duty wrecker for undamaged vehicle (passenger cars, pickup trucks and vans): 
a.  Basic tow job inside the city limits ..... $100.00 
b.  Additional surcharge for basic tow of motorcycle inside the city limits ..... 25.00 
(2)  a.  Services of light duty wrecker for damaged vehicles (passenger cars, pickup trucks and vans) where glass, and wreckage debris must be cleaned up or the use of a dolly, winch, dropping of a drive shaft is required ..... $200.00 
b.  Additional surcharge for motorcycles ..... 25.00 
c.  Wrecker services may levy an administrative fee necessary to identify the owner of a vehicle, when said owner cannot be identified at the time the vehicle is towed ..... 75.00 
(3)  Pulling vehicles out of the lake, basic rate ..... 200.00 
Plus diving costs if necessary and any reasonable and necessary cost. 
(4)  Services of heavy duty wrecker (wrecker for all vehicles other than a passenger car, pickup truck and van): 
a.  Hourly charge per wrecker including operator ..... 150.00 
b.  Any reasonable and necessary cost. 
(5)  Storage of vehicles: 
a.  Storage of passenger cars, vans, and pickup trucks, per day: 
1.  Outside ..... 15.00 
2.  Inside ..... 25.00 
3.  Under cover inside building ..... 30.00 
b.  Storage of trucks larger than pickup trucks, per day ..... 25.00 
c.  Storage of tractor and trailers, each piece, per day ..... 30.00 
(Code 1958, § 23-113; Ord. No. 98-07, § I, 2-17-98; Ord. No. 2003-69, § I, 1-7-03; Ord. No. 2008-15, §§ I, II, 5-20-08) 
Sec. 10-1-63. - Alcoholic beverage fees and excise taxes. 
(a)  The amounts imposed for alcoholic beverage annual fees will be set by resolution of the governing body of the City of Gainesville. 
(b)  The amounts imposed for excise taxes in the city are as follows: 
(1)  The malt beverage excise tax imposed pursuant to section 6-4-50 shall be in the following amounts: 
a.  For malt beverages sold in or from a barrel or bulk container (commonly known as tap or draft beer) a tax of six dollars ($6.00) on each container sold containing not more than fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons and a proportionate tax on the same rate on all fractional parts of fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons. 
b.  For malt beverages sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents ($0.05) cents per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate of all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces. 
(2)  The wine excise tax imposed pursuant to section 6-4-50 shall be in the amount of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate of all fractional parts of a liter. 
(3)  The distilled spirits excise tax imposed pursuant to section 6-4-50 shall be in the amount of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate of all fractional parts of a liter. 
(4)  The distilled spirits excise tax imposed pursuant to section 6-4-32 (mixed drinks consumed on premises) shall be in the amount of three (3) percent of the purchase price of the beverage. 
(Ord. No. 94-50, § II, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 99-31, § I, 6-1-99; Ord. No. 2001-40, § I, 7-17-01; Ord. No. 2005-48, § I, 11-1-05; Ord. No. 2006-13, § I, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2009-29, § I, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 2015-03, § I, 2-20-15; Ord. No. 2017-20, § I, 8-15-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-50, § I, adopted Jan 3, 1995, repealed former § 10-1-63, which pertained to alcoholic beverage excise taxes, and added a new § 10-1-63 to read as herein set out. 
Secs. 10-1-64, 10-1-65. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-54, §§ I, II, adopted Jan. 3, 1995, repealed former §§ 10-1-64 and 10-1-65, which pertained tax on insurance and vehicles for hire. 
Sec. 10-1-66. - Professionally organized parades. 
In the event the parade is a professionally organized parade, the applicant or the organizer shall pay a fee for such permit of ten dollars ($10.00) per one hundred (100) participants or any portion thereof reasonably estimated to participate and if more actually participate, a supplemental fee to cover such additional participants as though included in the original application shall be due and payable immediately following the parade. In any event, the fee shall not be less than ten dollars ($10.00) for a professionally organized parade. In addition thereto, the applicant or organizer shall post a bond of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per hundred participants or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 90-38, § 1, 8-21-90) 
Sec. 10-1-67. - Special events. 
An application for a special events permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to cover administrative costs. 
(Ord. No. 90-38, § 1, 8-21-90) 
Secs. 10-1-68—10-1-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-26, § III, adopted Dec. 27, 2013, repealed § 10-1-68 in its entirety, which pertained to Georgia Mountains Center marquee rental and derived from Ord. No. 2001-21, § I, adopted April 3, 2001. 
ARTICLE 5. - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Division 1. - Generally 

Sec. 10-1-81. - Streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  The permit fee for the display or sale of merchandise on streets or sidewalks under section 4-4-15 shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(b)  The fee for a residential driveway or sidewalk under section 4-4-72 shall be two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per lot. 
(c)  The fee for a commercial driveway or sidewalk under section 4-4-72 shall be five dollars ($5.00) per lot. 
(Code 1958, §§ 19-23, 19-60) 
Secs. 10-1-82—10-1-90. - Reserved. 
Division 2. - Building Regulations 

Sec. 10-1-91. - Building code. 
(a)  Fees; construction or alteration. 
(1)  The permit fee for the new construction of a building for a R3 occupancy, as defined in the Standard Building Code, including relocated buildings, shall be based on square footage as follows: 

 
(2)  The permit fee for structures accessory to R3 occupancy as defined in the Standard Building Code, additions to R-3 structures, and alteration or repair of an existing building for R3 occupancy, as defined in the Standard Building Code, shall be as follows: 

 
(3)  The permit fee for the new construction of a building for all occupancy uses (except R3), as defined in the Standard Building Code, shall be based on square footage as follows: 

 
(4)  The permit fee for alteration or repair of an existing building for all occupancy uses (except R3), as defined in the Standard Building Code, shall be as follows: 

 
(b)  Mobile homes, factory-built homes and relocated site-built homes. 
(1)  Mobile homes and factory-built homes shall be charged a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus a five dollar ($5.00) occupancy permit for a total of fifty-five dollars ($55.00); 
(2)  An existing mobile home requiring a site inspection will be charged a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a mobile home site check; 
(3)  Site-built homes being moved from one (1) foundation to another will be charged a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for inspection before being moved; 
(4)  There will be a charge of fifty cents ($0.50) per mile for travel outside of the county for the purpose of such inspection. 
(c)  Re-inspection fees. When the owner or contractor calls for an inspection and the inspector finds that the work is not ready for inspection, a re-inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first re-inspection and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent re-inspection will be assessed. All re-inspection fees shall be paid prior to next inspection of said work. 
(d)  Square footage defined. The term "square footage" as used in this section means the square feet of floor area, enclosed or open area, for each separate floor or level including basements, canopies, carports, porches and other area under a roof. A separate building permit shall be issued for each separate structure. 
(e)  Penalty fee. There shall be a penalty of double the price of the permit, in addition to the permit fee, if the permit is not acquired before beginning of work. 
(f)  Occupancy. No residential, commercial or industrial building shall be occupied in the city until all construction is complete and final inspection has been made by the inspection services division, and final approval given. 
(1)  Occupancy permits for residential stick built homes, mobile homes or other residential sites requiring an occupancy permit shall be charged a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(2)  Occupancy permits for commercial, industrial buildings and new construction or businesses changing company names that require an occupancy permit, but does not require a site inspection, shall be charged a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(3)  Occupancy permits for existing buildings requiring a site inspection and review for a change in use of the building shall be charged a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00); 
(4)  Temporary certificates of occupancy for residential and commercial buildings requiring an occupancy permit shall be charged a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(5)  A certificate of completion may be issued once the final inspection has been completed on any permit and shall be charged a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(g)  Governmental exemptions. Any governmental building shall be exempt from payment of any fee; however, application for inspection services is required. 
(h)  Agricultural exemption. Any non-residential farm or accessory building for agricultural, poultry or livestock uses shall be exempt from payment of any fee except the minimum fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(i)  Fees; new plan review. All buildings or spaces shall be charged ten (10) percent of the permit fee or one hundred dollars ($100.00), whichever is greater. 
(j)  Fee; building code appeal. Each appeal shall be charged fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(k)  [Signs.] The permit fee for the construction or alteration of a sign shall be based on the square footage as follows: 

 
(l)  [Swimming pools.] The permit fee for the construction of a swimming pool shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for private swimming pools and fifty dollars ($50.00) for public swimming pools. 
(m)  Change of contractor. There shall be a charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) if a contractor is changed on a construction permit. 
(n)  Renewal of expired permit. There shall be a charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to renew an expired permit as long as the original applicant is the same. 
(o)  [Re-establish electrical service.] Site inspection to re-establish electrical service that has been disconnected shall be charged a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(Ord. No. 89-60, § I, 10-2-89; Ord. No. 93-40, §§ I, II, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 96-7, § I, 6-27-96; Ord. No. 96-48, §§ I—III, 11-19-96; Ord. No. 97-27, § I, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 2000-13, §§ I—VI, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 2000-31, §§ I, II, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 2012-11, § I, 5-1-12) 
Charter reference— Water, sewers and drains, § 5.12. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 1995 Ga. Laws, p. 4542. 
Sec. 10-1-92. - Electrical code. 
(a)  Electrical permit fees: 

 
(b)  Penalty fee. There shall be a penalty of double the price of the permit, in addition to the permit fee, if the permit is not acquired before beginning of work. 
(c)  Re-inspection fees. When the owner or contractor calls for an inspection and the inspector finds that the work is not ready for inspection, a re-inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first re-inspection and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent re-inspection shall be assessed. All re-inspection fees shall be paid prior to next inspection of said work. 
(Code 1958, §§ 6-17, 6-24; Ord. No. 89-61, § I, 10-2-89; Ord. No. 2000-13, § VII, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 2012-11, § II, 5-1-12) 
State Law reference— Classes of electrical contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-6. 
Sec. 10-1-93. - Gas code. 
(a)  Permit fee schedule: 
(1)  For issuing each permit a minimum fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) will be charged. 
(2)  The total fees for inspection of a consumer's gas piping at one (1) location (including both rough and final piping inspection) shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) minimum, including one (1) outlet, plus one dollar ($1.00) per each additional outlet. 
(3)  The fees for inspecting conversion burners, floor furnaces, incinerators, boilers or central heating or air conditioning units shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for each unit. 
(b)  Penalty fee. There shall be a penalty of double the price of the permit, in addition to the permit fee, if the permit is not acquired before beginning of work. 
(c)  Re-inspection fees. When the owner or contractor calls for an inspection and the inspector finds that the work is not ready for inspection, a re-inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first re-inspection and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent re-inspection will be assessed. All re-inspection fees shall be paid prior to next inspection of said work. 
(Code 1958, §§ 6-34, 6-36; Ord. No. 89-62, § I, 10-2-89; Ord. No. 93-30, § II, 6-15-93; Ord. No. 2000-13, § VIII, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 2012-11, § III, 5-1-12) 
Sec. 10-1-94. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-13, § IX, adopted April 4, 2000, repealed § 10-1-94 in its entirety. Former § 10-1-94 pertained to heating, ventilating and air conditioning license fees and derived from the 1958 Code, §§ 6-90, 6-92. 
Sec. 10-1-95. - Heating, ventilating and air conditioning permit fees. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of heating, ventilating and air conditioning permit fees, the following are defined: 
(1)  In general. Where terms are not defined in this section, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply. 
(2)  Air conditioning equipment. Air conditioning equipment shall mean refrigeration units used for comfort cooling and installed for central air conditioning systems or self-contained air conditioning units. 
(3)  Approved gas appliance. Approved gas appliance means gas appliances tested, approved, listed and bearing the seal of approval of a nationally recognized testing agency. 
(4)  Distribution system. Distribution system shall mean a system designed and constructed for the purpose of conveying steam, water or air for heating, conditioning or process purposes. 
(5)  Gas vent. Gas vent means a vertical flue for removing products of combustion from approved gas appliances requiring a draft hood, but not suitable for other fuels. 
(6)  Horsepower capacity of refrigeration units. All reference to horsepower capacity of refrigeration units shall be construed to mean the horsepower rating of the compressor motor only. Capacity of other than compressed units shall be based on the refrigeration tonnage rating of the unit, at forty (40) degree evaporator and one hundred five (105) degrees condensing temperature, or equivalent. One (1) ton of refrigeration under these conditions shall be considered equal to one (1) horsepower. 
(7)  Mechanical firing equipment. Mechanical firing equipment shall mean a device for feeding and burning of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels, such as gas and oil conversion burners and stokers. 
(8)  Multifamily house. Multifamily house means a building occupied as the home or residence of individuals, families or households living independently of each other, of which three (3) or more are doing cooking within their apartments; including tenement house, apartment house or flat. 
(b)  Schedule of permit fees. 
(1)  Boiler or furnace. Permit fees for the installation of each boiler or furnace including distribution system, when such distribution system is installed under same permit as boiler or furnace, shall be in accordance with Schedule (A) below. 
(2)  Floor furnace, wall circulator, etc. Permit fees for the installation of each floor furnace, wall circulator or heater, recessed wall circulator or heater, (vented circulating heater), direct fired unit heater, gas steam radiator, commercial, rotary dryer direct fired, blast furnace and annealing furnaces shall be in accordance with Schedule (A) below. 
(3)  Replacement boiler or furnace. Permit fees for the installation of each replacement boiler or furnace connected to existing system, or installed and connected to distribution system installed by others under separate permit and mechanical firing equipment, shall be in accordance with Schedule (A) below. 
(4)  Distribution system. Permit fees for the installation or replacement of distribution system connecting to existing boilers or furnaces, or the installation or replacement of distribution system installed and connected to boilers or furnaces installed by others under separate permit shall be in accordance with Schedule (A) below. 
(5)  Refrigeration units. Permit fees for the installation of each refrigeration unit including distribution system, condenser, receiver, cooling tower or evaporative condenser, coils and air handling unit shall be in accordance with Schedule (B) below. Permit fees for the installation of separate refrigeration units or distribution systems installed under separate permits, including both new and replacement installations shall be in accordance with Schedule (B). 
(6)  Hoods over restaurant type ranges, etc. Permit fees for the installation of holds over restaurant type ranges, candy kettles, cruller furnaces and appliances for frying, barbecuing, broiling of meats, bakery or confectionery products shall be in accordance with section (c). 
(7)  Ventilating system other than in one- or two-family residence. Permit fees for the installation of ventilating system other than in a one- or two-[family] residence shall be in accordance with Schedule (D). 
(8)  Vertical gas vents, metal smokestacks, etc. Permit fees for the installation of ventilating system other than in a one-or two-family residence shall be in accordance with Schedule (E). 
(9)  Total connected load. The permit fee schedule shall be confined to the total connected load which shall include a one (1) unit each single family residence. Each tenant unit in duplexes, tenant unit in multi-family residences, each tenant space commercial establishments, each tenant space apartment house, each tenant space institution or industrial plant. 
(10)  Gas hot water heaters. Permit fees for the replacement of gas hot heaters shall be in accordance with Schedule (F) below: 
Permit Fee Schedule (A)  Heating Systems 

 
Plus $100.00 per million over 4,000,000 
Permit Fee Schedule (B)  Cooling Systems 

 
Plus $1.50 per ton over 100 tons 
Permit Fee Schedule (C)  Grease Hoods 

 
Permit Fee Schedule (D)  Fans 

 
Permit Fee Schedule (E)  Vents, Stacks & Chimneys 

 
Permit Fee Schedule (F)  Water Heater 

 
(11)  Special. Permit fees for the installation of the following equipment shall be: 
a.  Circulating air blowers on existing heating equipment, thirty dollars ($30.00) each. 
b.  Commercial incinerators and barbecue pits, including vents or stacks, thirty dollars ($30.00) each. 
c.  Residential incinerators, including vent or stacks, thirty dollars ($30.00) each. 
d.  Combustion air or induced draft fans, thirty dollars ($30.00) each. 
e.  Duct alteration, thirty dollars ($30.00). 
f.  Change of contractor/company, thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(12)  For issuing each permit, a minimum fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) will be charged. 
(c)  Penalty fee. There shall be a penalty of double the price of the permit, in addition to the permit fee, if the permit is not acquired before beginning of work. 
(d)  Re-inspection fees. When the owner or contractor calls for an inspection and the inspector finds that the work is not ready for inspection, a re-inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first re-inspection and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent re-inspection will be assessed. All re-inspection fees shall be paid prior to next inspection of said work. 
(Ord. No. 89-64, § I(b), 10-2-89; Ord. No. 93-30, § III, 6-15-93; Ord. No. 93-40, § III, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 2000-13, § X, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 2012-11, §§ IV, V, 5-1-12) 
Sec. 10-1-96. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-13, § XI, adopted April 4, 2000, repealed § 10-1-96 in its entirety. Former § 10-1-96 pertained to excavating or grading of land and derived from the 1958 Code, § 6-172; and Ord. No. 90-73, § 1, adopted Dec. 27, 1990. 
Sec. 10-1-97. - Plumbing code. 
(a)  An application for a plumbing installation permit shall be accompanied by the payment of the following fee(s): 

 
(b)  Penalty fee. There shall be a penalty of double the price of the permit, in addition to the permit fee, if the permit is not acquired before beginning of work. 
(c)  Re-inspection fees. When the owner or contractor calls for an inspection and the inspector finds that the work is not ready for inspection, a re-inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first re-inspection and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent re-inspection will be assessed. All re-inspection fees shall be paid prior to next inspection of said work. 
(Code 1958, §§ 6-51, 6-54, 6-55; Ord. No. 89-63, § I, 10-2-89; Ord. No. 91-02, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 2000-13, §§ XII, XIII, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 2012-11, § VI, 5-1-12) 
State Law reference— Classes of master plumbers, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-6. 
Sec. 10-1-98. - Garbage dealer. 
(a)  Commercial collections (see section 4-3). 
Franchise fee: Five (5) percent of gross income as per franchise agreement. 
(b)  Residential recycling (see subsection 4-3-3(a)). 
(Ord. No. 95-11, § I, 3-21-95; Ord. No. 2008-11, § I, 4-1-08) 
Sec. 10-1-99. - Demolition. 
The permit fee for demolition operation on pavements, houses, commercial buildings or other structures shall be: 
(1)  One (1) to ten thousand (10,000) square feet—Twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(2)  Ten thousand one (10,001) square feet and over—Fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 97-27, § II, 5-20-97) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1958 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1958 Code, as updated through December 15, 1987, which are included herein. Sections of the 1958 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1958 Code, as updated through December 15, 1987, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1958 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede December 15, 1987, but which were never included in the 1958 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since December 15, 1987, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - STATE CONSTITUTION 
This table shows the location within this Charter, Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the State Constitution. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - OFFICIAL CODE OF GEORGIA ANNOTATED 
This table shows the location within this Charter, Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 