UNIFIED LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE CITY OF GAINESVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted July 19, 2005  Effective, July 19, 2005 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS  of the  CITY OF GAINESVILLE 
____________ 
C. Danny Dunagan, Jr.  Mayor 
____________ 
W. Samuel Couvillon  George Wangemann  Ruth Bruner  Zack Thompson  Barbara B. Brooks  Council Members 
____________ 
Bryan Lackey  City Manager 
____________ 
Denise O. Jordan  City Clerk 
____________ 
Hulsey, Oliver & Mahar, LLP  City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes the unified land development ordinances of the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were Ordinance No. 2005-37, adopted July 19, 2005, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. 
The various sections within each chapter of the Code have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of four component parts separated by dashes, the first figure referring to the title number, the second figure referring to the article number, the third figure referring to the chapter number, and the fourth figure referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 9-1-10 is numbered 9-1-10-1 and the third section of Chapter 9-2-2 is 9-2-2-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its title and chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole titles or chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 9-1-1-8 and 9-1-1-9 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 9-1-1-8.1, 9-1-1-8.2 and 9-1-1-8.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 9-3-3 and 9-3-4, it will be designated as Chapter 9-3-3.5. New titles, articles and divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Zanne Ebersole, Editor, and Aline True, Quality Control Specialist, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Denise Jordan, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Unified Land Development Code which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Article 9-1 - ENACTMENT AND LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

 
CHAPTER 9-1-1. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This Unified Development Code is derived from Ord. No. 2005-37, adopted July 19, 2005, which repealed the former Title 9 of the City Code, and reenacted a new Title 9 as herein set out. Sections without a history note are derived from the original ordinance. 

Sec. 9-1-1-1. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as "The Unified Land Development Code of the City of Gainesville, Georgia" or, for brevity, "The Gainesville Development Code." 
Sec. 9-1-1-2. - Scope. 
This Code constitutes title 9 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Gainesville, Georgia, including regulations governing zoning, land subdivision, historic preservation, land development, building, and related activities among other topics. 
Sec. 9-1-1-3. - Authority. 
This Code is adopted under authority of Article 9, Section 2, Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and pursuant to the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. 36-66-1 et seq.) and other applicable laws enacted by the General Assembly and rules of various departments of state government including but not limited to the following, which shall not be deemed to limit or repeal any other powers granted the governing body under state statutes. 
(a)  The Georgia General Assembly has enacted the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, (Georgia Laws, 1989, pp. 1317-1391, Act 634) which among other things provides for local governments to adopt plans and regulations to implement plans for the protection and preservation of natural resources, the environment, vital areas, and land use. 
(b)  The Georgia General Assembly has enacted the Georgia Historic Preservation Act of 1980 which authorizes local governments to establish historic districts and designate individual properties as historic, and to approval or deny certificates of appropriateness for material changes in appearance in such districts or on such properties designated as historic. 
(c)  The Georgia Department of Community Affairs has promulgated Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning (Chapter 110-3-2 of Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs) to implement the Georgia Planning Act of 1989. Said standards and procedures were ratified by the Georgia General Assembly, and have since been amended. Said rules require local governments that adopt a comprehensive plan pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act of 1989 to describe regulatory measures and land development regulations needed to implement local comprehensive plans. 
(d)  The Georgia Department of Natural Resources has promulgated Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, commonly known as the "Part V" Standards. Said rules were ratified by the Georgia General Assembly and have since been amended. Said rules require local governments that adopt a comprehensive plan to plan for the protection of the natural resources, the environment, and vital areas of the state. 
(e)  The governing body has adopted a comprehensive plan in accordance with the requirements of the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, and Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, and the comprehensive plan has been revised from time to time. 
(f)  The Georgia Legislature, through the enactment of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, Georgia Code Titles 36-71-1 through 36-71-13, has authorized the city to enact development impact fees. 
(g)  The Georgia Department of Community Affairs has adopted administrative rules, chapter 110-12-2, development impact fee compliance requirements, and the city has adopted amendments to its comprehensive plan which have been found by said department to be in compliance with said administrative rules. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § II, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-1-1-4. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this Code include but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Implement the comprehensive plan including goals and policies not currently implemented by land use regulations of the city. 
(b)  Promote the health, safety, welfare, morals, convenience, order, and prosperity of the citizens and the city. 
(c)  Promote responsible growth, lessen congestion in the public streets, secure safety from fire and health dangers, and promote desirable living conditions. 
(d)  Provide adequate access to natural light and air. 
(e)  Promote the orderly and desirable subdivision of land and development of streets, blocks, and lots. 
(f)  Ensure the adequate provision of public facilities, including but not limited to water, sewerage, surface drainage, roads, schools, parks, and playgrounds. 
(g)  Regulate the height, bulk, and the size of buildings and structures. 
(h)  Classify land uses, set out zoning districts and overlay districts, establish procedures for the handling of certain land use matters, and regulate the distribution and density of uses on the land to avoid both the undue concentration of population and the inappropriate dispersion of population, prevent the encroachment of incompatible land uses within residential areas, and preserve property values. 
(i)  Provide for economically sound and stable land development by assuring the provision in land developments of adequate streets, utilities, services, traffic access and circulation, public open spaces. 
Additional purposes and intentions are articulated in the various articles, chapters, and sections, as appropriate. 
Sec. 9-1-1-5. - Adoption. 
It is hereby ordained by the authority of the governing body that the following articles, chapters, and sections, which collectively constitute title 9 of the Code of Ordinances of the city are adopted. 
CHAPTER 9-1-2. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-1-2-1. - Effective date. 
This Code shall take effect immediately upon its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
Sec. 9-1-2-2. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
(a)  Ordinance number 98-61, adopted November 17, 1998, which repealed the former title 9 in its entirety and replaced it with a new title 9, Unified Land Development Code, is hereby repealed and replaced with this Code. 
(b)  Ordinance number 99-47, "Limestone Parkway Overlay Zone," last revised June 15, 1999, is hereby repealed and replaced with chapter 9-8-3 of this Code. 
(c)  Ordinance number 2000-32, relative to protection of water supply watersheds groundwater recharge areas, and wetlands, adopted February 8, 2001, is hereby repealed and replaced with chapters of the same general name in article 9-8 of this Code. 
(d)  Chapter 4-6, "Soil Erosion and Sediment Control," of the City Code, including ordinance number 2001-57, adopted Sept. 18, 2001, and ordinance number 98-61, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 1998, are hereby repealed and replaced with article 9-14 of this Code. 
(e)  Chapter 4-7, "Stormwater Management," of the City Code, including section 1 of ordinance number 90-74, adopted December 27, 1990, is hereby repealed and replaced with chapter 9-13-12, "Stormwater Management," of this Code. 
(f)  Title 7, "Buildings and Construction," chapter 7-1, "Building Regulations," of the City Code is hereby repealed and replaced with article 9-20 of this Code. 
(g)  Chapter 8-1, "Historic Preservation," of the City Code, including Ordinance No. 2001-59, "Historical Preservation," and ordinance number 2005-07 which amended chapter 8-1, are hereby repealed and replaced with regulations in this Code. 
(h)  All other conflicting ordinances or parts of ordinances are hereby repealed to the extent of their conflict. Where this Code and another [ordinance] overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
Sec. 9-1-2-3. - Relationship to private restrictions. 
This Code is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any valid easement, covenant, or deed restriction duly recorded with the clerk of the superior court of Hall County, Georgia. 
Sec. 9-1-2-4. - Validity and severability. 
If any article, chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Code or any amendment thereto is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed as a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid. 
Sec. 9-1-2-5. - Validity of existing conditions of zoning. 
Notwithstanding the repeal of prior ordinances as stated in this chapter, if a property was zoned subject to conditions prior to the adoption of this Code, the existing zoning conditions shall continue to apply to said property, until or unless amended by the governing body. 
Sec. 9-1-2-6. - Previously issued permits. 
The provisions of this Code and any subsequent amendments shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and effective building or development permit if: 
(a)  The development activity or building construction authorized by the permit has been commenced prior to the effective date of this Code or the amendment, or will be commenced after such effective date but within six (6) months of issuance of the permit; and 
(b)  The development activity or building construction continues without interruption (except because of war or natural disaster) until the development or construction is complete. If the permit expires, any further development or construction on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Code in effect on the date of the permit expiration. 
Sec. 9-1-2-7. - Governmental bodies. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, all governmental bodies and authorities exempt from regulation under the police power of the city are exempt from the regulations contained in this Code. 
Sec. 9-1-2-8. - Codification. 
It is the intention of the governing body, and it is hereby ordered that this Code shall become and be made a part of the City Code, and the articles, chapters, and sections of this Code may be renumbered if necessary to fit most appropriately into the City Code. 
Sec. 9-1-2-9. - Amendments. 
This Code may be amended by following procedures specified in the City Code for such amendment. 
In cases where an amendment is proposed involving articles 9-1 through 9-11, articles 9-16 through 9-18, and articles 9-21 through 9-24 of this Code the amendment procedure shall satisfy the requirements of the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. 36-66-1 et seq.) and chapter 9-22-8 of this Code. Amendments to articles of this Code other than those cited in this section shall be considered under procedures generally applicable to amendment to the City Code, provided that the director of planning and development is notified and gives concurrence to the amendment to ensure that the proposed amendment does not conflict with this Code as a whole. 
Article 9-2 - INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

 
CHAPTER 9-2-1. - INTERPRETATIONS 

Sec. 9-2-1-1. - Responsibility for interpretation. 
The director of planning and development shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions, or any other provision of this Code, unless that authority is provided to another administrative official within a specific article. Interpretations of the director or other administrative official may be appealed under the provisions of chapter 9-22-7. The director shall have administrative authority of this Code. 
Sec. 9-2-1-2. - Interpretations. 
In the interpretation and application of this Code all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements. Where the literal interpretation is clear to the director, it shall be construed literally. Where the article, chapter, section, or subsection has a statement of purpose and intent, the director shall consider said purpose and intent in making the interpretation. The director shall make interpretations in a way that are liberally construed in favor of the governing body; provided, however, that where ambiguity exists the director shall interpret this ordinance in favor of the free use of property. 
Sec. 9-2-1-3. - Use of figures. 
Figures associated with defined terms or regulatory paragraphs in this Code are provided for illustration only and do not limit or change the meaning of the term as defined or the requirements of the regulation as written. 
Sec. 9-2-1-4. - Use of words and phrases. 
For the purpose of this Code, the following shall apply to the use of words and phrases: 
(a)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular tense include the plural tense, and words used in the plural tense include the singular tense. 
(b)  The masculine person "he" or "his" also means "her" or "hers." 
(c)  The word "person" is intended to include any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
(d)  The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory and not discretionary, while the word "may" is permissive. 
(e)  The word "and" indicates that all of the conditions, requirements or factors so connected must be met or fulfilled, while the word "or" indicates that at least one condition, requirement or factor so connected must be met. 
(f)  The term "such as" is intended to introduce one or more examples in illustration of a requirement or point, and is intended to mean "including but not limited to the following." 
(g)  The word "day" shall mean a calendar day unless otherwise specified. 
(h)  Where a term is defined in this article, it shall be construed to have meaning and application throughout this Code, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(i)  Where a term is defined in any article other than this article, it is generally the intent that such definition applies only within the article it appears, since it is positioned in the article to which it most readily refers; provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent the director from interpreting that defined term as applying outside the strict context of the article in which it appears, and to that end, all definitions, regardless of location within this Code, apply equally to the use of such terms throughout the Code. 
CHAPTER 9-2-2. - GENERAL DEFINITIONS 
Abutting: Having property lines in common, or having property separated by only an alley. Separation by a street right-of-way is not considered abutting. 
 Abutting 
Alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls columns, and girders, except such emergency change as may be required for safety purposes; any addition to a building; any change in use; or, any movement of a building from one location to another. 
Annexation: The process by which a parcel of land is transferred from the jurisdiction of unincorporated Hall County to the jurisdiction of the city. 
Appeal: A request for a review of an administrative official's interpretation of any provision of this Code, or a request for a review of an action taken by an administrative official in the application or enforcement of this Code. 
As-built survey drawings: Drawings specifying the dimensions, location, capacities, and operational capabilities of structures and facilities as they have been constructed. 
Buffer: A strip of land located between a side or rear property line and a building, structure, or use, intended to separate and obstruct the view of the site on which the buffer is located from an abutting property. A buffer is usually intended to provide screening, as defined and as may be required by this Code. 
(1)  Buffer, natural undisturbed: A buffer that contains a natural area consisting of trees and/or other vegetation, undisturbed except for approved access and utility crossings, and replanted where sparsely vegetated. 
(2)  Buffer, structural: A visual screen created through construction of a solid wooden fence, decorative masonry wall, earthen berm, or combination of fence or wall with an earthen berm, which may be supplemented with vegetation, so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year. 

 Buffer Types 
Buildable area: The portion of a lot which is not located within any minimum required yard, landscape strip, landscaped area, or buffer; that portion of a lot wherein a building or structure may be located. 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
(1)  Building, accessory: A building subordinate to the main building on a lot and used for purposes incidental to the main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith. 
(2)  Building, principal: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. In any residential zoning district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building on the lot on which same is situated, except for detached accessory apartments. 

 Building, Accessory and Principal 
Building frontage: The width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular building, as measured more or less parallel to the front property line. 
Build-to-line: A front building setback line required for a principal building on a particular property so that a continuous and consistent building setback will be achieved considering the front building setbacks of buildings on abutting and/or adjacent lots on the same side of the street or right-of-way. 
 Building Frontage and Build-To Line 
Building coverage: The horizontal area measured within the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor (i.e., "footprint") of all principal buildings, accessory buildings, and accessory structures on the lot, not including steps, terraces, and uncovered porches. 
Building coverage, maximum: The percentage of a given lot that may be occupied by all principal and accessory buildings and structures on said lot, measured within the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor (i.e., "footprint") of all principal and accessory buildings and structures on the lot, not including steps, terraces, and uncovered porches. 
Building height: The vertical distance measured to the highest point of a building from the average finished grade across those sides of a building that face a street. 
 Building Height 
Building official: The city's official responsible for implementing and enforcing the applicable building codes of the city. 
Building setback line: A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the front wall of a principal building (excluding roof overhangs of thirty-six (36) inches or less) and the street right-of-way line or a side or rear building wall and a side or rear property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. For purposes of this Code, a minimum required building setback line and minimum required yard shall be considered the same. 
Certificate of occupancy: An approval issued by the building official, indicating that the building and use or reuse of a particular building or land is in conformity with all applicable codes and regulations, and that such building or land may be occupied for the purpose stated therein. 
City: The City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
City engineer: The director of public works, or the city's official responsible for implementing and enforcing the applicable engineering requirements of this Code and those other engineering requirements of the city. 
Compatibility: The characteristics of different uses or activities that permit such uses or activities to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict. Some elements affecting compatibility include: intensity of occupancy as measured by dwelling units per acre or gross square footage per acre; pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated; volume of goods handled, and such environmental affects as noise, vibration, odor, glare, air pollution or radiation. 
Comprehensive plan: Any plan adopted by the governing body, or any plan adopted by a regional development center covering the local jurisdiction, or portion of such plan or plans. This definition shall be construed liberally to include the major thoroughfare plan, master parks and recreation plan, or any other study, document, or written recommendation pertaining to subjects normally within the subject matter of a comprehensive plan as provided by the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, if formally adopted by the governing body of a participating municipality. 
Concept plan: A document submitted with an application for a rezoning, zoning amendment, annexation, or other type of application upon which the applicant has shown the intended development and its design. Approval of the application request shall not constitute approval of the concept plan; said plan must be adjusted according to the requirements listed for submittal of civil plans or building plans and reviewed by the appropriate departments for permitting. 
Condition of zoning approval: A requirement adopted by the city council at the time of approval of a rezoning, zoning amendment, special use or annexation; placing greater or additional requirements or restrictions on the property than provided in this Code in order to reduce an adverse impact of the request and to further protect the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
Consumer fireworks: Any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. The term consumer fireworks shall not include: 
(1)  Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term consumer fireworks include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and 
(2)  Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party peppers, string peppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
Consumer fireworks retail sales facility: Shall have the same meaning as provided for by the National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 Edition (NFPA 1124). 
Density: The quantity of building per unit of lot area; for example, the number of dwellings per lot area (gross square foot or per acre). 
Designation: A decision by the governing body to designate a district or property as "historic" and thereafter prohibit all material changes in appearance prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to this Code. 
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials; any activity which alters the elevation of the land, removes or destroys plant life, or causes structures of any kind to be erected or removed. 
Development permit: An official authorization issued by the director in accordance with this Code to proceed with land disturbance and grading, as set forth in this Code. 
Director: The director of the department of planning and development of the city, or his or her authorized designee of the planning and development department. This term shall be the same as the director of the community development department or his or her authorized designee of the community development department. 
Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof which is arranged, designed or used for living quarters for one or more families on a permanent or long-term basis. 
EPD director: The director of the environmental protection division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Environmental health department: The Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
Family: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than three (3) unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit; provided, however, that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families. 
Fireworks: Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, balloons requiring fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedos, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. The term fireworks shall not include: 
(1)  Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term fireworks include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and 
(2)  Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party peppers, string peppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
Floor area: The sum of all square footages (areas) of each floor of a building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The following areas are excluded from the measurement of floor area; unfinished attics, attached garages or spaces used for off-street parking and loading, breezeways, and enclosed or unenclosed decks and porches. 
Floor area ratio (FAR): The ratio of the floor area of a building to the area of the lot in which the building is located. For example, a ten thousand (10,000) square foot lot with a maximum FAR of 0.5 cannot exceed a total building floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
Governing body: The mayor and city council of the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Grading: Altering the shape or topography of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Impervious surface: A man-made structure or surface, which prevents the infiltration of water into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, structures, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
 Impervious Surface 
Improvements: The physical addition and changes to land that may be necessary to produce usable, desirable and acceptable lots or building sites. 
Industrialized building: Any structure or component thereof which is designed and constructed in compliance with the state minimum standards codes and is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land but not including plowing and tilling for agricultural practices. 
Lot: A parcel or tract of land held in single ownership. 
(1)  Corner lot: Any lot bounded by two (2) streets at their intersection. 
(2)  Double-frontage lot: A lot bounding on two (2) or more streets, but not at their intersection, so that it is not a corner lot. 
(3)  Interior lot: A lot having frontage on only one street. 

 Types of Lots 
Lot lines: The boundary dividing a given lot from the street, an alley, or adjacent lots. 
(1)  Front lot line: Any boundary line of a lot that abuts a street right-of-way line. A lot adjacent to more than one street will have more than one front lot line. 
(2)  Rear lot line: Any boundary line of a lot that does not intersect with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 
(3)  Side lot line: Any boundary line of a lot that intersects with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 
  
 Types of Lot Lines 
Manufactured home: A dwelling fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq.), which first became effective on June 15, 1976. The term "manufactured home" includes a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term includes any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirement and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq. 
Manufactured home park: Any lot or parcel under single ownership on which two (2) or more manufactured homes are to be located or intended to be located for purposes of residential occupancy. 
Mobile home: A dwelling manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
Occupied: The word "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
Open space, landscaped: That portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, parking, access and service areas, that is designed to enhance privacy and the amenity of the development by providing landscaping features, screening and buffering for the benefit of the occupants or those in neighboring areas, or a general appearance of openness. Landscaped open space may include, but need not be limited to, grass lawns, decorative planting, berms, walls and fences, sidewalks/walkways, ornamental objects such as fountains, statutes and other similar natural and man-made objects, wooded areas, and water courses, any or all of which are designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect within and exterior to the development. 
Overlay zone: A defined geographic area that encompasses one or more underlying zoning districts and that imposes additional requirements above those required by the underlying zoning district. An overlay zone can be coterminous with existing zoning districts or contain only parts of one or more such districts. 
Permitted use: A use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district, or permitted by right in a particular overlay zone. 
Planning and appeals board: The planning and appeals board of the City, Georgia; also known or referred to as the "planning commission." 
Premises: An area of land with its appurtenances and buildings which is one unit of real estate because of its unity of use. 
Principal building setback line: A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between a property line or the right-of-way line of an abutting street and a principal building on a lot. 
(1)  Front building setback: The minimum allowable distance between the right-of-way line of any abutting street and any part of a principal building on a lot. The front setback distance is applied along the full length of the right-of-way line and is parallel to it. 
(2)  Rear building setback: The minimum allowable distance between a rear lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The rear building setback extends along the full length of the rear lot line. 
(3)  Side building setback: The minimum allowable distance between a side lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The side building setback extends along the side lot line between the front building setback and a rear building setback (if any). 

 Principal Building Setback Lines 
Property or parcel of land: See Lot. 
Professional engineer: An engineer licensed and registered to perform the duties of a professional engineer (P.E.) by the state. 
Public utilities director: The director of the department of public utilities of the city, or his designee, whose duties include the review and approval of construction plans for public utilities for the city. 
Public works director: The director of the department of public works of the city, or his designee, whose duties include the review and approval of construction plans for public streets for the city. 
Registered land surveyor: A land surveyor licensed and registered to perform the duties of a registered land surveyor (R.L.S.) by the state. 
Residential industrialized building: Any dwelling unit designed and constructed in compliance with the Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in a manufacturing facility and cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Any such structure shall not contain a permanent metal chassis and shall be affixed to a permanent load-bearing foundation. The term shall not include manufactured homes as defined by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. 
Rezoning: An amendment to the official zoning map, or an amendment to an overlay zone boundary, that changes the zoning district or overlay zone of one or more properties specified in an application; provided, however, that changes to the historic preservation overlay zone are not considered "rezoning" for purposes of this Code and are instead regulated by the provisions of chapter 9-23-3 of this Code. Rezoning also includes applications to change conditions of zoning approval. 
Setback: The shortest straight line distance between a street right-of-way or lot line and the nearest point of a structure or building or projection therefrom (excluding roof overhangs of thirty (30) inches or less). 
Setback, minimum: The shortest distance allowed between a street right-of-way line or any other lot line and any principal or accessory building on a lot. Minimum setback requirements for buildings are associated with the type of lot line from which the setback is taken; for instance, a "side yard setback" is measured from a side lot line. 
Special use: A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a particular zoning district and is not automatically permitted by right within said zoning district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, relation to the neighborhood or other pertinent considerations, may be found to be compatible and approved by the governing body within that particular zoning district as provided in certain instances by this Code. An approved special use runs with the property. 
Story: That portion of a building compromised between a floor and the floor or roof next above. The first floor of a two (2) or multi-story building shall be deemed the story that has no floor immediately below it and that is designed for living quarters or for human occupancy. Those stories above the first floor shall be numbered consecutively. 
Structure: Anything built, constructed or erected, or established or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having permanent location on the ground. For purposes of this Code, parking decks, swimming pools, tennis courts, signs, dog houses, and outdoor fenced animal runs are considered structures. Tents, vehicles, trailers, and play equipment attached to the ground in some permanent or temporary way shall be considered structures. A structure may or may not be easily moved from a given location on the ground. Walls and fences are considered structures but are subject to setback regulations for walls and fences rather than principal or accessory building setback regulations. Driveways and parking lots are not considered structures. 
Used: The word "used" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of this Code which permits construction or use in a matter otherwise prohibited by this Code, which may be approved in individual cases upon application and applied to specific property where compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
(1)  Variance, administrative: A variance which is authorized to be approved by an administrative official under the terms of this Code. 
(2)  Variance, improvement standards: A variance which relieves or modifies an applicant or subdivider of certain subdivision or land development specifications or standards under the terms of this Code. 
(3)  Variance, zoning: A minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading, or other regulations which are dimensional in nature as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
Yard: A space on the same lot with a principal building, open unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
(1)  Yard, front: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. For corner and double frontage lots, front yard requirements apply to all road frontages. 
(2)  Yard, rear: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
(3)  Yard, side: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 

 Yards 
Zoning map: The official zoning map or maps of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-17, § I, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2009-47, § I, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2011-02, § I, 1-18-11; Ord. No. 2015-29, § I, 9-15-15) 
Article 9-3 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

 
CHAPTER 9-3-1. - GENERAL USE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-3-1-1. - Use of land or water. 
No land or water shall hereafter be used, occupied, or altered except in full compliance with the provisions of this Code, unless specifically provided otherwise by this Code. 
No use or activity shall hereafter be established, reestablished, located, extended, or expanded except in full compliance with the provisions of this Code, unless specifically provided otherwise by this Code. 
No building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, relocated, occupied or used, extended, converted, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the provisions of this Code, unless specifically provided otherwise by this Code. 
Sec. 9-3-1-2. - Use prohibited when not specified. 
Any use not specifically permitted as a use by right or specifically indicated as a special use in a given zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, in a given overlay zone) shall be prohibited in that zoning district or overlay zone if applicable and controlling. 
Sec. 9-3-1-3. - Prohibited uses. 
Without limiting the generality of section 9-3-1-2, the following uses are expressly prohibited in the city: 
(a)  Mobile homes and manufactured homes. 
(b)  Mobile home parks and manufactured home parks. 
(c)  The manufacture of or industries that produce: caustic or corrosive acids; chlorine or other noxious gasses; explosives; fertilizer or glue; products involving hair or fur; and industrial uses involving a drop forge or using power hammers. 
(d)  Solid waste landfills. 
(e)  Tanning or finishing of leather or other hides, except taxidermy. 
(f)  Hazardous waste disposal. 
(g)  Petroleum refining. 
(h)  Stockyards or animal feeding pens. 
(i)  Peddlers and mobile vendors, except as may be permitted by the Governing Body in association with a public event. 
(Ord. No. 2007-17, § II, 5-15-07) 
Sec. 9-3-1-4. - Every use must be upon a lot of record. 
No building or structure shall be erected or use established unless upon a lot of record as defined by this Code unless specifically provided otherwise in this Code. 
Sec. 9-3-1-5. - One single-family dwelling per lot of record. 
Only one detached, single-family dwelling unit under fee-simple ownership shall be permitted on a single lot of record. This section shall not be construed to prevent the location of more than one detached single-family dwelling under condominium ownership on a single lot of record, where permitted, or the location of more than one non-residential building on a single lot of record. 
CHAPTER 9-3-2. - GENERAL DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 9-3-2-1. - Height. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to exceed the height limits established for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, for the overlay zone including the airport overlay zone in which the building or structure is located, or any height limits established for a specific building, structure, or use if regulated by article 9-10, or any other provision of this Code, except as otherwise specifically provided by this Code. 
Sec. 9-3-2-2. - Exemptions to height limits. 
Except as may be otherwise required in the airport overlay zone, height limitations of this Code shall not apply to chimneys, smokestacks, church spires and steeples, domes, flag poles, public monuments, observation towers, water towers, non-commercial radio and television towers, electricity transmission towers, utility poles, agricultural uses such as silos and windmills, and similar structures. 
Sec. 9-3-2-3. - Density and lot size. 
No lot shall hereafter be developed with a number of housing units that exceeds the residential density for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, for the overlay zone) in which the lot is located as established by this Code. 
No lot shall hereafter be platted, established, or developed unless it meets or exceeds the minimum lot size for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, for the overlay zone) in which the lot is located as established by this Code; provided, however, that where a zoning district or overlay zone allows the reduction of lot size such as in the case of a conservation subdivision, the overall density requirements for the applicable zoning district or overlay zone shall apply unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Sec. 9-3-2-4. - Lot width. 
No lot shall hereafter be platted, established, or developed that fails to meet the minimum lot width for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, for the overlay zone) in which the lot is located as established by this Code, except as otherwise specifically provided. 
Sec. 9-3-2-5. - Street frontage. 
No lot shall hereafter be platted, established, or developed that fails to maintain a minimum of forty (40) feet of street frontage on a public street, or on an approved private street; provided, however, that fee-simple lots for attached residential dwelling units (i.e. townhouses) may be platted to lot widths and with street frontages specified for such uses in this Code. 
The street frontage requirements of this Code shall not prevent a building, structure, or activity from being accessed through an access easement, so long as the lot on which it is located meets the minimum required street frontage and provided further that the access easement is located in a zoning district that permits the use accessing the easement. 
Sec. 9-3-2-6. - Yards and building setbacks. 
No lot shall hereafter be developed, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered in a manner to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, or side yards than specified for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, by the overlay zone) in which the property is located, or for the specific use if yards and setback regulations specified in this Code pertain to the specific use. 
Where this Code establishes a build-to line, no building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered in a manner inconsistent with the build-to lines specified for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, by the overlay zone) in which the property is located, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code. 
Sec. 9-3-2-7. - Building coverage. 
No lot shall hereafter be developed, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered in a manner that exceeds the maximum building coverage or floor-area ratio specified for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, for the overlay zone) in which it is located, or for the use if specific regulations for such use are established by this Code. 
Sec. 9-3-2-8. - Impervious surface coverage. 
No lot shall hereafter be developed, and no building, structure, or improvement shall hereafter be erected, installed, or altered in a manner that exceeds the maximum impervious surface coverage specified for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, for the overlay zone) in which it is located, or for the use if specific regulations for such use are established by this Code. 
Sec. 9-3-2-9. - Landscaping or open space. 
No lot shall hereafter be developed, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered in a manner to have less than the minimum percentage of landscaping or open space than specified for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, by the overlay zone) in which the property is located, or for the specific use if a minimum percentage of landscaping or open space for the specific use is required by this Code, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code. 
No lot shall hereafter be developed, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered in a manner that reduces the minimum required width of a landscape strip specified for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, by the overlay zone) in which the property is located, or for the specific use if a landscape strip for the specific use is required by this Code, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code. 
Sec. 9-3-2-10. - Buffers and tree protection zones. 
No lot shall hereafter be developed, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered in a manner to have narrower or smaller buffers than specified for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, by the overlay zone) in which the property is located, or for the specific use if buffers for the specific use are required by this Code, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code. The application of buffer requirements established by this Code supersede minimum required yards. 
No part of a required buffer shall be included as a part of the buffer required for another lot, building, or use. 
No lot shall hereafter be developed, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered in a manner that encroaches on a required tree protection zone, unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code. 
Sec. 9-3-2-11. - Acquisition for public purpose. 
When a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose and such acquisition renders the lot with less than the required lot area, lot width, or not in compliance with other dimensional requirements of this Code or where such remaining lot has an existing building or structure that does not meet required building setbacks of this Code, the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the development of the lot in accordance with requirements for nonconforming lots established in this Code; nor shall it be construed to prevent the continuation of the existing building or structure that otherwise conforms to the requirements of this Code. 
Article 9-4 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND OVERLAY ZONES GENERALLY 

 
CHAPTER 9-4-1. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 9-4-1-1. - Zoning districts established. 
The following zoning districts are hereby established in the city: 
Residential: 

 
Nonresidential: 

 
Flexible: 

 
Sec. 9-4-1-2. - Official zoning map. 
The boundaries of zoning districts created by this Code are hereby established as shown on a map entitled the "official zoning map," which is hereby adopted and made a part of this Code. The official zoning map shall indicate the date of adoption and most recent amendment. 
The official zoning map, as adopted by the governing body and subsequently amended from time to time by its action, shall be maintained by the director. The original of the official zoning map shall be kept in the office of the city clerk. 
The official zoning map may be kept electronically in a geographic information system and such electronic data shall constitute an integral part of the official zoning map. The director may make copies of the official zoning maps available to the public for a reasonable fee. 
Sec. 9-4-1-3. - Revisions to official zoning map. 
No changes of any nature shall be made to the official zoning map except in conformity with amendments to the map approved by the governing body. If, in accordance with the provisions of this Code, the governing body approves changes in the zoning district boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be made promptly after the amendment has been approved by the governing body. 
CHAPTER 9-4-2. - OVERLAY ZONES 

Sec. 9-4-2-1. - Overlay zones established. 
The following overlay zones are hereby established in the city, as set forth more fully in article 9-8: 
Airport Overlay Zone 
Gateway Corridor Overlay Zone 
Limestone Parkway Overlay Zone 
North Oconee Water Supply Watershed Protection Overlay Zone 
Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Overlay Zone 
Wetland Protection Overlay Zone 
Midtown Overlay Zone 
Historic Preservation Overlay Zone 
Sec. 9-4-2-2. - Overlay zone maps and boundaries. 
The boundaries of overlay zones are established in chapters of article 9-8. 
The overlay zone maps may be kept electronically in a geographic information system and such electronic data shall constitute an integral part of the overlay zone maps. The director may make copies of the overlay zone maps available to the public for a reasonable fee. 
Sec. 9-4-2-3. - Revisions to overlay zone maps. 
No changes of any nature shall be made to any of the overlay zone maps except in conformity with amendments to the map approved by the governing body and the requirements of this Code for their amendment (see chapter 9-22-2). If, in accordance with the provisions of this Code, the governing body approves changes to any overlay zone boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on an overlay zone map, such changes shall be made promptly after the amendment has been approved by the governing body. 
CHAPTER 9-4-3. - RULES GOVERNING BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 9-4-3-1. - Legal description. 
The boundaries of the zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map and the boundaries of overlay zones as shown on the various overlay zone maps shall be determined on the basis of the legal descriptions associated with approved annexation, rezoning, or special use applications where they exist, or, in the absence of such legal descriptions, on the basis of the location of the boundary as depicted on the official zoning map or overlay zone maps. In cases where questions arise as to the boundaries of a zoning district or overlay zone, the rules of this chapter shall apply. 
Sec. 9-4-3-2. - Streets and railroads. 
Where boundaries of zoning districts or overlay zones are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets highways, or railroads, street right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerline, right-of-way lines or such lines extended shall be construed to be such boundaries. Where boundaries are indicated as approximately paralleling the centerline of streets, highways, or railroads, the location of said boundaries shall be determined by using an engineering scale on the map showing such boundaries. 
Sec. 9-4-3-3. - City limits. 
Where boundaries of zoning districts or overlay zones are indicated as approximately following the corporate limit line of a city, such corporate limit line shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
Sec. 9-4-3-4. - Property lines. 
Where boundaries of zoning districts or overlay zones are indicated as approximately following property lines or such lines extended, such property lines or such lines extended shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
Sec. 9-4-3-5. - Streams and rivers. 
Where boundaries of zoning districts or overlay zones are indicated as approximately following the centerline of stream beds or river beds, such centerline shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
Sec. 9-4-3-6. - Abandonment or vacation of right-of-way. 
Where a public street or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, and said street or right-of-way is also a zoning district or overlay zone boundary, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned public street or right-of-way. 
Sec. 9-4-3-7. - Determinations, interpretations, and appeals. 
In the case where the exact location of a zoning district or overlay zone boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the director shall determine the location of the boundary. Any such administrative determination is subject to appeal as an administrative decision in accordance with chapter 9-22-7 regarding the appeal of administrative decisions. 
Article 9-5 - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

 
CHAPTER 9-5-1. - R-I-A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 9-5-1-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-I-A residential district is established to provide areas of primarily low density single-family residential development along with other uses that are compatible with a residential environment such as recreational, educational, and religious facilities. This district is intended to implement the city comprehensive plan's suburban, medium-density residential future land use category with a density not to exceed two (2) dwelling units per acre. 
Sec. 9-5-1-2. - Permitted and special uses. 
Permitted and special uses shall be as provided in table 9-5-1 , "Permitted and Special Uses for Residential Zoning Districts." 
Sec. 9-5-1-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in table 9-5-2 , "Dimensional Requirements for Residential Zoning Districts." 
CHAPTER 9-5-2. - R-I RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 9-5-2-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-I residential district is established to provide areas of primarily low- to moderate-density, single-family residential development along with other uses that are compatible with a residential environment such as recreational, educational, and religious facilities. This district is intended to implement the city comprehensive plan's suburban, medium-density residential future land use category with a density not to exceed two (2) dwelling units per acre). This district is also intended to provide for new, high-quality infill residential development that maintains community character, and ensures stable, long-term property values and neighborhoods, at higher densities than the base density of the zoning district, subject to compatibility standards and/or pursuant to a specific neighborhood plan. 
Sec. 9-5-2-2. - Permitted and special uses. 
Permitted and special uses shall be as provided in table 9-5-1 , "Permitted and Special Uses for Residential Zoning Districts." 
Sec. 9-5-2-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in table 9-5-2 , "Dimensional Requirements for Residential Zoning Districts." 
CHAPTER 9-5-3. - N-C NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICT 

Sec. 9-5-3-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The N-C neighborhood conservation district is established to allow the transition of older residential areas to primarily low- to moderate-density single-family residential development, along with other uses that are compatible with a residential environment such as recreational, educational and religious facilities. This district is intended to implement the city comprehensive plan's suburban, medium-density residential future land use category with density not to exceed two (2) dwelling units per acre. This district is also intended to provide for new, high-quality infill residential development that maintains community character, and ensures stable, long-term property values and neighborhoods, at higher densities than the base density of the zoning district, subject to compatibility standards and/or pursuant to a specific neighborhood plan. 
Sec. 9-5-3-2. - Permitted and special uses. 
Permitted and special uses shall be as provided in table 9-5-1 , "Permitted and Special Uses for Residential Zoning Districts." 
Sec. 9-5-3-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in table 9-5-2 , "Dimensional Requirements for Residential Zoning Districts." 
CHAPTER 9-5-4. - R-II RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 9-5-4-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-II residential district is established to provide for single-family, two-family and multi-family residential development, along with other uses that are compatible with a residential environment such as recreational, educational and religious facilities. This district is intended to implement the following categories of the city's future land use map: urban residential low, including areas containing or planned for urban residential development at a density range of four (4) to five (5) dwelling units per acre; urban residential medium, including areas containing or planned for urban residential development at a density range of five (5) to ten (10) dwelling units per acre; and urban, high-density residential, including areas containing or planned for urban residential development at a density range of ten (10) to twelve (12) dwelling units per acre. 
Sec. 9-5-4-2. - Permitted and special uses. 
Permitted and special uses shall be as provided in table 9-5-1 , "Permitted and Special Uses for Residential Zoning Districts." 
Sec. 9-5-4-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in table 9-5-2 , "Dimensional Requirements for Residential Zoning Districts." 
CHAPTER 9-5-5. - R-O RESIDENTIAL AND OFFICE 

Sec. 9-5-5-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The basic character of this district is one which encourages and assures a compatible mixture of residential, office and specialty retail types of land uses. This district is identified as one in which the physical character and design of existing and proposed new structures play an important role in assuring the compatibility of the various uses. The provisions of this district are set forth with a goal of allowing greater flexibility of use for older existing structures and encouraging their continued viability by permitting new structures whose design is compatible within the district. Special procedures for the review of building design and uses are recognized as essential for the establishment and maintenance of the character of this district. 
Dimensional requirements for R-O zoning districts are configured on the basis of the platted lot, and such requirements are intended to allow for mixed-use buildings and nonresidential development at scales compatible with residential neighborhoods. 
Sec. 9-5-5-2. - Permitted and special uses. 
Permitted and special uses shall be as provided in table 9-5-1 , "Permitted and Special Uses for Residential Zoning Districts." Business service establishments and Personal service establishments are special uses in this zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § II, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-5-5-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in table 9-5-2 , "Dimensional Requirements for Residential Zoning Districts." 
TABLE 9-5-1  PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

 

 
TABLE 9-5-2  DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

 
NP = Not Permitted 
*Lot size may be reduced in this zoning district to ten thousand (10,000) square feet within infill residential development projects, subject to the requirements of chapter 9-10-12 of this ULDC. 
**Required zoning buffers may be reduced in width with installation of a structural buffer as provided in chapter 9-16-2. 
(Ord. No. 2008-43, § III, 4-18-08; Ord. No. 2009-47, §§ III, IV, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2011-02, § II, 1-18-11; Ord. No. 2013-10, § I, 6-13-13) 
Article 9-6 - NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

 
CHAPTER 9-6-1. - O-I OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 9-6-1-1. - Purpose and intent. 
Within an office and institutional (O-I) district a variety of offices, professional offices, institutions, and public offices are permitted, but only those not involving the sale, wholesale, storage, or processing of merchandise. Multi-family residences are permitted as a special use. 
Areas zoned to this classification are not intended to be retail centers, commercial, or industrial activities. Rather, it is the intent of the district to provide locations for a wide range of open, uncrowded sites for offices, professional offices, institutions, and residences. The district is primarily intended to be located along arterial streets, but it can also be located in areas dominated by institutions such as a college, where a wide range of land uses are required. 
In some cases, this district may be appropriate as a transition between commercial and residential zoning districts. 
Sec. 9-6-1-2. - Permitted and special uses. 
Permitted and special uses shall be as provided in table 9-6-1 , "Permitted and Special Uses for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
Sec. 9-6-1-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in table 9-6-2 , "Dimensional Requirements for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
CHAPTER 9-6-2. - N-B NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 9-6-2-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The neighborhood business zoning district is intended to implement the neighborhood commercial category of the future land use map. These districts are envisioned to form nodes of development containing a total of ten thousand (10,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of small-scale buildings on sites totaling two (2) to five (5) acres, serving a population of approximately two thousand five hundred (2,500) to five thousand (5,000) living within a one to two-mile radius. Such areas are typically made up of small shops and offices, possibly anchored by a small neighborhood grocery or drug store. 
Within a neighborhood business (N-B) district a limited range of retailing and service activities are permitted. These limitations apply regarding both size and character of individual establishments. All of the uses permitted in this district shall be conducted inside buildings. This zoning district excludes most highway-oriented and automobile-related sales and service establishments and uses that rely on passer-by traffic from highways. Most of the uses permitted in this zoning district are not auto-oriented in nature, and the overall character of neighborhood business districts is such that access by both vehicles and pedestrians is possible. 
Sec. 9-6-2-2. - Permitted and special uses. 
Permitted and special uses shall be as provided in table 9-6-1 , "Permitted and Special Uses for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
Sec. 9-6-2-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in table table 9-6-2 , "Dimensional Requirements for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
In addition to the provisions of table 9-6-2 , buildings shall observe the following requirement: 
No individual establishment shall exceed fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor area total or eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet of gross floor area on the ground level floor. 
CHAPTER 9-6-3. - C-B CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 9-6-3-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The central business (C-B) District provides for the most intensive use of land for retail, service and office uses. The district is intended to provide a compact, pedestrian-friendly area of economic activity in the city. Activities in the C-B district are not normally oriented to serving residential areas in the same manner are as the neighborhood shopping and general business zoning districts. 
This district is unique in that the existing development pattern consists of buildings covering very large percentages of the lot, little if any building setbacks on front, side, and rear property lines, and a lack of off-street parking sufficient to meet the requirements of other commercial zoning districts. This district is distinguished from other commercial zoning districts in that greater building coverage is permitted and yard requirements are minimal. Permitted uses are those that contribute to a pedestrian-friendly central business district. Automobile-related facilities and services are not appropriate to this character and are restricted in this zoning district. 
Sec. 9-6-3-2. - Permitted and special uses. 
Permitted and special uses shall be as provided in table 9-6-1 , "Permitted and Special Uses for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
Sec. 9-6-3-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in table 9-6-2 , "Dimensional Requirements for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
CHAPTER 9-6-4. - R-B REGIONAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 9-6-4-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the regional business (R-B) district shall be to provide for the grouping of certain uses for the shopping convenience of consumers and the efficient provision of parking for business patrons in a manner that minimizes the impact of traffic on the street network and that minimizes the adverse visual and other impacts of loading, storage, and building service areas on surrounding properties and on the view from public streets. 
This district provides areas for those business and commercial uses which primarily serve the public traveling by automobile and which benefit from direct access to highways. Such districts are generally designed so that the automobile has precedence over the pedestrian, although pedestrian access is required. 
Sec. 9-6-4-2. - Permitted and special uses. 
Permitted and special uses shall be as provided in table 9-6-1 , "Permitted and Special Uses for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
Sec. 9-6-4-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in table 9-6-2 , "Dimensional Requirements for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
CHAPTER 9-6-5. - G-B GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 9-6-5-1. - Purpose and intent. 
Within the general business (G-B) district, a wide range of office, retailing, commercial activities, and services are permitted. The permitted uses have more off-site impacts on residential areas and other adjoining land uses than neighborhood commercial areas. This district typically serves a larger number of patrons than neighborhood commercial districts. 
This district provides areas for those business and commercial uses which primarily serve the public traveling by automobile and which benefit from direct access to highways. Such districts are generally designed so that the automobile has precedence over the pedestrian, although pedestrian access is required. 
Sec. 9-6-5-2. - Permitted and special uses. 
Permitted and special uses shall be as provided in table 9-6-1 , "Permitted and Special Uses for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
Sec. 9-6-5-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in table 9-6-2 , "Dimensional Requirements for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
CHAPTER 9-6-6. - L-I LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 9-6-6-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The light industrial (L-I) district is intended to provide areas where light manufacturing uses that primarily involve finishing, fabrication or assembly of previously manufactured parts may be located. The district's proximity to residential and other districts makes it desirable to limit industrial operations to those that are not objectionable due to generation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. The district is intended to exclude manufacturing or industrial uses that emit noxious odors, dust, fumes, gas, noise or vibration outside of any building on the premises. 
The industries locating in this district are characterized as lower in intensity, cleaner, and generally more compatible when located adjacent to commercial areas than are heavy industrial uses. Such industries are capable of operation in a manner so as to control the external effects of the manufacturing process through prevention or mitigation devices and conduct of operations within the confines of buildings. 
Sec. 9-6-6-2. - Permitted and special uses. 
Permitted and special uses shall be as provided in table 9-6-1 , "Permitted and Special Uses for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
Sec. 9-6-6-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in table 9-6-2 , "Dimensional Requirements for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
CHAPTER 9-6-7. - H-I HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 9-6-7-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The heavy industrial (H-I) district is intended for the location of primarily light and heavy manufacturing uses with limited restrictions on off-site impacts such as noxious odors, dust, fumes, gas, noise, and vibration. Some permitted or special uses may be objectionable due to the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, or radiation and that may create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. Special uses in this district include those uses known to create a severe safety hazard or to be major producers of air pollution, thus being subject to state and/or federal environmental controls. 
Sec. 9-6-7-2. - Permitted and special uses. 
Permitted and special uses shall be as provided in table 9-6-1 , "Permitted and Special Uses for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
Sec. 9-6-7-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in table 9-6-2 , "Dimensional Requirements for Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
TABLE 9-6-1  PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES  FOR NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

 

 
TABLE 9-6-2  DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

 
NP = Not Permitted 
* Required zoning buffers may be reduced in width with installation of a structural buffer as provided in Chapter 9-16-2-6 of this Unified Land Development Code. 
** Within the N-B zoning district, no individual establishment shall exceed 50,000 square feet of gross floor area total or 18,000 square feet of gross floor area on the ground level floor. 
  
(Ord. No. 2007-17, §§ IV, V, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2008-43, §§ I, IV, 4-18-08; Ord. No. 2009-47, §§ V, VI, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2011-02, § III, 1-18-11; Ord. No. 2013-10, § II, 6-13-13; Ord. No. 2015-29, § II, 9-15-15) 
Article 9-7 - FLEXIBLE ZONING DISTRICTS 

 
CHAPTER 9-7-1. - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 9-7-1-1. - Purpose and intent generally. 
This zoning district is intended to provide for maximum flexibility in the mixture and arrangement of land uses. The PUD zoning district provides for planned unit developments and mixed use developments but provides separate design specifications for both. This district provides for unique and innovative land developments that will meet the objectives of the city's comprehensive plan. Development in this zoning district is characterized by a unified site design for the entire development. 
This district is a "floating" (initially unmapped) zone, to be established upon successful application by the property owner/applicant and approval by the governing body; provided, however, that certain properties that were zoned P-R-D, P-O-D, P-C-D, or P-I-D districts on the effective date of this Code may be designated on the official zoning map as PUD, in which case they shall be subject to all regulations established for the district, development, or site at the time the property received rezoning or development approval. Any changes to such development approvals shall be subject to consideration under the terms of this chapter. 
This zoning district is also established to meet the following objectives: 
(a)  Encourage and allow the development of tracts of land as planned neighborhoods or communities according to designs that coordinate building forms that are interrelated and architecturally harmonious. 
(b)  Encourage and allow more unique, flexible, creative, imaginative arrangements and mixes of land use in site planning and development than are permitted through zoning district requirements established in this Code, but not in conflict with the comprehensive plan of the city. 
(c)  Encourage a broader mix of residential housing types, including detached and attached dwellings, than would normally be constructed in conventional subdivisions, and provide for unique dwelling arrangements not typically provided in conventional subdivisions. 
(d)  Preserve the natural amenities of the land through maintenance of conservation areas and open spaces within developments, provide amenities, and provide where needed the civic and semi-public uses (e.g., schools, playgrounds, meeting halls, etc.) that help to make up a community. 
(e)  Provide for the efficient use of land by encouraging smaller networks of utilities and streets which may lower development and housing costs. 
(f)  Provide an environment of stable character compatible with surrounding residential areas. 
(g)  Ensure that applications for PUD zoning have enough information to thoroughly analyze the merits of the proposal. 
This zoning district is not intended to be used as an alternative to obtaining variances for developments unable to comply with other zoning district provisions. Rezoning to this district is not intended to be a process of relief to applicants that merely seek one or more variances. Applications for rezoning to the PUD district shall be rejected by the director if the development proposal does not match clearly the purposes and intentions of this chapter, or if another remedy is available and would be more appropriate, such as an application for variance. For instance, an application for rezoning to this zoning district which consists of a single-use which cannot meet a particular dimensional requirement of the zoning district in which it is located, such as minimum lot frontage or building setback, shall be summarily rejected by the director because a variance is the more appropriate remedy. The PUD zoning district is not intended to allow for the intrusion of incompatible land uses into single-family neighborhoods that create negative land use impacts. 
Because the PUD zoning district promotes maximum flexibility, the type, mix, and placement of development are virtually unlimited, and examples can help illustrate what is intended by the city in establishing this district. Generally, this district characterizes developments as two types: planned unit development and mixed-use development. 
Sec. 9-7-1-2. - Intentions for planned unit developments. 
Planned unit developments are intended to provide a variety of dwelling types, including some combination of detached single-family (fee-simple or condominium), duplex, townhouse, and multi-family dwellings. Planned unit developments are predominantly residential but not necessarily exclusively residential. Planned unit developments feature clustered buildings, common open space, and unconventional or unique site designs. Planned unit developments may contain a mix of building types and land uses. 
 Planned Unit Developments 
Depending on size, a planned unit development may include offices, retail trade and service establishments, and civic and institutional uses (but see the recommendations for land use mixing provided in this chapter). When such other uses are part of a planned unit development, they often constitute multi-use (i.e., different land uses situated next to each other) but are not necessarily mixed use (i.e., the different uses do not exist in the same building, but they are designed to be interrelated and interconnected). 
Sec. 9-7-1-3. - Intentions for mixed-use developments. 
Mixed-use development includes development of a single building or single parcel to contain two or more of the following types of uses: residential, office, institutional, or retail or service commercial. Mixed uses may be combined vertically within the same building or placed side by side on the same parcel, provided that they are in close proximity, planned as a unified and complementary whole, and functionally integrated to make use of shared vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas. 
 Mixed-Use Developments 
Mixed-use developments typically consist of two (2) or more different land uses in the same building. The term mixed use development specifically includes live/work units and other mixtures of residential use with office, retail, service, or institutional uses. Mixed-use developments have a pedestrian friendly character (e.g., with a storefront or village design). 
Sec. 9-7-1-4. - Permitted uses. 
There are no pre-specified permitted or special uses for the PUD district. Within this district, a variety of land uses, and any land use, may be permitted if such use or uses can be shown to provide an orderly relation and function to other uses in the development and to existing land uses on-site and off-site, with due regard to the city's comprehensive plan. 
The permitted use or uses of property located in this zoning district shall be determined at the time the development is approved via the rezoning process. Unless otherwise specifically noted in the governing body's approval of the zoning district and the plan for development, the property within the zoning district shall be limited to those uses requested as part of the application and which are approved by the governing body. 
Sec. 9-7-1-5. - Relationship to specific use regulations. 
An application for rezoning and development plan approval that includes a use for which this Code specifies certain regulations (see article 9-10), shall not be required to demonstrate conformance with the specific use regulations of article 9-10 applicable to such use or uses; provided, however, the governing body may condition uses in a manner consistent with the provisions of article 9-10 as it may determine appropriate. Therefore, applications which include uses governed by article 9-10 should address the consistency of the development proposal with applicable specific use provisions of article 9-10. To that end, the director may require the applicant to address the proposed development's consistency with development specifications for specific uses described in article 9-10. 
Sec. 9-7-1-6. - Guidelines for land use mixing. 
Without limiting the flexibility provided by this chapter for mixing land uses, some guidance on the desired range of mixing of land uses is necessary. This section provides guidelines and recommendations which shall guide applicants, staff, the planning and appeals board, and the governing body in proposing, considering, and acting upon the merits of development proposals. This section shall not be construed to prevent an applicant from proposing a development inconsistent with the provisions of this section, although due adherence to these guidelines and recommendations may in the discretion of the governing body be imposed through conditions of zoning and development plan approval. 
(a)  Residential developments. Where predominantly single-family residential uses are proposed, the gross density should not exceed the recommendations of the comprehensive plan as described for the land use classification in which the property is located, as shown on the city's future land use plan map. 
(b)  Different dwelling types. Developments that include residential uses should provide for more than just one type of dwelling unit, such as detached, single-family dwellings (fee simple or condominium ownership), townhouses, duplexes, or multi-family (including condominium ownership) dwellings. This does not mean there should be an even or proportional distribution among more than one dwelling type. Where detached, single-family dwellings are included, the total number of multi-family dwelling units and the total acreage of development devoted to multi-family dwellings should not typically exceed twenty-five (25) percent. 
(c)  Civic and institutional uses. Sites for churches, schools, community or club buildings, and similar public or semi-public facilities are encouraged to be provided, where appropriate. Uses such as schools, churches, and other institutions where provided should be part of an integrated site design and located and designed to minimize negative impacts. 
  
 Civic and Institutional Uses 
(d)  Office and commercial uses in predominantly residential developments. Within planned unit developments (i.e., predominantly residential), commercial and offices uses, if proposed, should be located in careful relation to other land uses within and outside of the development, and they should be scaled and oriented so that they primarily serve the occupants of the planned unit development. Neighborhood business uses may be appropriate in areas not designated on the future land use plan map but only when such uses are consistent with the applicable development policies contained in the comprehensive plan. Such uses, where provided, should be part of an integrated site design and located and designed to minimize negative impacts. In predominantly residential developments, the amount of land in the development devoted to commercial and office uses should not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the total land area, unless it can be shown that a greater percentage of land devoted to such uses is more conducive to the mix of uses. 
(e)  Commercial uses. PUD districts permit commercial uses that are compatible with pedestrian-scale development, but they are not envisioned to include automobile sales or service establishments, outdoor storage, or other auto-oriented commercial uses including drive-through facilities that conflict with a pedestrian-friendly development pattern. 

 Commercial Uses 
(f)  Industrial uses. Industrial uses are not typically considered to be appropriate for inclusion within planned unit developments or mixed use developments; however, such uses are not prohibited and may be considered appropriate in larger (e.g., twenty (20) acres or more) developments where living and working areas need to be close to one another. If industrial uses are proposed, they should avoid nuisances on residential development within or adjacent to the PUD, through buffers. The buffer requirements for light industrial districts as specified in table 9-6-2 may be required as conditions of approval to avoid nuisances. 
(g)  Open space, passive or active recreation, landscaped open space, and natural/conservation areas. Planned unit developments should be designed around and connected to any open space corridors or networks that exist or are planned. Developments are expected to devote at least twenty (20) percent of the total land area to natural areas, conservation areas, open spaces, and active or passive recreational areas, or some combination thereof. 
(h)  Areas designated for mixed use. Developments which take place on property designed for mixed use on the future land use plan map should consider the following recommended mix of residential, office/institutional, and neighborhood retail, measured in terms of land area devoted to each use: 
Office/institutional: Forty (40) percent; 
Neighborhood retail: Thirty (30) percent; 
Residential: Thirty (30) percent. 
In such areas, predominantly residential development or other developments inconsistent with this recommended land use mix may be considered inappropriate and inconsistent with the future land use plan map. 
(i)  Neighborhood plans. Neighborhood planning units provide for more detailed planning than shown on the future land use plan map and may include parcel-specific recommendations for land uses and guidelines for design. Any development within an area designated as a neighborhood planning unit and which has a neighborhood plan adopted by the governing body should be substantially in accordance with the recommendations of such adopted neighborhood plan. No rezoning to this district should be permitted that fails to maintain existing neighborhoods as stable and desirable places to live and raise families. 
Sec. 9-7-1-7. - Minimum acreage or development size. 
When a planned unit development is proposed to include residential uses only, the minimum acreage to rezone or develop shall be one and one-half (1.5) acres to ensure prospects for mixture of different types of dwellings; otherwise, there is no established minimum acreage to rezone to this district or to develop within this zoning district. 
Sec. 9-7-1-8. - Dimensional requirements. 
To ensure maximum flexibility, there are no pre-specified requirements for minimum lot size, minimum lot width, lot coverage, yards and building setbacks, or height. Proposals for development must be reasonable, however, and shall not deviate to any significant degree from the goals, policies, objectives, and techniques specified in the city's adopted comprehensive plan. 
A detailed development plan shall be submitted by the applicant for rezoning to this district. Minimum dimensional requirements for PUD zoning districts are established on the basis of the development, and such requirements are intended to allow for multiple (different) uses within the development. Standards proposed by the developer are legally binding on the development if approved, unless otherwise specified by the governing body. 
Sec. 9-7-1-9. - Additional application requirements. 
The requirements for rezoning applications are specified in chapter 9-22-2, which includes additional application requirements for PUD rezoning/development approval. 
Sec. 9-7-1-10. - Approval procedures. 
The process and criteria for considering rezoning applications are specified in chapter 9-22-2. That chapter includes additional procedural requirements for PUD rezoning/development approval and criteria for acting upon them. 
Article 9-8 - OVERLAY ZONES 

 
CHAPTER 9-8-1. - AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE 

Sec. 9-8-1-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the airport overlay zone is to impose height and use restrictions necessary to ensure that structures and natural objects will not impair flight safety or decrease the operational capability of Lee Gilmer Memorial Airport. These zones overlay the various zoning districts and are intended to provide greater restrictions than the zoning districts otherwise provide with regard to heights and aircraft navigation. 
Sec. 9-8-1-2. - Definitions. 
Airport: Lee Gilmer Memorial Airport. 
Airport elevation: One thousand two hundred seventy-seven (1,277) feet above mean sea level. 
Airport overlay zones: Areas located on the ground that are defined in their boundaries by the airport surfaces overhead, including: 
(1)  Primary surface zone: That area on the ground that coincides with the primary surface for each runway. 
(2)  Approach zone: That area on the ground directly beneath an approach surface. 
(3)  Horizontal zone: That area on the ground directly beneath the horizontal surface. 
(4)  Conical zone: That area on the ground directly beneath the conical surface. 
(5)  Transitional zone: That area on the ground directly beneath the transitional surfaces. 
(6)  Navigable airspace zone: That area on the ground within six (6) nautical miles of the airport reference point, and not included in any of the other airport zones. 
Airport reference point: A horizontal reference point calculated in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 150/5300-4B. (For the airport configuration on July 1, 1990, the position is 34°16'22"N, 83°49'47"E.) 
Airport surfaces: Imaginary planes that define the lower limit of aircraft operational areas around an airport, including: 
(1)  Primary surface: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway and extending two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
(2)  Approach surface: A surface centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface at a slope designated by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(3)  Horizontal surface: A horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan is established by swinging arcs of ten thousand (10,000) feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. 
(4)  Conical surface: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) to one for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
(5)  Transitional surfaces: These surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. 
Airport zone structure: An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
Hazard to air navigation: An obstruction determined to have substantial adverse effect on the same and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
Height datum: The vertical distance above mean sea level elevation. 
Navigable airspace surface: That area of airspace greater than two hundred (200) feet above ground level or above the established airport elevation (Lee Gilmer Memorial Airport elevation of one thousand two hundred seventy-seven (1,277) feet, plus two hundred (200) feet equals one thousand four hundred seventy-seven (1,477) feet), whichever is higher, within three (3) nautical miles (18,228 feet) of the established airport reference point, which height increases in the proportion of one hundred (100) feet for each additional nautical mile of distance from the airport to a maximum of five hundred (500) feet at six (6) nautical miles (thirty-six thousand four hundred fifty-six (36,456) feet). 
Obstruction or obstruction to air navigation: Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile object, which extends above an airport surface as defined in this section. 
Runway: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
Runway designations: Runways are numbered by the compass heading of approach for landing aircraft. At Lee Gilmer Airport, runways are: 4, at an approach heading of 40°; 22, at an approach heading of 220°; 11, at an approach heading of 110°; and, 29, at an approach heading of 290°. 
Tree: A self-supporting woody plant that normally reaches a mature height of at least fifteen (15) feet. 
Sec. 9-8-1-3. - Airport zones established. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones within the airport overlay zone which include all of the land lying beneath the primary surfaces, approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to Lee Gilmer Memorial Airport. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The airport zones are: 
(a)  Primary zone. For runways 11 and 29, the primary surface is centered on the runway, two hundred fifty (250) feet wide, and extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of the runway. For runways 4 and 22, the primary surface is centered on the runway, five hundred (500) feet wide, and extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of the runway. 
(b)  Approach zone—Runways 11 and 29. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface which is two hundred fifty (250) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of eight hundred fifty (850) feet at a horizontal distance of three thousand (3,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(c)  Approach zone—Runway 22. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface which is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of one thousand four hundred (1,400) feet at a horizontal distance three thousand (3,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(d)  Approach zone—Runway 4. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface which is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of one thousand five hundred thirty (1,530) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand one hundred (5,100) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(e)  Transitional zones. The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
(f)  Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of ten thousand (10,000) feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(g)  Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
(h)  Navigable airspace zones. These consist of four (4) zones which are centered on each runway centerline, beginning eleven thousand (11,000) feet from the end of each primary zone and expanding outwardly as shown in table 9-8-1-1 as follows: 
TABLE 9-8-1-1  NAVIGABLE AIRSPACE ZONES 

 
Sec. 9-8-1-4. - Airport overlay zone map. 
The various airport zones established by this chapter are illustrated on the approach plan and profile map of Lee Gilmer Memorial Airport, prepared by Mayes, Sudderth & Etheredge, Inc., and dated March 15, 1994, which is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
  
 Airport Overlay Zone 
Sec. 9-8-1-5. - Airport zone height limitations. 
No structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any airport zone to a height in excess of the maximum height established for such zone, as shown in table 9-8-1-2; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure or growth of any tree to a height up to fifty (50) feet above the surface of land. 
TABLE 9-8-1-2  HEIGHT LIMITATIONS BY AIRPORT ZONE 

 
Sec. 9-8-1-6. - Use restriction. 
No use shall be located within any airport zone that would create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
Sec. 9-8-1-7. - Hazards shall not be increased. 
No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto or a greater hazard than it is when the application for a permit is made. 
Sec. 9-8-1-8. - Marking and lighting. 
The owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree within an airport zone must permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the airport manager to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the city. 
Sec. 9-8-1-9. - Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. 
Whenever the public works director determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than fifty (50) percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, such tree or structure shall be removed or modified to the extent necessary to comply with the applicable height limit. 
Sec. 9-8-1-10. - Variances. 
Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this section, may apply to the planning and appeals board for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. 
Sec. 9-8-1-11. - Staff review of application for variance. 
Variance applications pursuant to this chapter shall be reviewed by the director of public works and the airport manager, and their response or recommendation must be received prior to action on any such variance. 
Sec. 9-8-1-12. - Findings required to support variances. 
A variance may be allowed only where it is duly found that the requirements of the variance procedures and standards contained in chapter 9-22-6 are met; and relief granted will not create a hazard to air navigation as defined by this chapter or as determined by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Sec. 9-8-1-13. - Marking and lighting a condition of variance approval. 
Any variance granted shall be conditioned to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary, and to permit the city, at its own expense, to operate and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
CHAPTER 9-8-2. - GATEWAY CORRIDOR OVERLAY ZONE 

Sec. 9-8-2-1. - Purpose and intent. 
One of the key goals established in the comprehensive plan is the improvement of community quality, especially in the form of improved development quality. The perceived quality of new growth and development is an important element of community character and livability. An important element of quality of growth is the recognition of the importance of community "gateways." Gateways refer to key points of entry into a community. In the case of Gainesville, there are several gateway corridors that are important both from a functional transportation and a symbolic perspective. 
Consistent with the recommendations of the comprehensive plan, this chapter establishes provisions to ensure that the design quality of new development in the city's identified gateway corridors are held to high standards, as applied via the site and architectural design review processes established in article 9-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § VI, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-8-2-2. - Boundaries and map. 
The boundaries of the gateway corridor overlay zone shall be as shown on a map titled gateway corridor overlay zone which is hereby adopted and made a part of this Code, and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established in this Code. 
The boundaries of the gateway corridor overlay zone include all those major roadways entering the city, with the exception of those corridors that are fully included within the Limestone and Midtown overlay zones. The gateway corridor overlay zone shall include all properties fronting on a gateway corridor designated on the overlay zone map. 
Sec. 9-8-2-3. - Permitted uses. 
All uses permitted by right or as special uses by the underlying zoning district shall be similarly permitted under the gateway corridor overlay zone. This chapter does not establish use limitations. 
  

(Ord. No. 2016-09, § V, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-8-2-4. - Dimensional requirements. 
This overlay zone does not establish dimensional requirements. Uses shall be subject to the applicable dimensional requirements for the underlying zoning district in which said uses are located. 
Secs. 9-8-2-5—9-8-2-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09, § VI, adopted June 21, 2016, repealed §§ 9-8-2-5—9-8-2-11 which pertained to buildings, freestanding walls and fences, off-street parking and loading, underground utilities, stormwater detention, grass areas, and compliance, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 2009-47, §§ VIII—IX, adopted Dec. 15, 2009. 
CHAPTER 9-8-3. - LIMESTONE PARKWAY OVERLAY ZONE 

Sec. 9-8-3-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the Limestone Parkway overlay zone is to provide special design requirements for those properties located within the zone, regardless of their zoning classification, in order to maintain a consistent appearance along the parkway and throughout the zone, as applied via the site and architectural design review processes established in article 9-9 of this Code. The intent of this zone is to create an identity for the area that will enhance its economic vitality and protect the value of properties within the zone. 
It is also the intent of this chapter, relative to hillside developments, to retain an overall appearance similar to that of the natural terrain, i.e., to limit extreme alteration of the terrain and blend approved alterations into the natural shape of the land; specifically: 
(a)  To preserve the most visually significant slope banks and ridge lines in their natural state by clustering developments; 
(b)  To encourage only minimal grading which relates to the natural contour of the land; 
(c)  To preserve visually significant rock outcropping, native plant materials, natural hydrology, and areas of visual significance; 
(d)  To encourage variety in building types, padding techniques, grading techniques, lot sizes, site design, density, arrangement, and spacing of buildings in developments; 
(e)  To encourage innovative architectural, landscaping, circulation, and site design; 
(f)  To discourage mass grading of large pads and excessive terracing; and, 
(g)  To provide safe circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and within the hillside areas and to provide access for emergency vehicles necessary to serve the hillside areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § VII, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-8-3-2. - Boundaries and map. 
The boundaries of the Limestone Parkway overlay zone shall be as shown on a map titled Limestone Parkway overlay zone which is hereby adopted and made a part of this Code, and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established in this Code. 
Sec. 9-8-3-3. - Permitted uses. 
All uses permitted by right or as special uses by the underlying zoning district shall be similarly permitted in the Limestone Parkway overlay zone. 
  

(Ord. No. 2016-09, § VII, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-8-3-4. - Dimensional requirements. 
All properties located within the Limestone Parkway overlay zone shall conform to the dimensional requirements of table 9-8-3-1, where such requirements are more restrictive than the requirements of the underlying zoning district: 
TABLE 9-8-3-1  LIMESTONE PARKWAY OVERLAY ZONE DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

 
Sec. 9-8-3-5. - Increase in height. 
Building height may be increased beyond the maximum to a total height of two (2) stories for an additional lower story on the down-slope end of a building which is constructed on a hillside so that only one story is above ground on the up-slope end. 
Buildings of greater height are also permitted subject to additional setback from arterial roads and from property zoned for residential use. One additional story shall be permitted for each additional fifteen (15) feet front building setback provided beyond the minimum front setback requirement or one additional story for each additional fifteen (15) feet of side or rear building setback beyond the minimum required setback abutting property zoned for residential use. 
As a condition to any such height increase based on the provision of greater setbacks than required, one large-species tree (over forty (40) feet in height at maturity) for each thirty (30) feet of building perimeter shall be planted or retained between such buildings of greater height and adjoining property lines, in addition to any other trees required under this Code. Alternate height limits may be allowed through conditions of approval of the Limestone Parkway overlay zone for a specific development. 
Secs. 9-8-3-6—9-8-3-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09, § VII, adopted June 21, 2016, repealed §§ 9-8-3-6—9-8-3-17 which pertained to building placement, building materials, exposed walls, roof surfaces of nonresidential buildings, architecturally distinctive buildings, parking areas, service areas, walls and hedges, landscaping, cut and fill slopes, fencing and detention ponds, and adaptation of developments to hillsides, respectively, and derived from the original unified land development ordinance, Ord. No. 2005-37, adopted July 19, 2005. 
CHAPTER 9-8-4. - NORTH OCONEE WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE 

Sec. 9-8-4-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The quality of public drinking water supplies must be assured. Land-disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation, which threaten the storage capacity of reservoirs and impair the quality of public drinking water supplies. Stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients, and sediments into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering waters resources unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport, and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in potential risks of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. Therefore, land use activities within water supply watersheds must be regulated to ensure that public water supplies remain clean. This chapter establishes standards, consistent with the state department of natural resources' rules for environmental planning criteria for water supply watersheds (Rule 391-3-16-01) to ensure water quality in the watershed system is not compromised by land activities such as grading, septic systems, and accidental release of contaminants. The intent of this chapter is to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply, to maintain the yield of water supply watersheds, and to ensure water can be treated to meet federal and state drinking water standards, within the North Oconee River small water supply watershed. 
Sec. 9-8-4-2. - Definitions. 
Buffer: A natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas, located adjacent to water supply reservoirs or perennial streams within water supply watersheds. 
 Buffer 
Impervious surface: A man-made structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, and patios. 
 Impervious service 
Perennial stream: A stream that has normal stream flow consisting of base flow (discharge that enters the stream mainly from groundwater) or both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. 
Reservoir boundary: The edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Small water supply watershed: A watershed that contains less than one hundred (100) square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Utility: A public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water supply reservoir: A governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. No. 2007-23, § I, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 9-8-4-3. - Boundaries and map. 
The North Oconee River water supply watershed protection overlay zone is hereby designated and shall consist of the land areas that drain to the proposed North Oconee River public water supply intake and water supply reservoir. The boundaries of the overlay zone are defined by the ridgelines of the watershed. The overlay zone boundaries are further delineated and defined on the North Oconee River water supply watershed protection overlay zone map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter by reference. 
Sec. 9-8-4-4. - Permitted uses and use restrictions. 
All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts as established by this Code are permitted in this overlay zone, subject to standards established in this chapter, except for those listed or qualified below: 
(a)  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(b)  New sanitary landfills are allowed only if they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(c)  New facilities, located within seven (7) miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous material of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
  
 North Oconee Watershed Protection Zone 
  
Sec. 9-8-4-5. - Requirements within seven miles of intake. 
Within a seven-mile radius upstream of the North Oconee River public drinking water supply intake, the following requirements shall apply to perennial stream corridors: 
 Requirements Within Seven Miles of Intake 
(a)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of one hundred (100) feet on both sides of the perennial stream as measured from the stream banks. 

 Buffer Maintained 
(b)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the perennial stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(c)  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the impervious surface setback. 
  
 Septic Tanks and Drainfields 
(Ord. No. 2007-23, § II, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 9-8-4-6. - Requirements beyond seven miles of intake. 
Within the water supply watershed but outside a seven mile radius upstream of the North Oconee River public drinking water supply intake, the following requirements shall apply to the perennial stream corridors: 
(a)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of fifty (50) feet on both sides of the perennial stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(b)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of the perennial stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(c)  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the impervious surface setback. 
(Ord. No. 2007-23, § III, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 9-8-4-7. - Exemptions. 
The following land uses and activities are exempted from compliance with this chapter: 
(a)  Previously existing land uses. Land uses existing prior to the adoption of watershed protection regulations by the city (February 8, 2001). Any structure existing at that time which does not conform to the setback, buffer and/or impervious surface requirements of this chapter may be re-established if damaged or destroyed, provided the degree of non-conformity is not increased with the construction of the replacement structure. 
(b)  Forestry and agriculture. Specific forestry and agricultural activities in the stream corridor buffer and setback areas, provided that activities shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state forestry commission or the state department of agriculture, and provided further that the activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(c)  Utility encroachment. If utilities cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer or setback areas required by this chapter, such utility locations can be exempted with permission of the director from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible. 
2.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
3.  The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
Sec. 9-8-4-8. - Impervious surface limitations. 
The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire small water supply watershed shall be limited to twenty-five (25) percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2007-23, § IV, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 9-8-4-9. - Compliance with reservoir management plan. 
All development within the 150-foot buffer from any water supply reservoir boundary, and any uses of the reservoir itself including docks, shall, as may be applicable, comply with any reservoir management plan adopted by the local government with jurisdiction and approved by the state department of natural resources. 
Sec. 9-8-4-10. - Annexation, rezoning or special use within the watershed. 
When an application for annexation, rezoning or special use for land subject to this chapter is proposed, the director, planning and appeals board, and governing body shall consider the potential impacts of development resulting from the annexation, rezoning or special use if approved would have on the purposes of watershed protection established in this chapter. Any finding that development pursuant to the annexation, rezoning or special use if approved would result in excessive impervious surface or adverse impacts on water quality in the watershed shall be a sufficient basis for denial of the annexation, rezoning or special use application by the governing body. 
CHAPTER 9-8-5. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE 

Sec. 9-8-5-1. - Purpose and intent. 
Groundwater is among the nation's most important natural resources. It provides drinking water to urban and rural communities, supports irrigation and industry, sustains the flow of streams and rivers, and maintains riparian and wetland ecosystems. In many areas of the nation, the future sustainability of ground-water resources is at risk from contamination. Because groundwater systems typically respond slowly to human actions, a long-term perspective is needed to manage this valuable resource. This chapter is intended to implement rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division known as the "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria" as they specifically relate to groundwater recharge areas (Rule 391-3-16-.02). 
It is essential to the health, safety, and welfare of the public that the quality of subsurface public drinking water supplies be maintained. Groundwater resources exist in underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earth's surface that are capable of producing water through a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. 
Certain land use activities, such as septic tanks, underground tanks, and chemical spills, pose a threat to the quality of groundwater supplies. Therefore, it is necessary to manage land uses within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. To this end, this chapter establishes minimum lot sizes to provide for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems. 
Sec. 9-8-5-2. - Definitions. 
Acre-foot: The volume (as of irrigation water) that would cover one acre to a depth of one foot. 
Aquifer: Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water for a well. 
 Recharge of Groundwater from Surface Water, Normal & Drought Conditions 
DRASTIC: The standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: the DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility). 
Hydrologic atlas 18: A map prepared by the state department of natural resources and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey in 1989, which identifies the most significant groundwater recharge areas of the state as spotted areas labeled as "areas of thick soils." 
Hydrologic atlas 20: A multicolored map of the state at a scale of 1:500,000, prepared by the state department of natural resources using the DRASTIC methodology and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey in 1992, which shows areas of higher, average (or medium), and lower susceptibility of groundwater to pollution in the state. This map is also commonly known as the Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia. Note: This map shows all areas in Hall County as "lower" pollution susceptibility. 
Pollution susceptibility: The relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. Each significant recharge area shown on hydrologic atlas 18 is classified on hydrologic atlas 20 as higher, average, or lower pollution susceptibility. 
Recharge area: Any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant recharge areas: Those recharge areas mapped by the state department of natural resources in hydrologic atlas 18 (1989 edition) within the relevant portion of Hall County. Each significant recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on hydrologic atlas 20. Note: All areas in Hall County are "lower" pollution susceptibility. 
Sec. 9-8-5-3. - Boundaries and map. 
The groundwater recharge area protection overlay zone is hereby designated and shall consist of the land areas within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the state department of natural resources in hydrologic atlas 18, 1989 edition. The boundaries of the overlay zone are defined by on the groundwater recharge area protection overlay zone map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter by reference. 
 Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Overlay Zone 
Sec. 9-8-5-4. - Minimum lot size. 
Within an area governed by this chapter, new homes or land uses served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum lot sizes of at least one hundred ten (110) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR table MT-1 within a low pollution susceptibility area, based on application of table MT-1 of the DHR manual (hereinafter DHR table MT-1). The minimums set forth in DHR table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors set forth in sections A-F of the DHR manual, as determined by the Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of groundwater recharge area regulations (February 8, 2001) shall be exempt from the minimum lot size requirements of this section. 
Within an area governed by this chapter, no subdivision plat shall be recorded until and unless said plat has been reviewed and approved by the director as being in compliance with the minimum lot sizes established by this section. 
Sec. 9-8-5-5. - Manufactured home parks. 
Manufactured home parks are prohibited within this overlay zone. 
Sec. 9-8-5-6. - Agricultural waste impoundment sites. 
New agricultural waste impoundment sites which exceed fifty (50) acre-feet in a significant recharge area shall contain a liner consisting of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the natural resource and conservation service. 
Sec. 9-8-5-7. - Above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks. 
Within an area governed by this chapter, new above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks having a minimum volume of six hundred sixty (660) gallons shall have secondary containment for one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of such tanks or one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
Sec. 9-8-5-8. - Hazardous materials handling facilities. 
Within an area governed by this chapter, new facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
Sec. 9-8-5-9. - County environmental health department approval required. 
No development permit or building permit shall be issued by the planning department or the building official for a building, structure, or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank, unless the Hall County Environmental Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the state department of human resources manual. 
CHAPTER 9-8-6. - WETLAND PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE 

Sec. 9-8-6-1. - Purpose and intent. 
Wetlands are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the well being of communities in the state. Nationally, a considerable number of wetlands have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other activities. Without additional regulation, piecemeal or cumulative losses of wetlands will continue to occur over time. Therefore, it is in the interest of public safety and the general welfare to avoid damage or destruction to wetlands. The purpose of this chapter is to promote wetlands protection by providing for the withholding of land use and building permits in areas designated as wetlands until a jurisdictional wetland determination is completed, and establishing permitted and prohibited land uses within wetlands. 
Sec. 9-8-6-2. - Definitions. 
Generalized wetlands map: A map of wetlands provided in the city's comprehensive plan and/or any U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) map showing wetlands within the local jurisdiction. 
Jurisdictional wetland: An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination: A delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
  
 Illustrative Jurisdictional Wetland Determination 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands shall include any area delineated as a wetland by the United States Army Corps of Engineers under its jurisdiction pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act as amended; or any area shown on a 1:24,000 scale, United States Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetland Inventory Map as being a wetland; or any area shown on a 1:24,000 scale, state department of natural resources land cover database map as being a wetland; or any area shown on the generalized wetland map as a wetland. 
Sec. 9-8-6-3. - Boundaries and map. 
The generalized wetlands map, as defined by this chapter, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference hereby made a part of this Code as if fully set forth herein. 
The generalized wetland map is a general reference document and wetland boundaries indicated on the map are approximations. The purpose of the generalized wetland map is to alert developers/landowners if they are within proximity to a wetland, which means that there is a high likelihood of the presence of a jurisdictional wetland and a need for the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers guidance as to whether a Section 404 Permit will be required prior to any activity. The generalized wetland map does not necessarily represent the exact boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this Code does not relieve the landowner from federal and state permitting requirements. 
Sec. 9-8-6-4. - Prohibited uses. 
All activities which are not exempted shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a local development permit. The following uses are prohibited within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map: 
(a)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(b)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
Sec. 9-8-6-5. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed within an area shown as a wetland on the generalized wetlands map, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. 
(a)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(b)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(c)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(d)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(e)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(f)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(g)  Other uses permitted under section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
Sec. 9-8-6-6. - Land development permits. 
(a)  Compliance required. No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetland protection overlay zone without prior approval by the city in the form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent upon full compliance with the terms of this Code and other applicable regulations. 
(b)  Assessment. Prior to issuance of a local development permit, the director shall assess whether the proposed activity is of a type that could result in a disturbance of wetlands and, if so, shall also assess whether the proposed activity is located within the wetland protection overlay zone or within fifty (50) feet of the district. 
(c)  Issuance. If the director determines that the proposed activity is of a type that could not result in a disturbance of wetlands, or if the proposed activity is not located within the wetland protection overlay zone or within fifty (50) feet of the overlay zone, the director shall follow normal procedures for issuing a development permit. 
(d)  Jurisdictional wetland determination. If the director determines that the proposed activity is of a type that could result in a disturbance of wetlands and that the proposed activity is located within the wetland protection district, or within fifty (50) feet of the wetland protection district, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers jurisdictional wetland determination shall be required prior to issuance of a local development permit. 
(e)  Issuance after determination. If the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that the proposed activity would not require a department of Army permit, the director shall proceed with normal procedures for issuing a local development permit. If a permit or permission is required by the Corps, the local development permit shall not be issued until compliance with Corps requirements is achieved or future compliance demonstrated. 
CHAPTER 9-8-7. - MIDTOWN OVERLAY ZONE 

Sec. 9-8-7-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the Midtown overlay zone is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and promote economic prosperity in Gainesville Midtown in a manner consistent with the Redevelopment Plan - The Renaissance of Midtown Gainesville , and the city's comprehensive plan. The intent of the overlay zone is to set higher standards for the appearance and functionality of the land uses, as applied via the site and architectural design review processes established in article 9-9 of this Code. It is also intended to encourage mixed use development and the creation of more housing, employment, and recreational opportunities in Midtown. Please refer to the Redevelopment Plan - The Renaissance of Midtown Gainesville for further information on the redevelopment of Midtown. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § VIII, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-8-7-2. - Definitions. 
Mixed-use development: Development of a single building or single parcel to contain two (2) or more of the following types of uses: residential, retail/commercial, office, or institutional. Mixed uses may be combined vertically within the same building or placed side by side on the same parcel, provided that they are in close proximity, planned as a unified and complementary whole, and functionally integrated to make use of shared vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas. 
Open space: Areas that are set aside for common use and protected through a legal instrument approved by the city. The purpose of open space is to provide separation, resource protection, scenic enjoyment, recreation, or amenity to abutting developed property. Areas designated as open space shall not be included in minimum lot areas required by this Code. 
Parking, bicycle: An area in a parking lot or along a sidewalk that is designed and marked for the purpose of securing bicycles in an upright fashion, using a locker or open framework that is permanently attached to the ground and providing secure anchorage for three or more bicycles. Bicycle parking spaces should be in one or more convenient locations within one hundred (100) feet of the uses or principal entrances of buildings which they are intended to serve. 
Pervious paving: Materials used to surface parking lots and driveways that are designed to meet the requirements of materials described in Volume 2 — Technical Handbook of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (First Edition, August 2001) as the porous concrete or modular porous paver systems under the limited application stormwater structural controls. 
(1)  Porous concrete: A mixture of coarse aggregate, Portland cement and water that allows for rapid infiltration of water and overlays a stone aggregate reservoir. 
(2)  Modular porous paver systems: A pavement surface composed of structural units with void areas that are filled with pervious materials such as sand or grass turf. Porous pavers are installed over a gravel base course that provides storage as runoff infiltrates through the porous paver system into underlying permeable soils. 
Use, supportive commercial: A use of land or a building, or portion thereof, other than the principal use that may be located on the same parcel with such principal use in order to provide a convenient source of commercial goods or services for the occupants of the principal use of the land or building. Supportive commercial uses are intended and designed to reduce traffic and the need for occupants of surrounding buildings to make automobile trips for daily needs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § VIII, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-8-7-3. - Boundaries and map. 
The Midtown overlay zone is hereby designated and shall consist of the land areas further delineated and defined on the Midtown overlay zone map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter by reference, and which may be amended from time to time. The Midtown overlay zone shall include that area bounded by the Norfolk Southern rail line on the southeast, E. E. Butler Parkway on the northeast, Jesse Jewell Parkway on the northwest, and Queen City Parkway on the southwest. Also included is a 200-foot buffer surrounding the Midtown boundaries, where all of the requirements of this overlay zone apply as well. 
  
 Midtown Overlay Zone 
Sec. 9-8-7-4. - Effect of overlay zone provisions. 
The Midtown overlay zone is supplemental to the zoning district classifications and any locally designated historic landmark or district established in this Code. The provisions of this overlay zone apply to all applications for zoning matters, land disturbance permits, plat approval, and building permits for all property and rights-of-way within the boundaries of the Midtown overlay zone; except locally designated historic landmarks and districts which must comply with design guidelines for that historic landmark and/or district. All plan reviews, plat approval, and permits for parcels located within this overlay zone shall meet all the requirements of the base zoning district in which it is located and, in addition, shall meet the requirements of the overlay zone applicable to the parcel. In any case where the standards and requirements of the overlay zone conflict with those of the base zoning district, the standards and requirements of the overly zone shall govern. 
Sec. 9-8-7-5. - Administrative variances. 
Administrative variances are governed by chapter 9-24-3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § VIII, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-8-7-6. - Prohibited and permitted uses. 
All uses permitted by right or as special uses within the underlying zoning district shall be similarly permitted within the midtown overlay zone, except the following uses shall not be permitted on any property within the midtown overlay zone: 
Automated or non-automated car washes. 
Coin-laundry facilities. 
Dollar-type stores or thrift stores. 
Community donation boxes. 
Gas stations (located on lots less than 2 acres in size). 
Group homes, homeless shelters, rooming house or crisis centers. 
Industrial uses causing the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes and odors. 
Industrial uses with outdoor storage. 
Jail/correctional facility. 
Kennels. 
Liquor stores. 
Marine sales or repair stores. 
Massage parlors. 
Mini-warehouses including climate controlled self-service storage facilities. 
Motels or extended stay lodging. 
Motor vehicle sales or service. 
Pawn shops. 
Psychics, fortune tellers, clairvoyants and the like. 
Salvage yard. 
Sanitation uses including the storage of trash cans, dumpsters and porta potties. 
Sawmill. 
Sexually-oriented adult uses. 
Tattoo parlors. 
Taxi-cab or limousine services. 
Tobacco or vaping stores. 
Truck stops. 
Vehicle emission testing facility. 
Veterinarian or animal hospitals with outdoor kennels. 
Wireless telecommunication facility or cell towers excluding co-location. 
Wrecked motor vehicle compound. 
In addition, loft dwellings, single-family homes, condominiums and townhouses shall be permitted by right in any non-residential district in the overlay zone. 
(Ord. No. 2018-25, §§ I, II, 11-6-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-25, §§ I, II, adopted Nov. 6, 2018, amended § 9-8-7-6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 9-8-7-6 pertained to permitted uses. 
Sec. 9-8-7-7. - Property design standards. 
(a)  Minimum open space: Fifteen (15) percent of gross acreage of tract that is two (2) acres or larger before subdivision. Buffers can be included in the open space up to the discretion of the director. 
(b)  Maximum impervious cover: Seventy-five (75) percent of parcel; not including portions of the parcel that are in floodplain or wetlands. 
(c)  Maximum building height: Seventy-five (75) feet. 
(d)  Maximum front yard setback: Fifty (50) feet. 
(e)  Minimum front yard setback: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XI, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2016-09, § VIII, 6-21-16; Ord. No. 2018-25, § III, 11-6-18) 
Secs. 9-8-7-8—9-8-7-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09, § VIII, adopted June 21, 2016, repealed §§ 9-8-7-8—9-8-7-18 which pertained to parking, screening, connectivity, street trees, landscaping, streetlights, signs, street furniture, underground utilities, escrow in lieu of improvements, and architectural standards, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 2009-47, §§ XII—XIV, adopted Dec. 15, 2009. 
CHAPTER 9-8-8. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY ZONE 

Sec. 9-8-8-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, architectural, cultural or aesthetic interest or value; and is intended: 
(a)  To stimulate revitalization and preservation of the business districts and historic neighborhoods; 
(b)  To promote economic progress through heritage tourism; 
(c)  To provide for the designation, protection, preservation, rehabilitation and restoration of historic districts and properties; and to participate in federal or state programs to accomplish the same. 
Sec. 9-8-8-2. - Definitions. 
Designation: A decision by the governing body pursuant to chapter 9-23-2 to designate a district or property as "historic" and thereafter prohibit all material changes in appearance prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to chapter 9-23-3. 
Historic district: A geographically definable area, which contains structures, sites, works of art or a combination thereof which is designated as historic pursuant to this chapter and chapter 9-23-2, and which: 
(a)  Exhibits a significant historical, architectural, cultural or environmental character or value; 
(b)  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history; and 
(c)  Constitutes a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county by reason of above. 
Historic landmark: An individual structure, site or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, which is designated as historic pursuant to this chapter and chapter 9-23-2, and which is deemed worthy of preservation for one or more of the reasons listed below: 
(a)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of an era; 
(b)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(c)  It is a site or structure associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance; or 
(d)  It is a site of natural or aesthetic value that is continuing to contribute to the historical or cultural development and heritage. 
Site: The location of a significant event; a prehistoric or historical activity; or a structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished; where the location itself maintains historical, cultural or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Sec. 9-8-8-3. - Significance, boundaries and maps. 
The historic preservation overlay zone is hereby designated. It shall consist of the land areas further delineated and defined on the historic preservation overlay zone maps for each designated district and individual landmark as adopted as part of the official designation ordinance on file with the city clerk. The historic preservation overlay zone maps are hereby considered to be a part of the official zoning map of the city and this chapter by reference. In addition, the properties within the boundaries of the historic preservation overlay zone shall be clearly defined for individual properties on tax maps. 
The following subsections include a description of the physical boundaries and a statement of significance for all designated local historic districts and individual landmarks falling within the historic preservation overlay zone. Furthermore, in accordance with O.C.G.A. 44-10-26, a list of all property owners, a legal description and map, and the provision for requiring a certificate of appropriateness be obtained prior to making a material change in the exterior appearance—whether regarding a district or an individual landmark—shall be made a part of the official designation ordinance which is kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(a)  Big Bear Cafe individual landmark. 
1.  Significance. The subject property, which contains three historic buildings, is located on Main Street within the Midtown area of the city, which is one of the oldest sections of the city and has long since been a transitional area. The Big Bear Cafe landmark contains one of the first permanent commercial buildings constructed along Main Street in the Midtown area, and as such, contributed to the city's community planning efforts. 
The building (which is the current home of Jayne's Flower Shop) was constructed around the turn of the twentieth century, between 1900 and 1930. This building was constructed of local brick of poor quality and shaped as a parallelogram to face Main Street at an angle, and thereby, creating an architectural effect that is distinctive. The building has housed various cafes and barber shops over time; such uses were particularly vibrant during World Wars I and II. The adjacent building, which houses The Big Bear Cafe, is an identical brick building that was constructed in 1936, a few months after the devastating tornado of April 6, 1936. As with the first building, the parallelogram shape of the building creates an optical illusion that makes Main Street appear to angle toward the right, and like the first, this second building consisted of two (2) sides—the upper side held a cafe while the lower side next to the alleyway contained a butcher shop. The cafe was operated by Mr. G. C. Barron as one of the most colorful and exciting establishments on the main line of the Southern Railroad, which connected through major cities between New York and New Orleans. Because Mr. Barron had a black bear in a cage behind the cafe, local folks referred to the cafe as The Big Bear, and although Mr. Barron did not like the name he used it since it apparently was good for business. The third building, a large metal warehouse of approximately 4,900 square feet in size, was built by the Chambers Lumber Company in 1950; to store mantles, doors, windows, and fine millwork. In 1997, a small group of local artists worked with the owner to create an art studio within the building—movement which is hoped will bring about change in Midtown. 
In summary, the one-story brick, parallelogram buildings are typical commercial buildings from the turn of the twentieth century that are plain with commercial hardware characteristic of the period. The obtuse angles, creating the parallelogram shape, required custom fit for practically all of the structural elements and most of the interior finish as well. 
2.  Boundaries. The subject property is bounded by Main Street, Bradford Street, a spur track of the CSX Railroad (formerly Gainesville-Midland Railroad) which is no longer in use and property of the Norfolk Southern Railroad. More specifically, the boundary of the local historic landmark follows the property lines of the subject tract as described in the recorded deed and as shown on a recorded plat. 
  
 Big Bear Cafe Local Historic Landmark 
(b)  Ridgewood Neighborhood local historic district. 
1.  Significance. The Ridgewood Neighborhood local historic district serves as a bridge between the Green Street historic area and the Rock Creek, Ivey Terrace and the Wilshire parks. This area, which is a traditional residential neighborhood with sidewalks on either side of the street, is located within one of the oldest residential neighborhoods in the city. Forty-six (46) of the forty-seven (47) structures located in the district were built between 1910 and 1954, most of which were constructed in the 1930s with brick, asbestos siding or wood exteriors; the remaining structure was built in 1987. The 48th property located within the historic district is a small park, which is called the H. H. Dean Memorial Park in memory of the developer who originally owned much of the property within this neighborhood. The park/garden area is land that was given by H. H. Dean to the Northside Garden Club in the 1930s—at a time when much of the H. H. Dean Estate was subdivided to create the Ridgewood neighborhood area. 
The structures located within the district are representative of the type of historic residential architecture found in many of the state's towns and cities as well as reflect the prevailing national principles and practices of architecture of this time. Architecturally speaking, the district contains an outstanding group of examples of Craftsman and Victorian homes and English Tudor cottages; including one-story and two-story designs. Many of the structures contain much of their original fabric—including plaster walls, windows and exterior building materials—but many have been renovated and altered since their original construction. 
The Ridgewood Neighborhood local historic district contains within its confines a high concentration of intact, historic residential structures that reflect architectural styles and building types found throughout the early and mid-twentieth century. The structures located within the proposed historic district together depict an era of architectural and historic character and are reflective of the social and cultural development of the city. Moreover, the proposed historic district represents a major period in the development of the city. 
2.  Boundaries. The Ridgewood Neighborhood local historic district, which consists of residential structures that are predominantly owner-occupied, single-family homes; is located north of the central business district within the neighborhood conservation (N-C) zoning district along Ridgewood Avenue and includes forty-eight (48) contiguous properties situated along Ridgewood Avenue, Denton Drive and Bradford Street. 
  
 Ridgewood Neighborhood Local Historic District 
(c)  Green Street local historic district. 
1.  Significance. This area of Green Street (a.k.a. North Green Street), which is comprised of various office and light retail commercial uses, originally was an Indian trail and wagon road to North Georgia. Around 1828 with the discovery of gold in North Georgia, the city became a trading center for gold mines, taverns, and agricultural products; and stores and offices were erected downtown. The city experienced little growth after the gold rush. After 1870, following the extension of the railroad to the city, North Green Street became the prime residential district—as the more affluent and leading business families began constructing residential dwellings along North Green Street. A streetcar track with horse-drawn cars was constructed in the late 1880s, extending from the railroad depot to various parts of the city—including North Green Street. In 1903, the streetcar was electrified. 
Green Street, which was an important transportation route to the mining regions, is a four-lane state highway that bisects the Green Street local historic district and is lined on both sides with some of the city's largest, oldest and most architecturally-distinctive homes situated on large lots. Structures in the district date from the 1880s to the 1930s, although some were constructed later and are non-historic in nature. Many are one and one-half (1½) to stories in height with a few having two and one-half (2½) stories. A majority of the structures are wood-framed with clapboard siding; while a few are constructed of brick veneer or consist of synthetic siding added in recent times. Many of the structures, which were built by locally prominent architects and builders including John Cherry and E. Levi Prater, served as residences for some of the city's important professionals and businessmen, educators and politicians. Historically speaking, the Green Street local historic district reflects prosperity of the agricultural and mining industries in the Gainesville area; and for over fifty (50) years, this area was known to visitors as one of the outstanding residential neighborhoods in northeast Georgia. 
The Green Street local historic district contains within its confines a high concentration of intact, historic residential structures that reflect architectural styles and building types found throughout the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Moreover, the structures located within the district together depict an era of architectural and historical character—and are reflective of the social and cultural development of the city. Architecturally speaking the Green Street local historic district contains an outstanding group of examples of Victorian and Neoclassical Revival homes date from the turn of the nineteenth century. The various architectural styles found in the district include Colonial Review, Folk Victorian, English Vernacular Revival, early Classic Revival and Italian Renaissance. There are several late-Victorian structures located in the district, including the Smith-Palmer-Estes House which has Queen Anne massing and intricate Eastlake porch detailing. Also in the district, there is an excellent collection of high-style Neoclassical structures with a variety of monumental one-and two-story porticos. 
2.  Boundaries. The boundaries of the Green Street local historic district closely follow the boundary of the Green Street historic district as listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1975, and predominantly encompass properties fronting Green Street. This area also was included in an updated National Register nomination listed in 1985. Such nomination combined the existing 1975 Green Street and 1978 Brenau College National Register Historic Districts as well as encompassed adjacent historic neighborhoods to create one comprehensive district: the Green Street-Brenau-Green Street Circle Historic District. 
  
 Green Street Local Historic District 
Sec. 9-8-8-4. - Amendments to the historic preservation overlay zone. 
Local designations for either districts or individual landmarks may be proposed to be established or proposed to be rescinded by the governing body, the historic preservation commission, or property owner. Local designations shall be considered as amendments to the historic preservation overlay zone. 
The historic preservation overlay zone and historic preservation overlay zone maps may be amended from time to time to include new or separate, noncontiguous designated historic districts, to modify existing local historic districts, to designate historic landmarks, or for other reason, provided that such amendment conforms to the provisions of chapter 9-23-2 and O.C.G.A. 44-10-26 as applicable. The process, procedural requirements and criteria for considering an application for designation are specified in chapter 9-23-2. 
In order to amend the historic preservation overlay zone, the description of the physical boundaries, the statement of significance, and boundary map pertaining to a designation ordinance shall be incorporated into this Code under section 9-8-8-3, along with a reference to the designation ordinance. 
Sec. 9-8-8-5. - Use restrictions. 
All uses permitted by right or as a special use by the underlying zoning district shall be similarly permitted under the historic preservation overlay zone, and the underlying zoning district use provisions of this Code shall remain in effect until modified. 
Sec. 9-8-8-6. - Affirmation of building regulations and design guidelines. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners or occupants from complying with applicable building codes, nor to prevent any property owner or occupant from making any use of the property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
Design and construction guidelines, which are standards for evaluating proposed material changes to structures located within the historic preservation overlay zone, are intended to offer guidance to owners and occupants, architects, developers and other individuals contemplating restoration, remodeling or new construction on how to maintain the architectural integrity of the structure and district as a whole. The design and construction guidelines adopted by the historic preservation commission shall remain in effect and may be amended by the historic preservation commission without the need to amend this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners and occupants from complying with applicable design and construction guidelines even though such guidelines are not law. 
Sec. 9-8-8-7. - Requirement for a certificate of appropriateness. 
This chapter and other chapters of this Code related to historic preservation shall pertain to the exterior material appearance of a building, structure, work of art, and site as a whole, or a combination thereof. Upon designation and inclusion of a district or individual landmark within the historic preservation overlay zone, a certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from the city historic preservation commission, or from the planning department for minor work projects, prior to any material change in the exterior appearance of a structure or site. 
The process and criteria for considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness are specified in chapter 9-23-3. That chapter includes procedural requirements for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness. 
Sec. 9-8-8-8. - Maintenance of historic properties. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance and repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage; or to sustain the existing form; and that does not involve a material change in design, material or exterior appearance, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. However, this provision does not exclude ordinary maintenance and repair work from the requirement of obtaining any necessary applicable building permits. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance. Property owners of individual properties within a designated historic district or of designated historic landmarks shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The historic preservation commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  Notice to owner to remedy. If the historic preservation commission determines a property owner has failed to provide ordinary maintenance or repair (including but not limited to damaged windows, doors, siding, foundation or roof structure) the historic preservation commission shall notify the property owner and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The property owner shall have one hundred eighty (180) days in which to resolve the situation. 
(2)  Failure by owner to remedy. If the condition is not remedied within 180 days, the owner shall be subject to the enforcement provisions as specified in chapter 9-24-2, or 
1.  Upon authorization and at the direction of the governing body, the historic preservation commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. 
a.  The property owner shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance or repair. 
b.  The cost of such maintenance or repair shall be a lien against the real property. The lien shall attach to the real property at the time of payment of all costs of maintenance or repair by the city. 
2.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the governing body to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
Sec. 9-8-8-9. - Undue hardship. 
Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the historic preservation commission shall have the power to vary strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided that such variances or interpretations do not compromise the architectural or historical integrity of the property. In granting variances, the historic preservation commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as deemed necessary. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
The process, procedural requirements, and criteria for considering an application for an undue hardship variance are specified in chapter 9-23-4. 
Article 9-9 - SITE AND ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW 

 
CHAPTER 9-9-1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-9-1-1. - Findings. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city finds that its citizens have widely shared human values related to the visual environment. The desire to protect certain features of the visual environment reflects a widespread pattern of community preference. That finding is supported by community visioning and character area delineation completed as a part of the city's comprehensive planning process. Regulations for design review and aesthetics are therefore based on the visual sensibilities of the average person in the community. 
(b)  The governing authority of the city finds further that visual harm to a widespread pattern of community preference can occur without the imposition of the site design and architectural review provisions adopted in this article. The requirements contained in this article are related to legitimate public purposes, and they are the minimum necessary to prevent substantial harm to existing features of the visual environment of the city. 
(c)  Without guidance, future developments will likely be self-contained, compartmentalized, and without coherence and relationship with other developments. Without guidance, developers are unlikely to interrelate streets, buildings, human uses, and natural systems in a manner that results in a coordinated, pleasing, and sustainable built environment across property lines. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-1-2. - Purposes. 
(a)  Establishing the appropriate character of the city requires attention to the aesthetics of development, buildings, and sites. It is in the public interest to direct and control the visual appearance of buildings, structures, landscapes, and development in the city, to prevent patently offensive harm to the existing visual character of the city, and to safeguard the happiness, comfort, and general well-being of citizens. 
(b)  Careful attention to the architectural design of buildings and the layout of land development sites is in the best interests of the city, its citizens, and business owners. Attractive and integrated architectural and site design features tend to improve an area's image, raise overall property values, attract new businesses and residents, and improve the quality of life. 
(c)  Design guidelines provide criteria to evaluate the appropriateness of proposed changes to individual buildings, properties, and land use activities. The design guidelines provided in this article are intended to provide clear guidance to property owners and their engineers, landscape architects, site designers, and architects on best practices for site design, land development, and architecture of buildings. Criteria in this article allow for a wide range of architectural and site design solutions but also articulate strong preferences for certain designs. These guidelines are not intended to force a level of sameness; instead, a richness of character and expression is desired. 
(d)  This article is intended to establish a predictable and clear process for review and approval of the site design of land developments and architectural features of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-1-3. - Definitions. 
Appearance: The outward aspect of a building or site development that is visible to the public. 
Architectural appearance, exterior: The architectural character and general composition of the exterior of a building or structure, including but not limited to the kind, color, and texture of the building material and the type, design, and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs attached to the building or structure, and any appurtenant elements. 
Architectural features: Ornamental or decorative features attached to or protruding from an exterior wall or roof, including cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and decorative ornaments. 
Architectural recesses: Portions of a building wall at street level which are set back from the street line so as to create articulation of the building wall and/or to provide space for windows or doors. 
Asymmetrical: Not symmetrical, as in a building facade that is not identical on either side of an imaginary line drawn down its center. 
Attractive: Having qualities that arouse satisfaction and pleasure in numerous, but not necessarily all, observers. 
Awning, internally illuminated: A fixed awning covered with a translucent membrane that is, in whole or part, illuminated by light passing through the membrane from within the structure. 
Bollard: A luminaire having the appearance of a short, thick post, used for walkway and grounds lighting. The optical components are usually top mounted. 
Build-to line: An alignment establishing a certain distance from the curb or right-of-way line to a line along which a building or buildings shall be built. 
Building footprint: The outline of a building's ground plan from a top view. 
Character: Special physical characteristics of an area, building, structure, or site that set it apart from its surroundings and contribute to its individuality. 
Character area: Any of the specific areas delineated as character areas in the city's comprehensive plan. 
Clapboard: A wood exterior siding material that is applied horizontally and overlapped with the lower edge thicker than the upper edge. 
Cohesiveness: Unity of composition among elements of a building or among buildings and/or structures, and their landscape development. 
Column: A vertical, cylindrical or square supporting member. 
Compatibility: With regard to development, the characteristics of different land uses or activities that permit them to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict; with regard to buildings, harmony in appearance of architectural features in the same vicinity. 
Continuity: The flow of elements or characteristics in a non-interrupted manner. 
Coping: The capping member of a wall that covers and protects the wall from the effects of weather. 
Cornice: Any horizontal member, structural or nonstructural, of any building, projecting outward from the exterior walls at the roof line. 
Dentil: Any of a series of closely spaced, small, rectangular blocks forming a molding or protecting beneath the cornice. 

Design guideline: A standard of appropriate activity that will establish, preserve, or enhance the architectural character and site design and function of a building, structure, or land development. 
Direct light: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminary. 
Dormer: A small window with its own roof projecting from a sloping roof. Dormers are projections that provide ventilation, light, and additional space for attic areas. 


Downspout: A pipe for directing rainwater from the roof to the ground. 
Eave: The edge of the roof that extends past the walls of a building. 
Elevation drawing: An architectural drawing of a building or building facade, intended to illustrate its design, characteristics, and major features. 

Exterior insulating and finish system (EIFS): Exterior wall cladding system consisting primarily of polystyrene foam board with a textured acrylic finish that resembles plaster or stucco. 
Facade: The face (exterior elevation) of a building, especially the face parallel to or most nearly parallel to a public street. 
Fenestration: The organization of windows on a building wall. 

Fixture: The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can include all or some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor or lens. 
Flashing: Thin pieces of metal used for water-proofing roof joints. 
Footcandle: A unit of illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one (1) foot from a uniform point source of light of one (1) candle and equal to one (1) lumen per square foot. One (1) footcandle (FC) is the equivalent of ten and 76 one-hundredths (10.76) Lux (1 Lux = 0.0929 FC). 
Fronting on the downtown square: Any building block face fronting on Gainesville's downtown square, which is bounded by Main Street, Spring Street, Bradford Street, and Washington Street. 
Full cutoff luminary: Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no direct light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane. 
Gable: The triangular upper portion of an end wall, underneath a peaked roof. 
Glare: Light emitting from a luminary with intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see, and in extreme cases causing momentary blindness, or that causes annoyance or discomfort. 
Harmony: A quality that represents an attractive arrangement and agreement of parts of a composition, as in architectural elements. 
Illuminance: The area density of the luminous flux incident at a point on the surface. It is a measure of light incident on a surface, expressed in lux or footcandles. 
Isofootcandle plan: A site plan of a proposed development showing proposed outdoor illuminance with a series of isofootcandle lines that join points on a surface where the illuminance is the same. 
Light trespass: The shining of light produced by a luminary beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
Luminary: A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps and a fixture. This term shall be interpreted broadly as applying to all outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices, outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devices, permanently installed or portable, used for illumination or advertisement. 
Massing: The overall visual impact of a structure's volume; a combination of height and width and the relationship of the heights and widths of the building's components. 
Modularity: Design composition comprised of a rhythmic organization of parts. 
Modulation: A measured setback or offset. 
Outdoor lighting: The night-time illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device located outdoors that produces light by any means. 
Parapet: That portion of a wall which extends above the roof line. 


Pedestrian-scale development: Development designed with an emphasis primarily on the street sidewalk and on pedestrian access to the site and building, rather than auto access and parking areas. The building is generally placed close to the street and the main entrance is oriented to the street sidewalk. There are generally windows or display cases along building facades which face the street. 
Plaza: An open area adjacent to a building that functions as a gathering place and may incorporate a variety of nonpermanent activities. 
Porch: A projection from a building wall which is covered but enclosed on no more than one (1) side by a vertical wall. 
Portico: An exterior appendage to a building, normally at the entry, usually roofed. 
Proportion: Balanced relationship of parts of a building, signs and other structures, and landscape to each other and to the whole. 
Retail display window: A window or opening in the exterior wall of any portion of a building used for business purposes, through which merchandise, services, or businesses are displayed or advertised and visible from the ground or sidewalk level. 
Roof: The cover of a building, including the eaves and similar projections. 
Roof, flat: A roof having no pitch or a pitch of not more than 2:12. 

Roof, gable: A roof sloping downward in two (2) parts from a central ridge, so as to form a gable at each end. 
Roof, hipped: A roof with slopes on all four (4) sides meeting at a ridge or at a single point. 
Roof, pitched: A shed, gabled, or hipped roof having a slope or pitch of at least one (1) foot rise for each four (4) feet of horizontal distance. 
Safety lighting: Exterior lighting that involves ensuring proper levels of illumination to provide safe working conditions, safe passage, and the identification of outdoor hazards. 
Scale: Proportional relationships of the size of parts to one another and to humans. 
Security lighting: Exterior lighting installed solely to enhance the security of people and property. 
Shop front: A business or retail use where the facade is aligned directly on the frontage line with the entrance at grade; typical of sidewalk retail. Shop fronts often have awnings. 
Street furniture: Those features associated with a street that are intended to enhance the street's physical character and use by pedestrians, such as benches, trash receptacles, planting containers, pedestrian lighting, kiosks, etc. 
Street hardware: Objects other than buildings or street furniture that are part of the streetscape. Examples are: non-pedestrian street light fixtures, utility poles, traffic lights and their fixtures, fire hydrants, etc. 
Streetscape: The appearance and organization along a street of buildings, paving, plantings, street hardware, street furniture, and miscellaneous structures. 
Undergrounding: The placement of utility lines below ground, with the removal of above-ground poles, wires and structures as applicable. 
Wallpack: A wall-mounted luminary. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-1-4. - General requirements. 
(a)  Land development shall be required to comply with the site design review requirements of this article, unless specifically exempted from compliance with this article. 
(b)  Buildings and structures shall be required to comply with the architectural design review requirements of this article, unless specifically exempted from compliance with this article. 
(c)  No, grading, or alteration or improvement of land shall take place prior to approval of site design in accordance with the requirements of this article, if required. 
(d)  The community development department shall not issue a minor land development permit or a land development permit if required by this Code until and unless site design review, if required, has been accomplished in accordance with this article. 
(e)  No construction of building(s) or structure shall commence, and no building permit shall be issued by the community development department, prior to the approval of the architectural design of said building(s) or structure in accordance with the requirements of this article, if required. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-1-5. - Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(a)  Previously approved. Development consistent with previously approved site and architectural design plans, or their equivalent, as determined by the community development director. 
(b)  One- and two-family dwellings. Per section 9-13-7-1 of this Code, detached, fee-simple single-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses and structures, as well as two-family dwellings (duplexes), are exempt from the requirement to obtain a land development permit; however, certain activities such as parking lots, patios, walkways, and retaining wall additions on lots developed for single-family detached and two-family dwellings (duplexes) may require a minor land development permit per section 9-13-6-1 of this Code. Therefore, the development of detached, single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings shall be exempt from the site plan review requirements of this article unless the director determines that a minor land development permit is required. One- and two-family dwellings shall also be exempt from the architectural review process established in this article. 
(c)  Activities in historic districts. Any development, building, or material change in appearance within the historic district overlay zone, as established in chapter 9-8-8 of this Code. In lieu of compliance with this article, site and architectural design review within the historic district overlay zone shall be accomplished by way of a certificate of appropriateness from the Gainesville Historic Preservation Commission or approval of a minor work by the community development department as specified in section 9-8-8-7 of this Code. Notwithstanding this exemption, nothing shall prevent the historic preservation commission or the community development department from considering and applying various design guidelines of this article, if appropriate, to development and buildings within the historic district overlay zone during the process of considering the issuance of certificates of appropriateness. 
(d)  Re-occupancy. Re-occupancy of a building for which design review has already been approved. 
(e)  Interior renovations. Alterations and repairs to the interior of existing buildings. 
(f)  Other. Other instances as may be determined appropriate by the community development director, including but not limited to the approval of temporary uses and structures. To this end the community development director is authorized to and may exempt a project or activity from compliance with this article for good cause shown. Any such decision to exempt an activity from compliance with this article and the reason for such exemption decision, shall be documented in writing by the community development director and shall be public record. Exemption decisions by the community development director are subject to appeal in accordance with chapter 9-22-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-1-6. - Character areas recognized. 
The following character areas are established in the Gainesville comprehensive plan and are hereby recognized for purposes of applying the site and architectural design requirements of this chapter. The boundaries of the various character areas shall be as delineated in the Gainesville comprehensive plan, as may be amended from time to time: 
Central Core 
Traditional Neighborhoods 
City Park Neighborhood Center 
Lake District 
Longwood Cove 
Brown's Bridge Corridor 
West Side 
Limestone Medical Corridor 
Historic Mill Villages 
Suburban Residential 
Suburban Commercial 
Economic Development Gateways 
Regional Recreation/Conservation 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-9-2. - SITE AND ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW 

Sec. 9-9-2-1. - Design review required. 
For all lands, developments, buildings, and structures subject to compliance with this article, an application or applications shall be made by the property owner or agent for the property owner to the community development department for site and architectural design review approval, as required by and in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-2-2. - Division of design review. 

(a)  An application for site and architectural design review may be submitted as a single application or it may be divided into two (2) applications and approval processes, one (1) for the development site, and one (1) for the building or structure(s). Typically the civil review is completed prior to starting architectural review. 
(b)  The division of design review applications and approval processes into two (2) distinct (i.e., site and building architecture) components is appropriate and permissible when a property owner or land developer desires to proceed with land development approval but elects at that time to defer application for the architectural review and approval of the building or buildings until a subsequent stage of the permitting process. 
(c)  The division of design review applications and approval processes into two (2) distinct (i.e., site and building architecture) components is also appropriate in cases where the community development director determines that site design review, as would be required by this article, is unnecessary given the existing developed state of the lot. In such or similar instances the community development director may exempt a given building proposal from the site design requirements of this article and require only that the architectural design review process be completed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-2-3. - Application requirements for site design review. 
(a)  When a preliminary plat, minor land development permit, or land development permit is required, the application requirements for site design review shall at minimum be those plans and information required for applications for a preliminary plat, minor land development permit, or land development permit, whichever is applicable, as specified in article 9-13 of this Code. In addition, an application for site design review shall include all information necessary to demonstrate compliance with the site design requirements of this article. 
(b)  The community development director or designee may refuse to act on an incomplete application or an application for site design review that fails to contain submission materials with respect to design that it finds necessary to make a decision on said application. 
(c)  The community development director or designee may waive submission requirements where in his or her opinion such information is not necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-2-4. - Process of site design approval. 
(a)  The process of site design approval is administrative. It shall be the responsibility of the community development department to review development permit applications for compliance with the site design requirements of this article. The community development director or designee is authorized to review, approve, conditionally approve, or deny applications for site design approval, in accordance with this article. 
(b)  When an application for a preliminary plat or land development permit is made, the applicant shall be required to comply with the site design requirements of this article, as well as all other applicable development regulations of this Code. Plans and information submitted as a part of an application for a preliminary plat, minor land development permit, or land development permit, as the case may be, shall constitute an application for site design approval as required by this article, if said application includes all the information required or necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article for site design. 
(c)  When site design review is applied for and accomplished in conjunction with a preliminary plat, minor land development permit, or land development permit application, a decision on site design review shall be made in accordance with procedural requirements for considering preliminary plats or the land development permit, as the case may be. 
(d)  If a preliminary plat or land development permit is not required by this Code for a particular subdivision, development, or building, then compliance of said development or building with the requirements of this article relative to site design, as applicable, shall be reviewed by the community development director or designee in conjunction with a building permit application or prior to issuance of a building permit for a building on the property. 
(e)  When site design review is applied for and accomplished in conjunction with an architectural design application, a decision on site design review shall be made in accordance with the procedures applicable for architectural design review as specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-2-5. - Architectural design approval. 
(a)  The community development director or designee is authorized to review, approve, conditionally approve, or deny applications for architectural design review, in accordance with this article, except as specifically provided in this section. 
(b)  Where the record of application approval clearly indicates, demonstration of compliance with the architectural review requirements of this article at the time of rezoning or special use application approval, or as part of a planned unit development, shall be construed as satisfying the architectural design review requirements of this article. 
(c)  No later than when an application for a building permit is made, the applicant seeking design approval shall be required to comply with the architectural design requirements of this article, as applicable. Compliance will typically be gained during the process of the applicant applying for building permit review (see section 9-20-14-6, "Application Requirements for Building Permits," of this Code). Architectural design review applications may be coordinated with existing administrative processes established by the inspections services division of the community development department for building plan reviews and the issuance of building permits. It shall be the responsibility of the community development department to review building permit applications for compliance with the architectural design requirements of this article and this Code. 
(d)  The community development director shall not authorize the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy as required by this Code and/or the building code applicable in the city until and unless an application for architectural design review of the building or buildings proposed, if required, has been submitted and approved in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-2-6. - Application requirements for architectural design review. 
Applications for architectural design review shall include the following, and no architectural design review application shall be processed by the community development department unless it is found to be complete with regard to the requirements of this section: 
(a)  Application fee (included in other review fees); 
(b)  Application form furnished by the community development director, including signature of property owner or authorized agent; 
(c)  Legal description of the property and survey plat of the property; 
(d)  Letter of intent describing the proposed building(s) on the property, which may include a description of any special conditions voluntarily made a part of the request; 
(e)  Site plan of the property at an appropriate engineering scale showing the proposed use and relevant information regarding proposed improvements; 
(f)  Exterior elevation drawings drawn to scale and signed by an architect, engineer or other appropriate professional and submitted in sufficient number of copies as required by the community development director. Said exterior elevation drawings shall clearly show in sufficient detail the exterior appearance and architectural design of proposed buildings and structures or change(s) thereto; 
(g)  Material and colors samples. The community development director may accept written descriptions, product summary sheets, photographs, or other information in lieu of actual color and material samples; 
(h)  Other information as may be essential to demonstrate compliance with this article. An applicant for architectural design review may be also be required to submit information in the form of photographs or sketches of adjoining uses and indicate how the architectural design of the proposed project or improvement is compatible with the surrounding context. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-2-7. - Criteria for decisions on architectural design applications. 
In acting upon applications for architectural design approval, the community development director or designee shall consider whether the proposal meets the following criteria: 

(a)  Whether the proposal complies with the requirements of this article and other applicable provisions of this Code; 
(b)  Whether the proposal is consistent with the design guidelines of this article, as may be applicable; 
(c)  Whether the proposal is consistent with the descriptions, intentions, and purposes of the character area in which the property is located, as described in the comprehensive plan, as may be applicable. 
(d)  Whether the design, scale, arrangement, materials, and colors of the proposed building(s) or structure(s) is compatible with buildings and structures in the immediate surrounding area or the same zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-2-8. - Decision with regard to architectural design applications. 
(a)  The community development director shall render a decision on the architectural design application as expediently as possible but within no more than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date a complete application is received. 
(b)  If the community development director finds that the proposal meets the criteria for architectural design as specified in this article, the director shall approve the application. 
(c)  If the director finds that the proposal is mostly acceptable but requires modifications, the director may approve the application with conditions or the director may request changes and require modifications to the proposed design for consideration as a modified application at a future date. 
(d)  If the director finds that the proposal fails to meet the criteria for architectural design specified by this article, or does not comply with the requirements of this Code, the application shall be denied. Among other grounds for considering a design inappropriate are the following defects: character foreign to the area, arresting and spectacular effects, violent contrasts of material or color, intense or lurid colors, a multiplicity or incongruity of details resulting in a restless and disturbing appearance, and the absence of unity and coherence in composition not in agreement with the density and character of the present structure or surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-2-9. - Notice of decision. 
(a)  The community development director shall notify the applicant in writing of the action taken on design review applications promptly after the date action was taken on said application. 
(b)  If the application was denied, the reasons for the denial shall be stated in the written notice of decision. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-2-10. - Reapplication and appeal. 
(a)  An applicant for architectural design approval may revise plans and reapply for architectural design approval. 
(b)  Any decision by the community development director with respect to a design review application required by this article may be appealed as an administrative decision, in accordance with the requirements of chapter 9-22-7 of this Code, with the following exception: the governing authority of the City of Gainesville shall be the body to hear and decide on any appeal of an administrative decision pursuant to article 9-9. Where chapter 9-22-7 refers to the planning and appeals board, for purposes of any such appeal per this article, the governing authority of the city shall be substituted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-2-11. - Compliance with approved applications. 
(a)  Approval of site and architectural design applications is conditioned on compliance with the approved application(s). 
(b)  After the development and building are constructed and completed, but before issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the community development director or designee shall inspect the site and building for compliance with the approved design plans for the site or building. 
(c)  The community development director shall direct the building inspector not to issue a certificate of occupancy if the site or building is not in compliance with approved design plans. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-9-3. - SITE DESIGN GUIDELINES 

Sec. 9-9-3-1. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter provides guidelines for the design of land developments on individual sites and will be applied by the community development department during the process of site design review as required by chapter 9-9-2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-2. - Applicability. 
Unless the context of a particular section clearly indicates otherwise, the site design guidelines of this chapter may be considered by the community development department to apply to all land developments and minor land developments. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-3. - Interpretation. 
(a)  The provisions in this chapter which use the term "shall" are regulations and must be followed. 
(b)  When the terms "should" and "are encouraged" are used in this chapter, the language shall be considered a guideline, and flexibility toward compliance may be exercised if it is determined by the community development director that the spirit and intent of the guideline is being followed or an alternative to the guideline is acceptable. However, successive departures from the guidelines is grounds for denial of an application for site design review. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-4. - Cross-references to existing code requirements. 
At the time an application for preliminary plat is submitted, a proposed subdivision will be reviewed for compliance with existing code requirements, including but not limited to: article 9-13, "Subdivisions and Land Development," including specifically chapter 9-13-3, "Design Requirements for Blocks and Lots;" and chapter 9-13-9, "Design Requirements for Streets." Designers should consult with community development department staff early in the process to identify key chapters and sections of this Code that impact site design. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-5. - Existing site analysis. 
(a)  Significant natural features of the site proposed to be developed, should be identified on an existing conditions map and to the extent practicable incorporated into the site plan or plans for land development. 
(b)  The community development director may exempt development proposals on properties with one (1) acre or less in area, or minor land developments, from this requirement if through a site visit or other information presented the requirement for a site conditions analysis can be satisfied with other data and enforcing this requirement would be onerous given the development proposed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-6. - Grading. 
(a)  Developments should be designed to fit the existing contours and landform of the site, to minimize the amount of earthwork, and to reduce visual impacts and erosion. 
(b)  Where cut and fill is required, balancing the cut and fill is highly encouraged. 

(c)  Abrupt or unnatural-appearing grading should not be proposed and will not be allowed. 
(d)  Grading should blend with the contours of adjacent properties with minimum alteration of the natural topography necessary to accomplish the development. 
(e)  Where retaining walls must be used, the height and length of retaining walls should be minimized and screened with appropriate landscaping. Tall, smooth-faced concrete retaining walls should be avoided in highly visible areas. Terracing should be considered as an alternative to the use of tall or prominent retaining walls, particularly in highly visible areas on hillsides. 
(f)  When cut or fill is involved in the grading of an individual building pad or development site, the finished grade of the parking lot or driveway should be terminated far enough inside the property to allow for the slope to return to that of the natural grade or finished ground elevation at the property line. When inter-parcel access is provided or required, the slope at such a property line shall not exceed ten (10) percent. The purposes of this design guideline is to both facilitate inter-parcel access at reasonable grades between compatible land uses and to avoid harsh differences in grade between abutting properties. This practice also provides for a blending of the finished site elevations in a manner so that stark contrasts in the landscape will not occur. Where inter-parcel access is not required due to incompatible land uses, grade differentiation at a property line may be permitted but should be mitigated or softened as much as possible (see illustration below). 

(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-7. - Stormwater management generally. 
(a)  Stormwater management is governed by chapter 9-13-12 of this Code. One- and two-family dwellings are exempt as specified in section 9-13-12-6 of this Code. 
(b)  Land developers should utilize, to the maximum extent practicable, stormwater better site design practices as described in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM). 
(c)  During the land development permitting process, a stormwater management plan is required (see chapter 9-13-12 of this Code). The city will require the land development applicant to examine and where feasible implement stormwater management methods broadly referred to as "low-impact development" and as specifically referred to in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as stormwater better site design practices and limited application structural stormwater controls (i.e., filter strips, grassed channels, and porous concrete, among others) (reference: GSMM, Vol. 2, Sec. 3.3). 
(d)  To improve infiltration, porous paving materials are encouraged, including porous concrete, porous asphalt, porous unit paver systems, and gravel paving systems. 
(e)  Grassy swales and bio-retention areas are acceptable and encouraged alternatives to curbing, piping, and detention of water. Where curb is necessary, utilize where possible a pierced or broken curb option to direct runoff to swales or bio-retention areas. Rain gardens and constructed wetlands are also encouraged to handle surface drainage of parking lots providing ten (10) or more parking spaces. 

(f)  Mimic the predevelopment site hydrology by using site design techniques that store, infiltrate, evaporate, and detain runoff. Natural drainage patterns that exist on the site will need to be identified (as part of the stormwater planning process) to plan around these critical areas where water will concentrate. Where possible, natural drainage ways should be used to convey runoff over and off the site to avoid the expense and problems of constructing an artificial drainage system. 
(g)  Minimize and then mitigate the hydrologic impacts of land use activities closer to the source of generation. This can be done by implementing the principle of "microstorage," or breaking up drainage areas into small manageable subcatchment areas. Break up flow directions from large paved surfaces, and direct stormwater where appropriate to drain to natural systems, vegetated buffers, natural resource areas, or infiltratable zones/soils. 

(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-8. - Stormwater detention. 
(a)  Man-made lakes and stormwater ponds should be designed for maximum habitat value and/or to serve as amenity features. 
(b)  Stormwater ponds and facilities that are located in a front yard adjacent to a public right-of-way should be landscaped around the perimeter. Any fencing surrounding a stormwater pond that is visible from the public right-of-way shall be decorative in nature, or if chain link fencing is permitted it shall be black vinyl coated. 
(c)  Because detention ponds that impound water are hazardous, the following precautions should be taken: avoid steep slopes; slopes around the detention pond should be 2.5:1 or flatter; 3:1 where maintained by tractor or other equipment. Fence the area if slopes require and post with warning signs. 
(d)  In the Gateway Corridor and Limestone Parkway overlay zones, stormwater detention ponds or areas should be located to the rear or side of buildings. If such a location is not feasible from an engineering standpoint, the detention area may be placed underground with the approval of the department of water resources director, or it may be approved in front of a building at surface level if it is designed as an amenity feature with shallow slopes, does not contain fencing, and is surrounded by landscaping approved by the director of community development and also subject to the approval of the department of water resources director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-9. - Parking. 
(a)  Location. For uses other than single-family and two-family residential, parking should be located to the side or rear of the building (or where there is more than one (1) building, to the side or rear of the building closest to the right-of-way line). In the Gateway Corridor and Midtown overlay zones, the community development director may limit parking in the front yard (between the building and the street right-of-way) to no more than fifty (50) percent of the total spaces provided. 
(b)  Surfacing. See article 9-17 relative to surfacing of parking lots. 
(c)  Screening/landscaping. Parking lots shall be landscaped according to the requirements of chapter 9-16-4 of this Code. Parking areas adjacent to any public or private street must be screened from view by low masonry walls, fences, berms and/or landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-10. - Loading. 
For uses other than single-family and two-family residential, loading zones as may be required by this Code shall be to the side or rear of the building (or where there is more than one (1) building, to the side or rear of the building closest to the right-of-way line). 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-11. - Utilities. 
(a)  For all new construction and redevelopment, utilities along public streets (electrical, cable, telephone, other) must be placed underground. The director of public works may approve an exception, if subsurface rock or other unique hardships make such installation unfeasible. 
(b)  All transformers and other facilities and utility boxes and equipment shall be screened through the use of architectural materials compatible with the architectural materials present on the site or, alternatively, through landscape screening. Such screening shall be adequate to completely screen such facilities from view from the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-12. - Pedestrian circulation. 
(a)  Except in industrial zoning districts, pedestrian circulation should take precedence over vehicular circulation. Pedestrian ways shall be well defined, should take as direct a path as possible, and they should be separated where practical from automobile access ways. Parking aisle dividers are appropriate locations for pedestrian access facilities. Relocate landscape areas that may interfere with pedestrian "short cuts." 

(b)  Sidewalks on individual properties shall connect to the sidewalk system within public road right-of-way, where such system exists or is planned. 
(c)  All principal entries to a building shall provide direct pedestrian access to the sidewalk within a public right-of-way or along a dedicated street. 
(d)  When multiple buildings are proposed on a single development site, they shall be linked with on-site pedestrian walkways. 
(e)  Where pedestrian circulation crosses vehicular routes, a change in grade, paving material, or texture, or paving color should be provided to emphasize the conflict point and improve its visibility and safety. Accent strips of brick or textured paving may also be appropriate for defining pedestrian walkways. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-13. - Interparcel access. 
(a)  Interparcel access easements required. For any office or retail sales or services use, the property owner shall grant an access easement as described in this section to each adjoining property that is zoned or used for an office or retail sales or services use. The purpose of the easement is to facilitate movement of customers and their vehicles from establishment to establishment (lot to lot) without generating additional turning movements on a public street. When required by this section, interparcel access easements shall be recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court, Hall County, and reference to deed book and copy of such recorded easement provided to the community development director. 

(b)  Access easement provisions. 
(1)  The interparcel access easement shall permit automobile access from the adjoining property to driveways and parking areas intended for customer or tenant use; but parking spaces may be restricted to use by the owner's customers and tenants only. 
(2)  The granting of such easement shall be effective upon the granting of a reciprocal easement by the adjoining property owner. 
(3)  Upon the availability of access to driveways and parking areas of the adjoining lot, the pavement or other surfacing of the owner's driveways and parking areas shall be extended to the point of access on the property line. 
(c)  Location of interparcel connections. The location of vehicular connections across a property line should be mutually determined and constructed by both property owners. Connection of parking areas for vehicular access may be provided in the front portion of the site. In cases where it is not possible to provide the connection in front, it may be provided in the rear portion of the site. In the case of coordination problems or any factors preventing construction of an inter-parcel connection, the community development director shall determine the location of connection to be constructed by property owners. 
(d)  Relief. Where the proposed land use is such that adverse impact of the required easement on the use of the property would outweigh the reduced impact on the public street provided by the reciprocal easements, the community development director may waive the requirement for access easements, in whole or in part, administratively. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-3-14. - Outdoor lighting. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to existing uses, not just those required to complete design review. All public and private outdoor lighting shall be in conformance with the requirements established by this section. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  All temporary emergency lighting needed by police or fire departments or other emergency services. 
(2)  All hazard warning luminaries required by federal regulatory agencies. 
(3)  Any vehicular luminary. 
(4)  Safety lighting, as defined in this article. 
(5)  All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of natural gas or other fossil fuels. 
(6)  Holiday lights and decorations using typical unshielded low-wattage incandescent lamps, provided that they are removed within fifteen (15) days following the holiday season to which they pertain. 
(c)  Full cut-off fixtures required. All luminaries not exempted from this section hereafter installed for parking lots, buildings, and grounds shall be full cutoff luminaries, as defined by this article, or another luminary which does not emit any direct light above a horizontal plane through the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminary, unless otherwise part of a lighting plan approved by the community development director. 


Security lighting, as defined in this article, shall also meet this requirement unless activated by motion sensor devices. 
(d)  Wallpacks. Wallpacks, as defined in this article, are not permitted unless fully shielded. 

(e)  Glare. Any luminary that is aimed, directed, or focused so that the lamp is visible, or in a way that causes direct light from the luminary to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or that creates glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, shall be redirected or its light output controlled as necessary to eliminate such conditions. 
(f)  Intensity specifications. Illuminance levels for outdoor lighting fixtures serving parking lots, buildings and grounds shall comply in design and upon installation with the standards in the table below, measured at three (3) feet above the ground or finished grade. Lighting for athletic fields and tennis courts shall be exempt from this section. In addition, the community development director may also exempt or modify the requirements of this paragraph as a part of an approved lighting plan. 
OUTDOOR LIGHTING REGULATIONS 

 

 
(g)  Prohibitions. The following types of outdoor lighting are prohibited: 
(1)  Strobe lights, except as may be required for towers pursuant to section 9-10-9-3 of this Code, or other state or federal lighting requirement. 
(2)  Laser lights or searchlight beams projected into the sky. 
(3)  Neon-lit signs, neon outdoor lights, and neon or any other lighting outlining of windows or doors. 
(h)  Lighting plans. When a lighting plan is required for a specific use, as specified in article 9-10 which includes but is not limited to community recreation, athletic fields accessory to churches, automobile sales establishments, and outdoor recreation facilities, or, when a lighting plan is submitted as an alternative to compliance with the full cut-off fixture requirements or intensity specifications of this section, the lighting plan shall be submitted with the application required for the issuance of a land development permit as specified in chapter 9-13-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-9-4. - GUIDELINES FOR STEEP SLOPES 

Sec. 9-9-4-1. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply within the Limestone Parkway overlay zone as well as to any development on slopes containing twenty-five (25) percent or more. These guidelines supplement general site design guidelines for grading provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-4-2. - Building placement. 
On hillsides or slopes with twenty-five (25) percent or more, buildings should be placed to blend with and avoid dominating the natural terrain; e.g., not on the crest of hills or ridges but below the crest. Buildings, even on separate but adjoining lots, should be grouped to complement the natural terrain and each other. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-4-3. - Cut and fill slopes. 
(a)  Steepness of slope. Cut and fill slopes shall be no more than one and one-half (1½) times natural grade (e.g., increased from ten (10) percent to fifteen (15) percent) and shall be no steeper than 2:1 (fifty (50) percent). 
(b)  Planting. Cut or fill slopes more than ten (10) feet in height or twenty (20) feet in depth (in plan view) shall be planted with trees. Trees shall be spaced in accordance with the species planted so that the crowns will touch at maturity, but not farther apart than on 30-foot centers (approximately one (1) tree per six hundred (600) square feet). These trees shall be in addition to other requirements for trees. Landscaping shall be used around buildings to blend cuts and fills into the natural terrain. 
(c)  Location of cut and fill slopes. Except for driveways, cut and fill slopes shall be entirely contained within a lot; i.e., natural grade at the lot lines shall be maintained. 
(d)  Angles of cuts and fills. Sharp angles shall be rounded off, in a natural manner, at the top and ends of cut and fill slopes (within approximately five (5) feet of the sharp angle). Where this would damage tree root systems at the top of the slope, the amount of rounding off may be reduced and shrubs used instead to hide the transition. 
(e)  Retaining walls. Retaining walls may be used to minimize cut and fill. Generally, a retaining wall shall be no higher than eight (8) feet except that a retaining wall may average twelve (12) feet for a distance of one hundred (100) feet or less. A higher wall is permitted; where used internally at the split between one- and two-story portions of a building; and, where substantially hidden from public view at the rear of a building, where it may not exceed the eave height of the building. Retaining walls shall not be stepped in height but shall be sloped from one height to another to match the terrain behind it. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-4-4. - Guidelines for adaptation of developments to hillsides. 
The following guidelines are established for adapting developments to hillsides and steep slopes: 
(a)  Orient roads and building sites to minimize grading. 
(b)  Orientation of buildings should consider views from the site as well as the aesthetic impact of views of the site from surrounding properties. 

(c)  Hilltops, if graded, shall be rounded to blend with natural slopes rather than leveled. 
(d)  Slopes providing a transition from graded areas into natural areas shall be varied in percent grade both up-slope and across the slope, in the undulating pattern of surrounding natural slopes; so that the top or the toe (or both) of the cut or fill slope will vary from a straight line in plan view. 
(e)  Parking areas shall be constructed on multiple levels and follow natural contours as necessary to minimize cut and fill. 

(f)  Roads shall follow natural topography to the extent feasible, to minimize cut and fill. Necessary grading shall be constant half-cut and half-fill along the length of the road (versus all cut or all fill at points) unless other arrangements would result in less severe alteration of natural terrain. 
(g)  Repetitive padding or terracing of a series of lots ("stair-stepping" up a slope) shall not be permitted. Creation of a single large pad or terrace (especially creating a single pad or terrace of an entire lot) shall be an exception to typical design, to deal with circumstances that can't be managed with other techniques. Typical design shall utilize full split pads (separate level for a down-slope lower story), a split foundation (adapting a single story to a slope), setting the building into a cut in the hillside, or a combination of techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-9-5. - ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN GUIDELINES 

Sec. 9-9-5-1. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter provides guidelines for the architectural design of buildings and structures on individual sites which are generally appropriate on a citywide basis and will be applied by the community development department during the process of architectural design review as required by chapter 9-9-2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-2. - Applicability. 
(a)  Unless the context of a particular section clearly indicates otherwise, the architectural design guidelines of this chapter may be considered by the community development department to apply to all buildings and structures. 
(b)  A detached, single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-3. - Interpretation. 
(a)  The provisions in this chapter which use the term "shall" are regulations and must be followed. 
(b)  When the terms "should" and "are encouraged" are used in this chapter, the language shall be considered a guideline, and flexibility toward compliance may be exercised if it is determined by the community development director that the spirit and intent of the guideline is being followed or an alternative to the guideline is acceptable. However, successive departure from the guidelines is grounds for denial of an application for architectural design review. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-4. - Architectural design compatibility. 
Buildings or other improvements should be compatible with the orientation, directional emphasis, shape, volume, massing, proportion, rhythm, scale and materials of the context, setting and streetscape of the site. Architectural design should be compatible with the developing character of the neighboring area. Design compatibility includes complementary building style, form, size, color, materials, and detailing. Determinations of compatibility will consider each of the following factors as appropriate: 

(a)  Size: The relationship of the project to its site. 
(b)  Orientation: The relationship of buildings to streets. Buildings should front directly onto public sidewalks unless site features prohibit such building configuration. 
(c)  Scale: The relationship of the building to those around it. Efforts to coordinate the height of buildings and adjacent structures are encouraged. This is especially applicable where buildings are located very close to each other. It is often possible to adjust the height of a wall, cornice or parapet line to match that of an adjacent building. 

(d)  Massing: The relationship of the building's various parts to each other, and the consistency of roof characteristics to adjacent buildings. 

(e)  Fenestration: The placement of windows and doors. The building may incorporate design that is similar to or links with designs of neighboring buildings. For instance, window lines should be placed in a pattern that reflects the same elements on neighboring buildings. 
(f)  Rhythm: The relationship of fenestration, recesses and projections. 
(g)  Setback: Placement of the building in relation to setback of immediate surroundings. 
(h)  Materials: The compatibility of building materials with those used in the zoning district. 
(i)  Context: The overall relationship of the project to its surroundings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-5. - Building style and design. 
(a)  When more than one (1) building is constructed on a development site or within a planned development, all buildings shall reflect a compatible architectural style and create a cohesive visual relationship between the buildings. 
(b)  "Theme" or stylized architecture which is characteristic of a particular historic period or trend is not encouraged, unless the existing building or site is historically important to the district or necessary for architectural harmony. 
(c)  Franchise architecture will be reviewed for compatibility with surroundings and may require adjustments to be compatible with surrounding buildings in the district. 
(d)  Building design should include a minimum of one-foot high cornices extending along the entire frontage and sides of buildings. 
(e)  Building design should include a minimum of eighteen-inch high contrasting base extending along the entire frontage and sides of buildings. 
(f)  Building design should incorporate and feature awnings, canopies, porches, porticos, patios, decks, or other covered entries to portions of the facade at the ground level. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-6. - Classification of building materials. 
Building material can be classified based on its application as: 
(a)  Primary material: The dominant material of a building's exterior walls. A primary material will typically comprise seventy-five (75) percent to ninety (90) percent of each exterior building face excluding windows and doors; however, architectural style and detailing of the building should dictate the appropriate composition of primary material. 
(b)  Accent material: A material utilized to provide architectural interest and variety on a building. Accent materials will typically comprise ten (10) percent to twenty-five (25) percent of each building face excluding windows and doors, depending on architectural style and context. Accent materials are not to be utilized as a primary building material. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-7. - Exterior building materials and finishes. 
(a)  Finding. The choice of materials and texture applied to the exterior of buildings has great visual significance and can affect the long-term appearance and maintenance of the built environment. Exterior building material is directly related to the durability of the building against weathering and damage from natural forces. 
(b)  Building material prohibitions. The following types of external building materials (siding and window and door frames) are prohibited: highly reflective, shiny, or mirror-like materials; mill-finish (non-colored) aluminum metal windows or door frames; exposed, unfinished walls; exposed plywood or particle board; and unplastered, exposed concrete masonry blocks. Exterior metal siding may be used as an accent material as defined in this chapter. This provision applies also to accessory buildings and structures, including signs. 
(c)  Similar finishes on all sides. All sides of a building may impact on its surroundings and should be considered for treatment with an architectural finish of primary materials (i.e., brick and stone), unless other materials demonstrating equal or greater quality are used. All buildings should be designed so that all sides contain similar architectural finishes and detailing. 
(d)  Durability. The durability of building materials should be considered; materials that do not need high maintenance or frequent placement are preferred. 
(e)  Brick and stone. Brick and stone convey permanence and are preferred primary and accent building materials for all building types. 
(f)  Wood. Wood may be appropriate in specific contexts. 
(g)  Siding. Horizontal aluminum and vinyl sidings should not be utilized for nonresidential applications. 
(h)  Exterior insulating and finish system (EIFS). EIFS or Dryvit material should not be used as a primary material. Where used, EIFS should be justified based upon the design intent of the building and limited to accent applications above the pedestrian level (approximately ten (10) feet above ground). 
(i)  Fiber cement. The use of fiber cement materials should be limited to accent applications only, except where utilized in a downtown or historic context as a substitute for wood. Fiber cement product is not considered an acceptable substitute for masonry. 
(j)  Glass. The use of glass as a primary exterior building material may be appropriate within its surrounding context such as in office parks or pedestrian retail streets. Where used, transparent types of glass are preferred and mirror/dark tinted glass is discouraged. Mirrored glass with a reflection greater than twenty (20) percent is strongly discouraged and should not be used in lieu of exterior windows for the facade. 
(k)  Stucco. The use of stucco is acceptable for accent applications. Stucco can be applied directly to blocks or bricks, or onto metal laths (sheets of wire mesh that help adhesion) to provide a decorative, weatherproofing coat that protects a wall's structure. Finishing options include smooth stucco with some slight texture, stucco that can be tooled to produce various patterns; a uniform rough stucco finish that is applied over smooth stucco; and pebbles added onto damp stucco ("pebbledash"). 
(l)  Cast-in-place concrete. Cast-in-place concrete may be appropriate for industrial buildings or secondary facades if sufficient articulation and detail is provided to diminish the appearance of a large, blank wall and provide a high-quality architectural finish. Cast-in-place concrete may be acceptable as an accent material; its appropriateness for primary material applications will be reviewed within the context of the design intent and surrounding character of development. 
(m)  Pre-cast concrete. Pre-cast concrete is acknowledged as a durable and quality material. Concrete panels should be limited to industrial and selected institutional buildings and in any case should incorporate articulation and additional architectural detailing finishes when visible from a right of way or abutting property. The appearance of panel joints should be minimized. 
(n)  Concrete masonry units. Concrete masonry units, including split face, may be acceptable as an accent. 
(o)  Architectural metal cladding. Smooth metal panels, with sufficient metal thickness to prevent deterioration of the surface and promote durability, may be acceptable. The use of metal should account for the design intent of the building and surrounding character of development. Buildings with all-metal siding (i.e., primary and secondary finish) shall not be permitted except in industrial zoning districts. Within the Gateway Corridor overlay district/character area, metal or tin roofs are not permitted except for standing seam metal, and then only if they have a reflectance similar to (or less than) that of the siding material. 
(p)  Gateway Corridor overlay zone. Within the Gateway Corridor overlay zone, front facades and other building sides visible from a public right-of-way shall be at least fifty (50) percent composed of brick masonry, stone masonry, split-face block masonry, or combination thereof. If used, split-face masonry shall be limited to a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the facade. 
(q)  Limestone Parkway overlay zone. Within the Limestone Corridor [Parkway] overlay zone, exterior wall materials shall be brick masonry, stone masonry, or split-face block masonry; or wood clapboards or weather boarding. If used, split-face masonry shall be limited to a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the facade. Architectural treatment shall be consistent on all sides of the building. Standing-seam or corrugated metal walls are not permitted. 
(r)  Midtown overlay zone. Within the Midtown overlay zone, building materials for front facades oriented to public streets shall be constructed of brick, stone, textured concrete masonry units, or glass. Metal siding is permitted as an architectural treatment on facades not oriented to public streets. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-8. - Roofs. 
(a)  All roof surfaces on nonresidential buildings oriented to or facing a street should have a minimum pitch of three (3) inches of rise for every twelve (12) inches of run (3:12); provided, however, that flat roof surfaces may be required or approved by the community development director if compatible with surroundings, and if rooftop equipment is screened from view by building elements that are designed as an integral part of the building architecture, or by a parapet wall. 
(b)  If metal is authorized as a roofing material, the metal shall not reflect light any more than the siding material used on the same building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-9. - Buildings on corner lots or at street corners. 
Buildings on street corners should be designed to address the street corner — that is, to engage the interest of drivers, pedestrians and bicyclists at the intersection. These buildings should provide a building entry or distinctive architectural elements facing the corner. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-10. - Modulation. 
Avoid constructing buildings with blank or unmodulated facades parallel to public rights-of-ways. In the Gateway Corridor and Midtown overlay zones, the walls of building facades for office, institutional, commercial, and industrial use shall not extend more than one hundred (100) linear feet unless the front facade of the building (including roof) is designed in a way that modulates the building face into discrete architectural elements as more fully described in this section. For all other areas, the maximum building length without modulation shall be two hundred (200) feet. Modulation may be accomplished with one or a combination of the techniques described below: 

(a)  Recesses and projections should be used along the front facade to break up long expanses of wall planes. 
(b)  Rooflines can be modulated by alternating dormers, or using stepped roofs, gables, or other roof elements. 
(c)  Windows with awnings above the windows can be provided in a repeating pattern or at regular intervals, or bay windows can be used to achieve some modulation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-11. - Awnings and canopies. 

(a)  Finding. Awnings and canopies should be applied to storefront commercial buildings for three (3) reasons: to minimize interior heat gain; shield merchandise in the display windows from the sun; and to provide some protection to pedestrians on the sidewalk from the elements. 
(b)  Encouraged. Awnings are encouraged for first floor uses to provide architectural interest. 
(c)  Coordination. Where awnings are used, they should be designed to coordinate with the design of the building and any other awnings along the same block face. 
(d)  Frame and material. Awnings should be constructed with a durable metal internal structural frame covered by a fabric or canvas material. Flameproof vinyl or metal awnings and canopies may be appropriate. Aluminum and other metal canopies may be acceptable, particularly when integrated into shopping center designs. 
(e)  Colors. Awning colors should be neutral or compatible with the overall color palate of the building to which they are being affixed. Solid colors are preferred over striped awnings, but striping may be permitted if colors compliment the character of the structure or group of buildings. 
(f)  Shape. The shape of an awning should be dictated by (consistent with) the shape of the window opening to which it will be applied. 
(g)  Vertical clearance. No portion of an awning shall be less than eight (8) feet clearance from the ground surface. 
(h)  Depth and width. Awnings shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in depth. Awnings shall not extend beyond the width of the building or tenant space, nor encroach above the roof line or the story above. 
(i)  Lighting. Awnings that are internally or backlit through translucent materials are discouraged if not prohibited altogether. 

(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-12. - Colors. 
(a)  The primary material color (used on the majority of the building surface) of buildings and accessory buildings and structures should be harmonious and compatible with the primary material colors of other buildings within the character district in which the building or structure is located. 
(b)  High-intensity or fluorescent colors shall not be used. 
(c)  Facade primary material colors should be low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors. 
(d)  Trim color (used on the window trim, fascia, balustrades, and posts) may be brighter than primary material color. 
(e)  All vents, gutters, downspouts, flashing, electrical conduits, etc., should be painted to match the color of the adjacent surface primary material, unless they are being used expressly as a trim or accent element. 
(f)  Accent color may be used with discretion on the building's exterior. An accent stripe may be appropriate to add interest to larger, (typically) industrial buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-13. - Architectural lighting. 
(a)  Finding. Well-designed and distinctive lighting of building facades is one of the best ways to attract attention and make a favorable impression with a minimal investment. Building facade lighting can help enhance the intrinsic charm, beauty, and utility of any given setting. Architectural lighting may include outlining, floodlighting, spotlighting, or any applicable combination of these techniques. 
(b)  Selectivity. The discrete lighting of a few key architectural features or details is preferred over uniform floodlighting of the entire building facade. Focal points can also be established through careful floodlighting of major buildings, with the lighting of secondary buildings keyed in turn to these focal points. 
(c)  Reflectivity. Highly polished surfaces such as glass, marble, glazed tile, glazed brick, porcelain enamel, and various metals can reflect the image of the light source. Designers should avoid lighting these reflective surfaces directly. Glass buildings usually cannot be lighted for nighttime viewing. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-14. - Accessory buildings. 
Accessory buildings should be substantially similar to the principal building(s), in terms of material finish, color, and architectural detailing. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-15. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  The design of fences and walls should be compatible with the architecture of the principal building(s) and should use similar materials. 
(b)  All walls or fences fifty (50) feet in length or longer, and four (4) feet or more in height, should be designed to minimize visual monotony though changes in plane, height, material, material texture, or significant landscape massing. 
(c)  All fences visible from the public right-of-way shall have their appearance softened with landscaping as approved by the community development director. 
(d)  Chain-link fences visible from the public right-of-way shall be coated with vinyl with a black color. 
(e)  In the Gateway Corridor overlay zone, smooth-faced concrete walls visible from the right-of-way are prohibited; walls visible from the right-of-way shall be faced with brick or stone masonry or shall be architecturally compatible in terms of design/style and color, as approved by the community development director. 
(f)  In the Limestone Parkway overlay zone, walls shall be of brick masonry, stone masonry, concrete masonry, or concrete which is architecturally compatible with the principal building. Walls and fences in any required front yard shall be no more than three and one-half (3½) feet in height. Walls and fences on or within all rear and side property lines, up to the required front yard setback line, shall be no more than six (6) feet in height; except that within a yard abutting a street, such height shall be no more than three and one-half (3½) feet. See also section 9-8-3-15(e) for retaining wall requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-16. - Trash and recycling collection areas. 
(a)  All institutional, commercial, industrial, multi-family residential sites must provide appropriate refuse dumpsters and areas devoted to the storage of waste materials (including grease or oil containers where used). 

(b)  All garbage dumpsters and other similar areas devoted to the storage of waste materials and grease or oil containers should be screened on three (3) sides of said dumpster or area with a minimum six (6) foot high (eight (8) feet preferred) wall constructed of materials substantially similar in appearance to the building on site. Dumpster areas must be gated on the fourth side with a material that provides opaque screening, such as a solid wooden fence or metal gate compatible matching the height of the surrounding wall and compatible in material and appearance. 
(c)  Access to all service areas, including dumpster pads, shall be limited to the hours of between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., unless an emergency situation warrants access to these areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-5-17. - HVAC and mechanical and utility equipment. 
(a)  Heating, ventilation, air conditioning (HVAC) or other mechanical equipment should not be located on the street side of developments or adjacent to open spaces. HVAC and other mechanical and utility equipment, which is located on, beside or adjacent to any building or development, shall be fully screened from view of streets and adjoining property. 
(b)  The screen should exceed the height of the equipment and should utilize building materials and design which are compatible with these used for the exterior of the building. 
(c)  Where mechanical and utility equipment are located on the roof of a structure, all devices should be fully screened from view of streets or adjacent property. A parapet wall or rooftop enclosure compatible in material and appearance with the building's exterior materials may be used to accomplish this screening requirement. 
(d)  All building-mounted utility meters and service equipment should be located to the side or rear of the building and painted to match the exterior color of the building. 
(e)  At-grade utility equipment and facilities associated with on-site electric, cable, telephone, gas or other similar utility should be screened with evergreen plantings or other acceptable alternatives. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-9-6. - PEDESTRIAN RETAIL DESIGN GUIDELINES 

Sec. 9-9-6-1. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter provides guidelines for the architectural design of buildings and structures on individual sites which are appropriate in the more urban parts of the city and will be applied by the community development department during the process of architectural design review as required by chapter 9-9-2 of this Code. The guidelines of chapter 9-9-4 of this article also apply in addition to those provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-6-2. - Applicability. 
The architectural design guidelines of this chapter shall apply to all buildings and structures located within: 
(a)  The C-B, central business zoning district; 
(b)  Midtown overlay zone. 
(c)  The central core character area. 
(d)  As may be appropriate in any other character areas as determined by the community development director; these design guidelines are encouraged but not required in the suburban commercial character area. 

(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-6-3. - Interpretation. 
(a)  The provisions in this chapter which use the term "shall" are regulations and must be followed. 
(b)  When the terms "should" and "are encouraged" are used in this chapter, the language shall be considered a guideline, and flexibility toward compliance may be exercised if it is determined by the community development director that the spirit and intent of the guideline is being followed or an alternative to the guideline is acceptable. However, successive departure from the guidelines is grounds for denial of an application for architectural design review. 

(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-6-4. - Pedestrian-scale development. 

(a)  Development should be designed with an emphasis primarily on the street sidewalk and on pedestrian access to the site and building, rather than auto access and parking areas. 
(b)  Ground-floor uses should be reserved for retail and should be limited to nonresidential uses. Ground floor residential uses should not be permitted in buildings fronting the downtown square; provided, however, residential use of a ground floor may be authorized if it is not readily visible from the front of the building. 
(c)  Sidewalks in storefront commercial areas are pedestrian corridors where one (1) wall is created by the unbroken line of commercial buildings abutting the sidewalk, and a second "perceived wall" is created by sidewalk fixtures such as benches, planting boxes, and street trees. In addition, a "perceived corridor ceiling" is created by storefront awnings and the canopies of street trees. While the sidewalk is technically part of the public right-of-way, many business owners whose properties abut the sidewalk utilize portions of the sidewalk for business purposes. Others desire to improve the appearance of the sidewalk area in front of their individual building. 
(d)  In areas with business storefronts, extra-wide sidewalks should be provided, along with a furnishing zone where street furniture may be placed and street trees planted. 
(e)  In the downtown core character area, sidewalk requirements shall consist of brick edging to match the square's sidewalk design. 



Recommended practice; downtown parklet (Bradford Street SW shown): two (2) on-street parking spaces are transformed into a public parklet with wider sidewalk, plantings, and space for a range of activities like reading, relaxation, and lunch breaks outdoors. Applicable in many areas of downtown. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-6-5. - Building placement. 

Buildings should be placed close to (with little if any setback from) streets internal to the development, or along public streets abutting the development area, as determined in the review and approval process. The buildings should be generally placed so that the main entrance is oriented to the street sidewalk. The community development director may establish a build-to line for the placement of the building to ensure compatibility and consistency with other buildings on the block face. 

Outdoor private seating is encouraged for pedestrian retail areas. If outdoor seating is contemplated prior to building, the building should be setback an additional ten (10) feet to provide appropriate seating area along the building frontage. 
While the sidewalk may be enhanced or used for commercial purposes such as outdoor cafe seating, it is important that the sidewalk's functionality as a means of transportation is not limited. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-6-6. - Building width. 
In pedestrian retail areas, buildings should provide storefronts at sidewalk level along the entire width of their property frontages. Exceptions to this guideline may be appropriate for designated alleyways or other service access ways, subject to the approval of the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-6-7. - Building height. 

(a)  A building designed for one (1) story only should have the appearance of a two- story building; hence a single-story building shall have minimum of twenty (20) feet height measured from the street level or top of curb, with a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  The height of a new building should be similar to or compatible with existing buildings on lots abutting the property on the block face. 
  
  
  

(c)  Buildings fronting the downtown square should be limited to four (4) stories in height; this guideline may be exceeded only if the fifth story and higher stories is/are stepped back from the established building line. 


Recommended practice, infill at the square (three-story concept shown): immediately adjacent to the downtown square, most buildings fit within the two- to four-story range. Infill building shown is traditional brick with taller center parapet, but with modern elements such as a glass and steel first story used as retail space. Top floor space used for residents and/or offices. A rooftop garden patio is incorporated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-6-8. - Cornices, windows, and entrances. 

Source: City of Gainesville Preservation Manual and Design Guidelines
(a)  Storefront cornices. Storefront cornices should be provided as horizontal decorative elements that extend across the width of the building and visually separate the storefront from the upper stories of the two-part commercial block. 
  
(b)  Storefront display windows. Storefront display windows are large areas of plate glass at the street level that provide an opportunity for pedestrians on the sidewalk to view the merchandise and activity taking place inside retail establishments. No less than seventy-five (75) percent of the building frontage should be provided with glass windows and building entrance. Ground-story windows should not exceed ten (10) feet in height and should be no less than three (3) feet above the sidewalk. 

  
  
  
  
  
(c)  Storefront entryways and doors. Commercial storefronts should feature recessed entryways that welcome provide shelter for pedestrians during inclement weather. Storefront doors should be glazed (glass) to allow light into retail areas and provide a means for pedestrians to view commercial activities taking place inside the building. 

(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-6-9. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  The physical and visual impact of new off-street parking areas and new off-street parking facilities within commercial storefront areas should be mitigated as much as possible. 
(b)  Evergreen landscape buffers and hedges should be located around the perimeter of parking lots with shade trees interspersed throughout the interior of the parking lot. 


(c)  Parking decks should adhere to all of the guidelines for new construction in a commercial storefront area in terms of building placement, massing, scale, and facade articulation. If possible, the street level facade of a new parking deck should provide retail storefront space to help it blend into the existing commercial environment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-9-7. - DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR SPECIFIC USES 

Sec. 9-9-7-1. - Live-work unit. 

Live-work units are buildings or spaces within buildings that are used jointly for commercial and residential purposes, where the two (2) uses are physically connected in one (1) unit and residential use of the space is accessory to the primary use as a place of work. This use is distinguished from a home occupation and from a mixed-use building. Live-work units may have larger work spaces than permitted by home occupations, and the floor space for live/work units is specifically designed for both living and working areas. Live-work units are distinguished from mixed-use buildings in that a mixed-use building has residential and nonresidential uses in the same building, but the residential and nonresidential spaces are not necessarily connected or used by the same person. 
Live-work units should meet the following requirements, which are intended to minimize the potential negative impacts on residential use within a live-work unit and on other dwelling units in the same development or near the live-work unit: 
(a)  Occupancy. Only persons living in the dwelling unit should be engaged in the occupation. 
(b)  Use restriction. Sales or customers should be limited or not permitted. There should be no external storage of products or materials. Use of the work space should be limited to general office and similar uses, including investors and those who perform trades via computer or by phone, but not involving the physical exchange of merchandise on the premises. 
(c)  Signs. There should be no exterior signs including window signs except as may be permitted for the rental, lease, or sale of the property. 
(d)  Floor area. A minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet should be provided within each live-work unit. The work component of a live-work unit should be not be smaller than one hundred fifty (150) square feet and no larger than forty (40) percent of the total floor space in the live-work unit. 
(e)  Connection of live-work areas. There needs to be a physical connection between the work floor area and the residential floor area of the unit. 
(f)  Pedestrian access to street. There should be direct pedestrian access at the fronting street at or near grade level to each individual live-work unit. 
(g)  New building in relation to street. When a new building is constructed containing one (1) or more live-work units, the building should face (parallel) the fronting street in a manner that occupies at least fifty (50) percent of the property frontage of the lot on which it is constructed. 

(h)  Location of living areas. Residential areas should normally not be provided on the main (ground/street) floor and are not permitted fronting the downtown square. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-7-2. - Mixed-use building. 
The intent of this section is to guide the design of residential uses mixed with commercial and other land uses. In districts where permitted, mixed-use buildings and mixed-use development should meet the following guidelines: 
(a)  Access to residential units. Residential uses above the first-floor retail or other nonresidential uses should have an entryway to each unit or a hallway serving one (1) or more units which should connect to a stairway opening directly to the outside at street level. Every dwelling unit with a front facade facing a street should to the maximum extent possible have its primary or shared entrance face the street. All stairways should be enclosed. 
(b)  Private exterior area. All dwelling units above the first-floor retail or other nonresidential uses should have an exterior area (balcony) with a minimum of eighty (80) square feet, and which affords maximum privacy to occupants. 
(c)  Signs. Windows above first-floor retail or other nonresidential uses should have no signs, except as they may pertain to the rental, lease or sale of property per the sign regulations contained in this Code. 
(d)  Mailboxes. Residential uses above the first-floor retail or other nonresidential uses should not have outside mailboxes; inside mailboxes or mail slots should be used. 
(e)  Occupancy limits. Residential uses above the first-floor retail or other nonresidential uses should not be rented on a daily or weekly basis and cannot be operated as boarding or rooming houses. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-7-3. - Open spaces. 

(a)  Open spaces, such as town greens and public squares, should be located and designed to add to the visual amenities of mixed-use developments, planned unit developments, suburban commercial, and office campus/office park developments. 
(b)  Greens and squares should be spatially defined and distributed throughout the development so that no principal building is more than a walking distance of one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) feet from a green, square, or park. 
(c)  In large developments with multiple buildings or lots, a mix of peripheral as well as internal green space should be provided. 
(d)  Residential development should be designed around active or passive neighborhood open spaces, which in turn should connect to adjacent open space networks or regional systems, where they exist or are planned. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-9-8. - SUBURBAN COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES 

Sec. 9-9-8-1. - Purpose and intent. 

Conventional, suburban-style layout of shopping centers result in auto-oriented development with expansive surface parking areas that are not pedestrian-friendly, lack open spaces, and should no longer be pursued for larger shopping centers in Gainesville. Instead, the city envisions more functionally appropriate shopping centers utilizing designs that resemble mixed-use developments, incorporate "main street"-type pedestrian retail character, cluster buildings to create activity centers, and integrate plazas and pedestrian places as central points of activity. Commercial site design should focus on "placemaking," or creating a unique sense of place, as its primary design goal. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-8-2. - Design guidelines. 
Compliance with this section is encouraged for all suburban commercial developments and is considered mandatory for suburban commercial sites with four or more acres of land designed to include seventy-five thousand (75,000) or more square feet of retail space (including outlots). 

(a)  Gathering places provide area for activities that promote safe community interaction, exchange, and congregation. Designers are encouraged to provide plazas or gathering places, especially where building breaks occur, by including design elements such as play areas, landscaping, street furniture, public art, and/or other attractive features that improve functionality and introduce a pedestrian orientation. 
(b)  Benches should be provided near drop off areas and entryways to major buildings and at key locations along pedestrian ways and within plazas. Consideration should be given to the location of benches with respect to the ability to provide shelter from summer sun and winds and be open to direct sunlight in the winter. 
(c)  One (1) or more buildings should be arranged to create a primary "main street" or internal street grid pattern. Building designs should frame and accentuate public spaces with pedestrian-scale elements and details. Pedestrian ways should be embellished with special design features such as towers, arcades, porticos, pedestrian light fixtures, bollards, planter walls, and other architectural elements that define circulation ways and outdoor spaces. 
(d)  Buildings should orient, frame, and/or direct pedestrian views to parks and plazas. Buildings along roadways should provide a building scale of two (2) stories or if single-story should be no less than twenty (20) feet in height. Buildings, including those on outlots, should be massed against the primary arterial or collector roadways to create a "street wall" effect, with shared, interior surface parking. No more than forty (40) percent of any parcel frontage should be open to a view of surface parking. 
(e)  Building lengths should not exceed three hundred (300) linear feet without a physical break or pedestrian access way connecting to surface parking to the rear of buildings "big box" stores should be articulated at a smaller pedestrian scale to disguise their mass. 
(f)  Incorporate architectural features on all sides of a building facade facing: the primary entrance(s) of an adjacent building, public roadways, interior site amenities, and facades that are visible from public spaces. 
(g)  Drive-through windows and drive-through lanes should not be utilized and may be permitted only if the access drives are designed in a way that minimizes conflict with pedestrian travel which shall take precedence. 
(h)  Unique architectural components such as entryway structures and clock towers are encouraged to be integrated into the design. 

Source: Gainesville Comprehensive Plan 2035
  
Best practices: this long-term vision for Lakeshore Mall redevelopment illustrates several desirable design principles: incorporation of a central green and interior courtyard space; buildings close to and framing the streets and driveways; and parking lots that are partially shielded from view from abutting public streets. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-9-9. - SIGN DESIGN GUIDELINES 

Sec. 9-9-9-1. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter provides guidelines for signage. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-9-2. - Applicability. 
The sign design guidelines of this chapter shall apply to all buildings and structures located within: 
(a)  The C-B, central business zoning district; 
(b)  Midtown overlay zone. 
(c)  In the central core character area, and any other character area, as may be determined appropriate by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-9-3. - Generally. 
(a)  All signs should be of a design and include materials that are in keeping with the architectural design and exterior materials of the principal structure. 
(b)  Signs shall be sized in proportion to the building. Notwithstanding the maximum areas allowed under the terms of the sign ordinance, an individual sign may be disapproved if it is found to be excessive or nonproportional in relation to the building on which it is placed or which it serves. 
(c)  Uniformity of size and lettering among properties in the same district or character area is desirable, to create a pleasing visual consistency. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-9-4. - Sign materials. 
(a)  Exposed surfaces of signs must be constructed of or appear to be constructed of metal, glass, stone, concrete, brick, cloth, or wood, or similar approved material. If synthetic materials are authorized, they shall have the same finished appearance as the materials specified here. 
(b)  Sandblasted wood signs are not prohibited but may or may not be considered appropriate. 
(c)  Plywood or unfinished wood is not an appropriate material for signs and shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-9-5. - Colors. 
(a)  No individual sign should have more than three (3) colors. 
(b)  Colors of signs should be coordinated with overall building colors. 
(c)  White or other light-colored backgrounds for signs should not utilized. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-9-9-6. - Placement of wall signs. 
(a)  Wall signs shall be mounted flush against the facade of the building adjacent to the front entryway of the unit. 

(b)  Wall signs should be located on flat, unadorned parts of the building facade, somewhere above storefront display windows (where they exist) and below second-story windows (where they exist). 
(c)  If the building facade or storefront has a lintel strip or signboard, the wall sign should be placed directly on it. Wall signs should be located centrally on the facade. Sign boards should not exceed two and one-half (2½) feet in height. 

(d)  Projecting signs and signs suspended from canopies and awnings oriented to pedestrians (i.e., perpendicular to the wall surface of a building) should be permitted and are encouraged, provided that they are constructed to be compatible in material and appearance with the building. 
(e)  Projecting and suspended signs shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § IX(Exh. A), 6-21-16) 
Article 9-10 - SPECIFIC USE PROVISIONS 

 
CHAPTER 9-10-1. - GENERAL ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 9-10-1-1. - Accessory use or structure. 
(a)  Location. Buildings accessory to residential uses in residential zoning districts shall be located in a rear yard or side yard. In other zoning districts, accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall be located in a rear yard or side yard, except for well houses, decorative landscape structures, or guard buildings serving residential neighborhoods. 
(b)  Relationship to principal use. No accessory building, structure, or use shall be erected on a lot until construction of the principal building or establishment of principal use has commenced. Accessory buildings and structures must be constructed in conjunction with, or after, a building permit for the principal building is lawfully approved and use is established. 
(c)  Interpretation. When an accessory building is attached to a principal building by a breezeway, passageway, or similar means, the accessory building shall be considered part of the principal building and shall comply with the yard requirements for a principal building. 
Sec. 9-10-1-2. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  Height. If a fence or freestanding wall, other than a retaining wall or necessary fencing encompassing a tennis court is to be placed in a required yard, it shall be no more than eight (8) feet in height. Fences or freestanding walls constructed in a front yard of a residential lot shall not exceed three and one-half (3½) feet (forty-two (42) inches) in height; provided, however, that this shall not apply to subdivision or project identification monuments at the entrance to a subdivision or development and wall or fence extensions thereof, where permitted, which shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and columns shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. Fences or walls on properties with nonresidential uses shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and columns shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height in a front, side or rear yard. 
(b)  Setback and location. Fences and walls must be set back three (3) feet from any side or rear property line for purposes of maintenance; provided, however, that a fence may be established along a side or rear property line if there is a written and signed agreement between the property owners to permit the fence at or along a common property line. In such cases, the director may require a letter, plat or deed as evidence of such agreement. No fence or freestanding wall shall be erected in a manner that obstructs visibility at street intersections (see also chapter 9-17-4). Retaining walls and subdivision entrance monuments shall not be placed within the right-of-way of a local street. 
(c)  Composition. Walls and fences shall present a finished and attractive surface to the exterior of the property. Walls or fences composed or constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, junk, or other discarded materials shall not be permitted. In all residential zoning districts, fences or walls erected within the required front yard shall be constructed of brick, stone, wood, stucco, wrought iron, or split rail; provided, however, that this shall not preclude wire fences (e.g., chain link, or barbed wire) within a required front yard, when a residential property contains a minimum of two (2) acres and such fencing is needed for permitted livestock. Chain-link fences installed in commercial and industrial zoning districts and visible from the public right-of-way shall be coated with vinyl with a black color and the appearance softened with landscaping as approved by the director. An additional two (2) feet of security wire may be placed on fences in commercial and industrial zoning districts, unless prevented by overlay zone regulations. 
(d)  Gates. When gates for vehicular access are provided, said gates shall not be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a public street or road right-of-way, to ensure safe ingress and egress. See also section 9-13-10-9. 
These requirements shall not apply to temporary fencing erected around a lot during construction of a building for security and safety or code compliance reasons. All such temporary fencing shall be approved by the building official upon issuance of a building permit and shall be removed upon completion of construction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XV, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-10-1-3. - Junked vehicle or material. 
Except for junk/salvage yards and wrecked motor vehicle compounds, it shall be unlawful to park or continuously store abandoned, wrecked, junked or inoperable vehicles, power-driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, used appliances, or any other miscellaneous scrap material that is visible from a public street or adjacent or abutting property. Such use shall be enclosed with a minimum six-foot high opaque fence and screened with vegetation. No such storage shall be allowed in front yards. Additional screening as determined by the director of planning and development, based upon the elevations and uses of surrounding properties, may be required to comply with this provision in side and rear yards. 
Sec. 9-10-1-4. - Accessory uses of parking lots and loading areas. 
(a)  Repair or dismantling. Parking and loading areas shall not be used for the repair or dismantling of any vehicle, equipment, materials, or supplies. 
(b)  Offer for sale. Parking and loading areas shall not be used to store vehicles for sale, except in cases where the property owner holds title or lease to the vehicle(s), provided auto sales is a permitted use in the district in which the property is located. This provision shall not apply to the placing of a "For Sale" sign on or in one licensed vehicle, located in a private residential driveway and which licensed vehicle, boat, or other vehicle is owned by an occupant of said private residence. 
(c)  Attendant's shelter. An attendant's shelter building may be permitted for parking lots in nonresidential zoning districts, provided that such structure or building does not contain more than fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area and is set a distance of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the public right-of-way. 
CHAPTER 9-10-2. - PRINCIPAL RESIDENTIAL USES 

Sec. 9-10-2-1. - Community recreation facility. 
Within a residential subdivision or multiple-family residential development, community recreation facilities as defined by this Code must be platted when a part of a subdivision or part of the development plan approval for a multiple-family residential development. Community recreation facilities shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  Exterior lighting. If lighted, exterior lighting shall require a lighting plan to be submitted and approved prior to installation. See chapter 9-3-4. 
(b)  Swimming pools and tennis courts. Swimming pools and tennis courts shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from all property lines of the tract of land devoted to community recreation, with a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip along all property lines of said tract. See article 9-16 for landscape strip specifications. 
(c)  Buildings. Buildings (excluding accessory structures) shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the property line of the tract. If outdoor patio or decks are provided, they shall be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the property line of the tract and a minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided between said outdoor patio or deck and the property line or boundary of said tract. See article 9-16 for landscape strip specifications. 
(d)  Parking. Parking shall be provided per the requirements of article 9-17. 
Sec. 9-10-2-2. - Model home. 
A dwelling unit may be constructed and used as a model home or temporary office for the sale of lots under the following conditions: 
(a)  The model home is typically constructed before approval of a final plat, and hence the model home is the principal use of the entire unsubdivided parcel until the final plat is approved. The model home shall be placed on a lot designated on the approved preliminary plat and shall be placed in a manner that meets the applicable zoning district dimensional requirements so that it complies at the time it is erected and when it is sold and/or converted for single-family residential use. 
(b)  Sales shall be limited to the lots and buildings within the subdivision where the model home is located. 
(c)  A manufactured home or portable building shall not be used as a model home or temporary sales office. 
(d)  The use of the model home for a sales office shall be discontinued within thirty (30) days after certificates of occupancy have been issued on ninety (90) percent of the lots in the subdivision. 
(e)  The model home shall comply with parking and applicable accessibility standards. 
Sec. 9-10-2-3. - Multi-family development. 
(a)  Condominiums. If a condominium form of ownership is proposed, the development shall meet all current applicable state laws including the Georgia Condominium Act (O.C.G.A. 44-3-70 et. seq.). Proposed bylaws and the articles of incorporation for the condominium association shall be submitted with the application for development approval. 
(b)  Amenities. All developments containing fifty (50) or more dwelling units shall have a clubhouse, swimming pool, and tennis court(s). The size of the swimming pool shall be a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet of water surface. These facilities are subject to section 9-10-2-1. 
(c)  Laundry facilities. On-site accessory laundry facilities are permitted accessory uses for developments with twenty-five (25) or more units. 
(d)  Setbacks. Buildings within multi-family developments shall be subject to the setbacks for the entire lot as established in applicable zoning district dimensional requirements. There shall be no requirements for setbacks from private driveways within the multi-family development. This does not include single-family attached dwelling (fee-simple townhouse) developments. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XVI, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-10-2-4. - Relocated residential structure. 
A relocation permit is required to relocate a residential structure established in the city limits. The relocation permit is not a building permit for the placement of the structure at a new location. The applicant shall include the following with the application for the relocation permit: 
(a)  A photograph of the structure at its present location. 
(b)  The current location (address and tax parcel number) where the structure is now located. 
(c)  If the structure is to be relocated inside the city limits, the proposed location (address and tax parcel number) of the structure. To ensure compliance with the applicable zoning district dimensional requirements, when the relocated residential structure is proposed to be located within the city limits, the director of planning and development shall require submission of the proposed location (address and tax parcel number) and a copy of the recorded plat of the lot on which the structure will be placed (if none exists the applicant shall be required to comply with subdivision requirements of article 9-13). 
(d)  The total heated floor area of the existing structure and, if to be located within the city, the renovated structure. 
(e)  If it is to be relocated within the city, an agreement that a building permit will be required and that all exterior improvements to the structure once relocated shall be completed within six (6) months of relocation. 
(f)  If located or proposed to be located within the historic preservation overlay zone, there must be a copy of the approved certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission in accordance with chapter 9-23-3. 
The building official shall inspect or arrange to inspect the structure for compliance with the minimum standards of the zoning district proposed for location and other applicable regulations. 
Sec. 9-10-2-5. - Single-family attached dwelling (fee-simple townhouse). 
In zoning districts where permitted, fee-simple townhouses shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Lot frontage and lot width. Each platted lot shall have a minimum of twenty (20) feet of frontage on a public street or private road that meets public street standards, and each lot shall have a minimum lot width of twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  Lot size. The minimum size of a lot for each fee-simple townhouse lot (i.e., the extent of land owned by the owner of the unit) shall be two thousand (2,000) square feet in lot area. 
(c)  Building setbacks. There shall be a minimum 20-foot side or rear setback from any perimeter boundary of the fee-simple townhouse subdivision and a 30-foot front setback from any public street exterior to or within the subdivision. There shall be a minimum 20-foot rear setback from townhouse lot boundaries for all buildings and structures. In the case of any public street the front building setback shall be measured from the right-of-way line of the public street. In the case of a private street the front building setback shall be fifteen (15) feet and shall be measured from the private street right-of-way line or, if none is established, the curb of the private street nearest the building. Zero lot line between units within the same building shall be permitted, subject to applicable fire and building codes. 
(d)  Building separation. There shall be a minimum building separation of twenty (20) feet between townhouse buildings. 
(e)  Building unit offsets. To avoid a monotonous appearance, for any given building, no more than six (6) units may have common walls. Any building containing more than three (3) units with common walls must have the front facade and the roof of each attached unit distinct from the other through separation, staggering, or offsets in design by a minimum of three (3) feet. 
(f)  Rear access for fire protection. Townhouse developments shall be designed to provide proper access to all dwelling units for fire fighting purposes, as may be determined by city personnel administering relevant codes. Rear access, if required for fire fighting purposes may be accomplished by alleys. 
(g)  Subdivision plat approval. Each townhouse development or phase thereof shall require preliminary and final subdivision plat approval in accordance with chapters 9-13-4 and 9-13-14, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XVII, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-10-2-6. - Single-family and two-family dwellings. 
All single-family and two-family detached dwellings shall meet or exceed the following requirements: 
(a)  Administrative relief: The community development department director may approve deviations from the requirements of this section on the basis of finding that the materials to be utilized or the architectural style proposed for the dwelling unit will be compatible with and harmonious or superior to existing structures in the vicinity, and that such deviation shall be consistent with the intent of these regulations. 
(b)  Building code standards: The dwelling shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable requirements of the building code as adopted by the city, or in accordance with the standards of state law and regulations for residential industrialized buildings, whichever apply. 
(c)  Exterior siding: Exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, brick, stone, concrete, stucco, EIFS or similar materials, or lap siding of masonite, vinyl or similar materials, or any combination of the above except where otherwise identified as a prohibited material within an infill residential development project or overlay zone as identified within this Code. 
The exterior siding shall extend the full height of the exterior walls, from the surrounding grade to the bottom eves or other juncture with the roof. 
(d)  Foundation: The structure shall be attached to a permanent foundation constructed in accordance with the building code or state regulations as applicable. 
(e)  Minimum structure width: The minimum width of a structure shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(f)  Porch: A porch or hard surfaced landing shall be provided at each exterior door and stairway top and bottom, which shall be at least as wide as the door it serves, but no less than thirty-six (36) inches in width and thirty-six (36) inches in depth. 
(g)  Roofs: All roof surfaces shall have a minimum pitch of 3:12 (three (3) inches of rise for every twelve (12) inches of run), except that mansard and gambrel roofs must meet this requirement only for those surfaces that rise from the eaves. 
All roof surfaces exposed to view shall be covered with asphalt or fiberglass shingles, wood shakes or shingles, clay tiles, slate, standing seam metal or similar materials. 
(h)  Minimum roof overhang shall be twelve (12) inches, including gutters. 
(i)  Water and sewage: Each dwelling shall be connected to potable water supply and sanitary sewage disposal system approved by the Gainesville Public Utilities Department or Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § IV, 1-18-11) 
CHAPTER 9-10-3. - ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL USES 

Sec. 9-10-3-1. - Customary residential accessory uses and structures. 
Each of the following uses is considered to be a customary accessory use to a dwelling and shall be situated on the same lot with the principal use to which it serves as an accessory. This list is not necessarily exhaustive of possible permitted accessory uses and structures on a residential lot. 
(a)  Garage or carport for storing vehicles, subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Shed or tool room for the storage of equipment used in grounds or building maintenance. 
(c)  Children's playhouse and play equipment. 
(d)  Quarters for the keeping of pets owned by occupants for non-commercial purposes provided that such use does not generate a nuisance to adjoining properties. 
(e)  Private recreational facility, such as a swimming pool and bathhouse or cabana, tennis court, subject to applicable requirements of this article. 
(f)  Deck or patio, whether on water or over land. 
(g)  Fences and walls, subject to the requirements of section 9-10-1-2. 
(h)  Guest houses, subject to the requirements of section 9-10-3-3. 
(i)  Structures designed and used for purposes of shelter in the event of man-made or natural catastrophes. 
(j)  Vehicle parking, subject to the requirements of section 9-10-3-7. 
(k)  Personal horse stable, in R-I-A zoning districts only, subject to the requirements of section 9-10-3-8. 
Sec. 9-10-3-2. - Generally. 
Customary residential accessory buildings are permitted in residential zoning districts, subject to permitted use provisions for the zoning district in which the property is located, and provided they meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Location. Accessory uses, buildings, and structures shall be located in a rear yard or side yard, except for well houses which may be located in front yards. 
(b)  Height. Accessory buildings shall not exceed two (2) stories. Accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of twenty-four (24) feet, or the height of the principal residential building, whichever is less. 
(c)  Setback. Accessory buildings shall meet setbacks specified for the zoning district in which it is located, as specified in table 9-5-2 or 9-6-2, whichever is applicable. For setbacks applicable to fences and walls, see section 9-10-1-2. 
(d)  Area. In no case shall the total area square footage of a single accessory building or structure exceed fifty (50) percent of the square footage of the principal building/structure footprint to which it is accessory. Where more than one accessory building/structure is permitted and provided on a given lot, the total area of accessory buildings/structures shall not exceed the square footage of the principal building/structure footprint to which they are accessory. 
(e)  Building materials. Any accessory building or structure exceeding two-hundred (200) square feet should contain similar exterior materials as the primary structure. The following types of external building materials (siding and window and door frames) are prohibited for buildings over two-hundred (200) square feet: highly reflective, shiny, or mirror-like materials; mill-finish (non-colored) aluminum metal windows or door frames; metal siding; exposed, unfinished walls; exposed plywood or particle board; and unplastered or exposed concrete masonry blocks. 
(f)  Roof material and pitch. If metal roofs are used, they shall not reflect light any more than the siding material used on the same building. All new roof surfaces on buildings shall have a minimum pitch of 3:12. 
(Ord. No. 2008-43, § V, 11-18-08) 
Sec. 9-10-3-3. - Guest house. 
Guest houses, where permitted, shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Accessory use. The guest house must be an accessory use to a single-family detached dwelling already existing on the lot. 
(b)  Architecture and building codes. The guest house shall have an architectural design and exterior building materials that are compatible with the principal building (single-family dwelling). The guest house shall meet all building code requirements. 
(c)  Lot area requirement. A guest house shall be permitted only on a lot having at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area. 
(d)  Location. The guest house must be placed to the rear of the main house (principal building) separated by a distance of at least twenty (20) feet. No more than one guest house may be located on any lot. 
(e)  Maximum floor area. The gross building floor area of the guest house may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the main house (principal building). 
(f)  Use. Guest houses shall not be rented or otherwise occupied separately from the main residence, except for non-paying guests or domestic employees residing on the premises and sharing meals in the principal dwelling. 
Sec. 9-10-3-4. - Accessory apartment. 
In zoning districts where permitted, accessory apartments (detached or attached) shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Number limited. Only one accessory apartment shall be permitted on a lot. An accessory apartment shall not be permitted on the same lot as a home occupation. 
(b)  Parking. One additional off-street parking space is required and shall be provided, which shall be located in a side or rear yard. 
(c)  Minimum floor area. At least three hundred (300) square feet of heated floor area shall be provided per adult occupant. The heated floor area for an accessory apartment shall be at least three hundred (300) square feet and shall not exceed nine hundred (900) square feet or the size of the principal dwelling, whichever is less. 
(d)  Entrance to unit. The entrance to an accessory apartment shall be from a rear or side yard and shall not face the street to which the principal dwelling is oriented. 
(e)  Exterior finish. Accessory apartments, whether attached or detached, shall have exterior finishes or architectural treatments (e.g., brick, wood, stucco, etc.) of an appearance substantially similar to those on the principal dwelling. 
(f)  Water and sewer. The Hall County Environmental Health Department must certify that the septic tank facilities meet applicable countywide health rules; or if served by public water and/or sanitary sewer, the city public utilities department must certify those utilities are adequate to serve both the principal dwelling and the accessory apartment. 
(g)  Occupancy. Either the accessory apartment or the principal dwelling unit shall be owner-occupied. 
Sec. 9-10-3-5. - Private swimming pool. 
Swimming pools accessory to single-family dwellings shall be located in rear or side yards. All swimming pools shall be located at least ten (10) feet from all property lines. Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence or wall at least five (5) feet in height (or as otherwise specified in an adopted swimming pool code or building code) and maintained in good condition with a lockable gate. 
Sec. 9-10-3-6. - Yard sales. 
Yard sales, where permitted, shall not exceed seventy-two (72) hours for each yard sale. A yard sale on a particular property shall not occur more frequently than four (4) times annually. All merchandise must be the property of those holding the sale and not be purchased for the purpose of resale. 
Sec. 9-10-3-7. - Vehicle parking in residential zoning districts. 
(a)  Location and number of vehicles limited. In single-family residential zoning districts, the parking of automobiles is permitted in garages, carports, or outdoors. Unenclosed parking shall not exceed four outdoor automobiles per single-family or two-family dwelling unit in any front yard of a lot. Parking shall be permitted only in designated hard surfaced areas with concrete or asphalt surfacing and shall not be permitted outside such surfaced areas (i.e., no parking in yards). Administrative relief may be given by the public works director to use alternative pervious materials due to environmental impacts. 
(b)  Recreational vehicles. Parking or storage of such recreational equipment or vehicles shall not take place on any vacant residential lot. In residential zoning districts, recreational equipment such as boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, motor coaches, tent trailers and other similar vehicles may be parked or stored only in side yards, rear yards, carports, or in an enclosed building. If stored regularly in a side or rear yard, the vehicle and vehicle storage area shall be screened from view from abutting properties. Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored anywhere on residential premises except within a required front yard for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours. 
(c)  Commercial vehicles. Parking or storage of commercial vehicles shall not take place on any vacant residential lot. It shall be unlawful to park or store commercial vehicles (including but not limited to dump trucks and delivery trucks) or school buses in front yards of residential zoning districts. One commercial vehicle may be parked or stored in a side or rear yard of a lot in a residential zoning district, but if stored regularly in a side or rear yard, the vehicle and vehicle storage area shall be screened from view from abutting properties and parked on a hard-surfaced area. Administrative relief may be given by the public works director to use alternative pervious materials due to environmental impacts. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XVIII, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-10-3-8. - Livestock. 
The keeping of livestock shall not be permitted in the city; provided, however, that in the R-I-A zoning district a personal horse stable may be permitted as a principal use, or an accessory use to a residence, provided that at least two (2) acres of lot area is provided for each horse stabled on the property. No building or structure for shelter of horses shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of any property line. 
CHAPTER 9-10-4. - HOME OCCUPATIONS 

Sec. 9-10-4-1. - General provisions. 
Home occupations may be established in a portion of a dwelling as provided in permitted uses requirements for the zoning districts established by this Code. No more than one home occupation may be established in a single dwelling. In districts where permitted, the following regulations shall apply to home occupations. Failure to meet one or more of these regulations at any time shall be unlawful and grounds for immediate revocation of business registration. 
Sec. 9-10-4-2. - Physical limitations. 
The gross floor area of a dwelling unit devoted to a home occupation shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet, or thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling, whichever is less. An accessory building may be used for the home occupation, but in no case shall the total area within the accessory building devoted to such use be greater than five hundred (500) square feet. If part of the dwelling unit and an accessory building are devoted to a home occupation, no more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of combined gross floor area shall be used for such activity. 
Sec. 9-10-4-3. - Alterations to the dwelling. 
The exterior appearance of the dwelling and any accessory building used for such activity must remain that of a dwelling, or accessory use to a dwelling. No external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the dwelling or accessory building are permitted. 
Sec. 9-10-4-4. - Parking of vehicles. 
Vehicles kept on site in association with the home occupation shall be used by residents only. Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the home occupation. Incoming vehicles related to the home occupation, if any, shall at all times be parked off-street within the confines of the residential driveway or other on-site permitted parking. 
Sec. 9-10-4-5. - Visits by patrons limited. 
There shall be no nonresident persons on the premises in conjunction with the home occupation, except for family day care homes. Home occupations including medical, professional or personal service uses involving visits by patrons shall require special use approval from the governing body and shall be limited to no more than two (2) nonresident persons on the premises at the same time in conjunction with the home occupation whether they are students, clients, patients, or customers. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XIX, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-10-4-6. - Transportation of goods and deliveries. 
The transporting of goods by truck in connection with a home occupation is prohibited. There shall be no goods, products or commodities received on the premises; provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent the non-routine delivery of packages by Federal Express, United Parcel Service, or other commercial carrier. 
Sec. 9-10-4-7. - Equipment, off-site impacts, and nuisances. 
No home occupation shall generate traffic, sound, smell, vibration, light, or dust that is offensive or that creates a nuisance. There shall be no exterior lighting of the building or property that is not in character with a residential neighborhood. No equipment that interferes with radio and/or television reception shall be allowed. Home occupations must exclude the use of machinery or equipment that emits sound (e.g., saws, drills, musical instruments, etc.) that is detectable beyond the property. Chemical, electrical, or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment and which is used primarily for commercial purposes shall not be permitted. 
Sec. 9-10-4-8. - Signs prohibited. 
There shall be no signs permitted in conjunction with a home occupation, whether placed on the premises or on a vehicle parked on the premises. This section shall not be construed as limiting a property owner from erecting signs permitted on the lot pursuant to article 9-18. 
Sec. 9-10-4-9. - Employees and licenses. 
Only occupants of the dwelling shall be authorized to work on the premises in connection with a home occupation. Any occupational licenses, including business registrations, required by state and/or city regulations must be obtained. Proof of state registration, if required for the home occupation, shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a business registration. 
Sec. 9-10-4-10. - Display, stock-in-trade, sales, and storage. 
There shall be no display, and no stock-in-trade nor commodity sold on the premises, in connection with a home occupation, nor shall there be any activity associated with the home occupation visible outside the dwelling. There shall be no exchange of merchandise of any kind on the premises. Incidental storage of products which must be mailed/shipped to the customer/recipient is permitted, within the physical limits of the home occupation as established in this chapter. 
Sec. 9-10-4-11. - Uses specifically prohibited. 
The following uses are specifically prohibited as home occupations: auto sales or auto repair; restaurants; animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, kennels, or the keeping of animals; funeral homes; retail or wholesale shops; machine shops; special event facilities; and lodging services. 
Sec. 9-10-4-12. - Approval. 
All home occupations shall be subject to the director of planning and development's approval. The applicant for a home occupation shall file for approval from the director on forms provided by the director. Information required by the director to approve a home occupation shall be as established in a home occupation application and may include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(a)  Address and reference to recorded plat. 
(b)  A site plan of the lot on which a home occupation is proposed, showing the location of the principal building, accessory building if proposed to be used in conjunction with the home occupation, and parking areas. The director may require the site plan to be based on a boundary survey or on a engineering scaled plat. 
(c)  Written narrative which shall at minimum describe the home occupation (use), hours of operation, and generally how the home occupation complies with this chapter. 
Sec. 9-10-4-13. - Modifications by special use. 
The provisions of this chapter may be modified or varied pursuant to application by the property owner for a special use, according to procedures specified in chapter 9-22-2. The director may provide a recommendation whether or not to approve said modifications. 
CHAPTER 9-10-5. - INSTITUTIONAL USES 

Sec. 9-10-5-1. - Church, temples, synagogue, or place of worship. 
(a)  Setbacks and buffers. When located on a lot abutting a R-I-A, R-I, NC, or R-II zoning district, or abutting an existing residential use, churches and their customary accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any property line, and within the 50-foot setback, a minimum 25-foot wide natural buffer shall be provided. See chapter 9-16-2 for zoning buffer specifications. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Acceptable accessory uses include but are not limited to, a residence for the housing of the pastor, priest, minister, rabbi, etc., school buildings and temporary classrooms, gymnasiums and other indoor recreational facilities, community meeting rooms, and unlighted outdoor recreational facilities. In commercial districts, a community food or housing shelter may be operated as an accessory use to a church. 
(c)  Special uses in residential zoning districts. When located in a residential zoning district, no church shall be permitted to establish a day care center, house more than one household or family on-site, or provide lighted outdoor recreation facilities, without a special use permit approved by the governing body. See chapter 9-22-2. 
Sec. 9-10-5-2. - Club or lodge, nonprofit. 
(a)  Setbacks and buffers. When located on a lot abutting a R-I-A, R-I, NC, or R-II zoning district, or abutting an existing residential use, nonprofit clubs or lodges shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any property line, and within the 50-foot setback, a minimum 25-foot wide natural buffer shall be provided. See chapter 9-16-2 for zoning buffer specifications. 
(b)  Special uses in residential zoning districts. When located in a residential zoning district, no nonprofit club or lodge shall be permitted to establish lighted outdoor recreation facilities, without a special use permit approved by the governing body. 
Sec. 9-10-5-3. - Continuing-care retirement community. 
(a)  Accessory uses. The facility may have on site as a part of its development the following accessory uses for use of residents and their guests only: full-service kitchen for meals, exercise facilities, swimming pools, tubs and spas, administrative offices, nursing stations, treatment rooms, emergency paging systems, indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, restrooms, hair salons, computer facilities, game and card rooms, chapel, movie theaters, wellness centers, billiard rooms, restaurant facilities, common areas, libraries, dining rooms, mail rooms, housekeeping and storage areas, laundry facilities, and gift shops. 
(b)  Minimum floor area per unit. Independent living units shall contain a minimum of six hundred fifty (650) square feet of area. 
(c)  Maximum building coverage. Maximum building coverage shall be limited to forty (40) percent. 
(d)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size for a development shall be five (5) acres. 
(e)  Setbacks and buffers. All principal and accessory buildings shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all side and rear property lines. There shall be a minimum 25-foot wide buffer along side and rear property lines. 
(f)  Occupancy. At least eighty (80) percent of the units must be occupied by residents sixty-two (62) years old or older, and the remaining units must be occupied by at least one resident fifty-five (55) years old or older. 
Sec. 9-10-5-4. - Institutional residential living and care facilities. 
In districts where permitted, institutional residential living and care facilities shall meet the requirements of the state board of health and applicable rules of the state department of human resources. Proof of compliance with such requirements shall be required to be on file with the director prior to business registration approval. 
Sec. 9-10-5-5. - Rooming house and group home. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. This section is intended to address concerns about dormitory-style housing in existing single-family residential neighborhoods. It is adopted in response to concerns that when a large number of people rent rooms in one home, there are sometimes negative impacts such as overcrowding, unsanitary conditions, illicit activities, cars parked in the yard, frequent parties, and other disturbances and threats to public safety. This section is designed to help protect the character and stability of the city's neighborhoods while also respecting individual property rights. 
(b)  Applicability. No person shall establish or operate a rooming house or group home, or let a person occupy any rooming unit in any rooming house or group home, except in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Business registration of existing rooming houses or group homes. No person shall operate a rooming house or group home unless he holds a valid business registration issued in the name of the operator and for the specific dwelling. Property owners operating a rooming house or group home shall register the rooming house or group home as an existing business within one hundred twenty (120) days from the effective date of this section. It shall be unlawful to continue to use or operate a rooming house or group home in the city after one hundred twenty (120) days from the effective date of this section, unless the rooming house or group home has been registered with the city. The city shall compile and maintain a list of registered rooming houses and group homes. 
(d)  Appointment of agent and agent responsibilities. As part of the registration process, property owners of existing and new rooming houses or group home shall appoint an agent, who lives in Hall County, as the person responsible for the property. The designated agent shall be available to be contacted twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. The agent is the party designated to receive all notices from the city concerning the use of the property. The name and telephone number of the agent responsible for the rooming house or group home will be provided by the city to any neighbors who contact the city with complaints about the rooming house or group home. The designated agent for the property shall be responsible for responding expeditiously to any complaints received by the city and problems if they occur. 
(e)  Registration application requirements. The application for registration shall include the agent of the property and the resident manager. The applicant for a registration required by this section shall file with the application the following: 
(1)  A copy of the recorded plat for the property; 
(2)  A site plan, if no current as-built survey exists; 
(3)  A floor plan of each floor of the building. Said floor plan shall be drawn to an acceptable architectural scale and shall show all stairs, halls, the location and size of all windows, the location and size of habitable rooms and the exits of each floor to be occupied. The intended use of every room in the building must be indicated on the floor plans submitted; and 
(4)  A written statement indicating the number of persons proposed to be accommodated or allowed on each floor, and services to be provided, if any. 
(f)  Resident management and occupancy registry. A resident manager shall reside on the licensed premises. A telephone shall be located in the resident manager's living quarters. The manager of every rooming house or group home shall keep in the office, or other place therein, a register in which shall be entered the name and residence of every person who becomes a lodger, boarder or guest therein. Such register shall also show the number or location of the room or bed occupied by such person, the date of his arrival, and the period for which he will stay. The register shall also be accessible, without charge, to the director, any police officer, or other duly authorized agent of the city. An up-to-date floor plan and current list of occupants shall be maintained by the resident manager and posted in a conspicuous location. 
(g)  Occupancy limitations. No basement, attic, or accessory building shall be used for rooming house or group home purposes. No registration required by this section shall be issued to any person proposing to use a basement, attic, or accessory building or any part thereof as habitable rooms for rooming house or group home purposes. 
(h)  Air space. No room in any rooming house or group home shall be occupied as a sleeping room by any person unless there are at least six hundred (600) cubic feet of air space, exclusive of wardrobe and closet space, for each and every person occupying any such room. All sleeping quarters shall be served by working heating and cooling facilities and a bed with a mattress for each registered occupant. 
(i)  Minimum basic facilities. At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, connected to a water and sewerage system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight (8) persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house or group home. All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. 
(j)  Food preparation and meals. Any rooming house or group home where food is served shall comply with all requirements of the Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
(k)  Responsibility for maintenance. The property owner, property agent, and resident manager of each rooming house or group home shall be individually responsible for the maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions in every part of the rooming house or group home. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XX, 12-15-09) 
CHAPTER 9-10-6. - PRINCIPAL NONRESIDENTIAL USES 

Sec. 9-10-6-1. - Automobile sales establishment. 
Establishments that sell, rent, or lease automobiles must provide parking specifically identified and devoted to customers. Adequate space must be allocated, specifically identified, and reserved on the site for the unloading of vehicles brought to the site by car carriers. It shall be a violation to park vehicles for sale, rent, or lease in customer parking areas, unloading zones, within landscape strips, or in any other grass or unpaved area. Outside loudspeakers shall not be permitted when abutting residential zoning districts and uses. 
When abutting a residential zoning district or use, automobile sales establishments require submittal and approval by the director of a photometric plan for lighting demonstrating compliance with the requirements of chapter 9-3-4. Establishments that will not operate during darkness shall not be required to submit a photometric plan. 
Sec. 9-10-6-2. - Bed and breakfast inn. 
In districts where permitted, bed and breakfast inns shall have a minimum of two (2) guest rooms and a maximum of five (5) guest rooms. 
Sec. 9-10-6-3. - Commercial recreation facility, outdoor. 
(a)  Lot area. Such uses require a minimum lot area of two (2) acres. 
(b)  Access. Vehicular access shall be derived only from a collector or arterial street. 
(c)  Setback and buffer. A minimum building setback of one hundred (100) feet, and a natural undisturbed buffer replanted where sparsely vegetated of at least fifty (50) feet adjacent to side and rear property lines, shall be required. 
(d)  Exterior lighting. Uses that propose night lighting other than incidental security lighting shall be required to submit a photometric plan to enable the evaluation of impacts from illumination. See chapter 9-3-4 for additional requirements. 
(e)  Evaluation. A written evaluation of noise impacts is required at the time the following special uses are proposed to be established as principal uses: stadiums, amphitheaters, outdoor firearms shooting ranges, and race tracks for animals and motor driven vehicles; such projects may be required to construct noise attention walls or otherwise address off-site noise impacts. A traffic impact analysis (see chapter 9-22-4) shall be required for amphitheaters, stadiums, racetracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles, and recreational vehicle parks. 
Sec. 9-10-6-4. - Day care center. 
In districts where permitted, day care centers shall have at least one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of outdoor play area and at least thirty-five (35) square feet of indoor space provided for each child or other person served. The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a solid wooden fence or masonry wall, with a minimum height of five (5) feet, or by a building or combination wall or fence and building. Adequate and safe areas for the drop-off and pick-up of patrons shall be provided. 
Sec. 9-10-6-5. - Golf driving range. 
(a)  Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be ten (10) acres or one acre per tee, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Lot depth and width. The width of a driving range shall be not less than two hundred (200) yards at a distance of three hundred fifty (350) yards from the tees. The depth along the driving area shall be at least three hundred fifty (350) yards measured from the location of the tees. 
(c)  Access. Vehicular access shall be derived only from a collector or arterial street. 
(d)  Loudspeakers. Loudspeakers/paging systems are prohibited when residential use or a residential zoning district abuts a driving range. 
(e)  Hours of operation. The hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(f)  Lighting. If the driving range is proposed to be lit, a lighting plan shall be required to be submitted to the director of planning and development for approval. See also chapter 9-3-4. 
Sec. 9-10-6-6. - Junk yard. 
Junk yards shall be at least five hundred (500) feet from any single-family or multi-family residential zoning district boundary and shall be completely enclosed by a solid wooden fence or masonry wall having a height of eight (8) feet, which shall be installed along all property lines to effectively screen all stored contents and operations from view. See also chapter 9-16-2. A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along the rear and side property lines, and a minimum 20-foot wide landscape strip shall be required along the front property line. The solid wooden fence or masonry wall, where required, shall be located interior to any required landscape strips. 
Sec. 9-10-6-7. - Outdoor shooting range. 
The minimum site size for a skeet or trap shooting range shall be fifteen (15) acres. The minimum site size for a rifle range shall be twenty (20) acres. The range-portion of an outdoor shooting range shall be located no closer than five hundred (500) feet to a residential zoning district boundary or existing residential use. Rifle ranges shall have an earth embankment not less than twenty-five (25) feet in height and not less than ten (10) feet in depth along the entire width at the end of the range to serve as a back stop. Hours of operation shall be restricted to 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
Sec. 9-10-6-8. - Race track. 
(a)  Distance from residential zoning district. Race tracks for vehicles or animals shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from a residential zoning district or existing residential use. 
(b)  Access. Vehicular access shall be derived only from an arterial or collector road. 
(c)  Buffer. A minimum 75-foot buffer shall be provided adjacent to any property containing a residential use or a residential zoning district. A minimum 50-foot wide buffer shall be provided adjacent to all other property lines. 
(d)  Security fencing. Security fencing shall be provided when the facility abuts a residential use or a residential zoning district. 
(e)  Sound Levels. A maximum constant sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of seventy-five (75) dBA shall not be exceeded at adjacent residential property lines. Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter. Noises capable of being measured shall be those that cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two (2) decibels. Noise measurements of a few minutes only will suffice to define any given noise level. 
(f)  Hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
Sec. 9-10-6-9. - Self-service storage facilities (mini-warehouse). 
(a)  Access. Vehicular access shall be derived only from an arterial or collector road. 
(b)  Minimum and maximum development size. The minimum lot size for a mini-warehouse development shall be two (2) acres, and the maximum developed area for a mini-warehouse shall be four (4) acres. 
(c)  Size and use of storage units. Individual storage units shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet in area and shall not be used for the storage of hazardous materials or toxic substances. The use of individual storage units for living, sales, or hobbies is prohibited. 
(d)  Maximum building length. No individual mini-warehouse building shall be more than two hundred (200) feet long. 
(e)  Fencing. Fencing adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be required in the form of an architecturally finished wall or solid, opaque wooden fence. Fences placed on the remainder of the site may be black, vinyl-coated chain-link. 
(f)  Hours of operation. Mini-warehouse developments shall not be accessible to the general public (excluding on-site managers) between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
Sec. 9-10-6-10. - Service and fuel filling station. 
(a)  All buildings and accessory structures must be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district boundary. All fuel must be stored underground outside of any public right-of-way. 
(b)  Pumps that dispense gasoline, kerosene, propane, natural gas or diesel fuels shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from any street right-of-way line. 
(c)  Uses permissible at a service and fuel filling station shall not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or storage of automobiles not in mechanically operable condition. No emissions of noxious odors, dust, fumes, gas, noise, or vibration shall be allowed outside of any building. 
Sec. 9-10-6-11. - Truck stop. 
In zoning districts where permitted, establishments that provide refueling of trucks and cater to the needs of truck drivers are subject to the following requirements: All uses other than the dispensing of fuel or other accessory vehicle services must be contained within a single principal building. Such building may contain convenience shopping space, a restaurant, television viewing and recreation lounges, restroom facilities, and showers. 
CHAPTER 9-10-7. - ACCESSORY NONRESIDENTIAL USES 

Sec. 9-10-7-1. - Caretaker residence. 
A residence for a night watchman, accessory to a business or industrial operation, may be established in a single-family detached dwelling or as a unit located within a commercial or industrial building. The director of planning and development may approve one residence or dwelling with a minimum gross floor area of six hundred (600) square feet, within a principal building or in an accessory housing unit, on the site of a commercial or industrial establishment as an accessory use, provided that the applicant supplies evidence to the director of need for full-time security or 24-hour on-site management. 
Sec. 9-10-7-2. - Drive-through facilities. 
When a drive-through operation is located adjacent to a residential zoning district or existing residential use and it involves an exterior loud speaker, volumes must be monitored and controlled so as to minimize audible sound from the loud speaker at the property line. Prior to operation, or to mitigate unwanted noise after commencement of a drive-through operation, the director may require noise attenuation to be installed on the site with the exterior loudspeaker, if volumes cannot be reduced below those audible at the property line, or if buffers (see chapter 9-16-2) are inadequate to mitigate noise from the exterior loud speaker. 
Sec. 9-10-7-3. - Gasoline or fuel pumps. 
Pumps that dispense gasoline, kerosene, propane, natural gas or diesel fuels shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from any street right-of-way line. 
Sec. 9-10-7-4. - Manufacturing and fabrication. 
If approved as an accessory use to a retail use permitted by right, a manufacturing or fabrication activity must occupy no more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area, and all products made on the premises must be sold on the premises as a retail activity. 
Sec. 9-10-7-5. - Outdoor storage. 
Except for open air business establishments, outdoor storage, where permitted, shall be screened from view by an opaque fence or freestanding wall no less than eight (8) feet in height and shall also meet the requirements of subsection 9-10-1-2(c). The outside storage of products in conjunction with an enclosed retail trade establishment shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the lot. 
Sec. 9-10-7-6. - Outdoor display areas. 
Except for open air business establishments, outdoor display areas, where permitted, shall confined to a specific designated area which must not be within designated parking areas. In conjunction with an enclosed retail trade establishment, outdoor display shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the lot. Any area outside of a building where merchandise or goods are located but which is permanently screened by a fence or freestanding wall at least six (6) feet in height shall be considered storage and not outdoor display area (see also chapter 9-16-2). 
Sec. 9-10-7-7. - Retail and restaurant uses accessory to office, institution, or lodging. 
It is the intent of this section to permit small-scale, accessory retail uses in office complexes and other uses with gross floor areas of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, including without limitation, barber shops, beauty shops, dry cleaning, drug stores, book stores, florists, gift shops, convenience food stores, news stands, and cafeterias, sandwich shops, and restaurants, subject to the requirements of this section. Retail sales and services accessory to the operation of an office complex, institutional use, or lodging facility with ten thousand (10,000) or more gross square feet of floor area are permitted where otherwise not listed as a permitted use, subject to the requirements of this section: 
(a)  The activity must be conducted wholly within the building in which the principal use is located and shall be limited to fifteen (15) percent of total gross floor area of the building. No merchandise shall be stored or displayed outside the structure in which the principal use is located. 
(b)  The public entrance or entrances to the activity shall be from a lobby, hallway, or other interior portion of the structure in which the principal use is located, except for restaurants located within an office building or hotel which shall be permitted one exterior public entrance. 
CHAPTER 9-10-8. - TEMPORARY USES 

Sec. 9-10-8-1. - Construction field office. 
Manufactured homes or other temporary buildings or structures shall not be occupied as a permanent office or for any other use in any district; provided, however that such manufactured homes or other temporary buildings or structures may be used for a temporary office on a site where a development is under construction, subject to the following: 
(a)  Approval and permit. Approval by the director and issuance of a permit by the building official. Said permit shall be temporary but renewable once after a period of six (6) months. Said permit shall only be issued if plans and permit(s) have been approved for one or more permanent buildings on the subject property. 
(b)  Water and sewer. Adequate water and sewage disposal for the structure(s) is approved by the Hall County Environmental Health Department or the city public utilities department, whichever has jurisdiction. 
(c)  Additional installation provisions. The director is authorized to require additional installation standards to ensure compatibility of appearance and functional safety of the construction field office and the site on which it is located. 
(d)  Removal upon occupancy. Said manufactured home(s) or temporary building or structure(s) shall be removed from the site no later than upon the occupancy of the appropriate permanent building(s) or structure(s) intended for such use. 
(e)  Compliance with overlay zone requirements. When this use is established in an overlay zone, the requirements of the overlay zone shall apply to this use. 
Sec. 9-10-8-2. - Special temporary outdoor event. 
A special temporary outdoor event is an activity accessory to a business or organization that is not part of its normal daily activities, such as a grand opening or closeout sale, or any temporary event conducted by a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious institution, such as a fund-raising or membership drive. A special temporary outdoor event may be authorized subject to permit approved by the director of planning and development and in compliance with the following: 
(a)  Duration. The duration of the event shall not last longer than fifteen (15) consecutive days. 
(b)  Frequency. Special temporary outdoor events shall not take place more frequently than four (4) times in any calendar year for the same business or organization. Any four (4) such events must be separated by at least thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(c)  Parking. Adequate parking and traffic maneuvering space must be located on the same property as the event. 
(d)  Application. A special temporary outdoor event shall be considered and approved only on the basis of a site plan and letter of intent reflecting conformance to the above requirements. The application shall address the dates of the event, hours of operation, placement of bathroom and other public facilities, parking, and security. The application shall also address whether amplifying equipment will be used and if so police department review and approval shall be required. 
Carnivals, circuses or festivals are considered special temporary outdoor events but are only permitted within the C-B, R-B, G-B, L-I and H-I zoning districts. Carnivals, circuses or festivals shall not take place more frequently than four (4) times in any calendar year on the same property. Any four (4) such events on the same property must be separated by at least thirty (30) consecutive days. In addition to the special temporary outdoor event requirements, carnivals, circuses or festivals shall provide: 
(1)  Property owner authorization in the form of a notarized letter signed by the property owner. 
(2)  Evidence of liability insurance in an amount acceptable to the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2008-43, § II, 11-18-08) 
Sec. 9-10-8-3. - Temporary classroom. 
On sites where educational or religious facilities are permitted, one or more temporary classrooms, which may be modular structures but not manufactured homes, may be permitted as temporary uses by the director of planning and development, upon application and after the issuance of a building permit, for a school or church. The director may attach reasonable conditions on the issuance of such permit to ensure compatibility and public safety. The duration of such temporary use and building permit shall not exceed one year, unless an extension is granted by the planning and appeals board. 
When this use is established in an overlay zone, the requirements of the overlay zone shall apply to this use. 
CHAPTER 9-10-9. - TOWERS AND WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES 

Sec. 9-10-9-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for the siting of all wireless telecommunication equipment and facilities, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular, television and radio telecommunications towers and antennae. The regulations and requirements of this chapter are adopted for the following purposes: 
(a)  To provide for the location of communication towers and communication antennas; and to protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of communication towers, poles, and antennas by restricting them in accordance with the restrictions of this chapter. 
(b)  To minimize adverse visual impacts of communication towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques. 
(c)  To accommodate the growing need for communication towers and antennas while minimizing the total number of towers within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to residents. 
(d)  To promote and encourage shared use/co-location of existing and new communication towers (i.e., the use of multiple antennae operated by different providers on a single tower) as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers or poles. 
(e)  To promote and encourage placement of antennae on existing towers, where such siting options exist, and on buildings, where such siting options exist. 
(f)  To consider public health, safety, and welfare in the siting of new towers, and to avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or pole failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
It is also the intent of this chapter to limit the siting of telecommunications facilities and towers where they will have the least adverse impact on the community and still comply with the requirements of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104, 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)). These intentions are accomplished with restriction of locations and by enacting controls on height, setbacks, screening, color, and materials in order to minimize visibility and promote public safety and welfare. The regulations in this chapter are reasonably related to the valid public purposes described in this section. 
It is not the intent of the governing body to discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services or to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless services in the city. It is also the intent of the city that applications to place, construct, or modify personal wireless service facilities will be acted upon within a reasonable period of time. 
Sec. 9-10-9-2. - Applicability. 
All new communication towers, poles, and communication antennas shall be subject to this chapter, except that this chapter shall not govern the following: 
(a)  Any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is seventy (70) feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or ham radio operator from the operator's residence. 
(b)  Antennae or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled the city, Hall County, or Gainesville or Hall County School Board, provided that a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the government or agency with jurisdiction. 
(c)  Monopole towers one hundred (100) feet or less in height located within electrical substations and antennae attached to existing transmission towers. 
Sec. 9-10-9-3. - Performance and construction standards. 
(a)  Structural design. New communication towers or poles and antennae, and modifications to existing structures including, without limitation, the addition of height, antennae or providers, shall be constructed in accordance with applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
(b)  Placement restrictions. Towers occupying a lot as a principal use shall at minimum meet the minimum lot size and setback requirements for the zoning district in which the lot is located. Towers shall be a minimum of three-hundred (300) feet from any residential zoning district and a minimum of five-hundred (500) feet from any single-family residence. The tower shall also be set back from property lines a distance equal to or greater than the tower height. All towers shall be located at least one-third ( 1/3 ) of their height in feet from any public right-of-way. All accessory structures will meet the normal setbacks for the districts in which they are located. When the tower is on property leased, the setbacks shall apply to the lot of record, not the lease boundaries. 
(c)  Screening. The visual impacts of a communication tower at the ground level shall be mitigated by landscaping. All towers and accessory structures shall be surrounded on the ground by a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip or buffer that forms a hardy screen dense enough to interrupt vision and shield the base and accessory structures from public view and view from the surrounding properties. The buffer shall consist of evergreens that will reach a minimum height of at least eight (8) feet within three (3) years. 
(d)  Fencing. A black vinyl-coated chain link fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in height from finished grade shall be provided around each communication tower or pole. Access to the tower or pole shall be through a locked gate. The tower or pole shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device, unless the director of planning and development waives this requirement for alternative tower structures. 
(e)  Height. Through approval of a special use application, when one is required, the height of the tower may exceed the maximum height limit of the zoning district in which it is located, up to a height of two hundred (200) feet, subject to the limitations of this paragraph. If a special use application is not required for erection of the tower, and the tower is to be placed in an L-I or H-I zoning district in a manner that exceeds the maximum height for said zoning district, then the applicant may exceed the height limitation of the applicable zoning district only through a zoning variance process. Towers shall be the minimum height necessary to provide parity with existing similar tower-supported antenna. No tower, pole, or antenna, whether freestanding or attached to a building or structure, shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in height from ground level unless a zoning variance is obtained. To prevail in any variance application to exceed established maximum height limitations of this paragraph or the zoning district in which it is located, the applicant must successfully demonstrate why the prescribed maximum height is insufficient to provide adequate service, or that a taller tower will be in the community's interest by avoiding the construction of one or more additional towers at a new location. 
(f)  Illumination. Communication towers, poles, or antennae shall not be lighted except to assure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission, or other federal agency with jurisdiction. Lighting shall be restricted to dual lighting, medium intensity white strobe lights (daylight mode), and red obstruction lights (nighttime mode), unless the FAA or state aeronautics division requires another type of lighting. 
(g)  Color and material. Towers clustered at the same site shall be of similar height and design. Communication towers not required to be painted or marked by the Federal Aviation Administration shall have either galvanized steel finish or be painted a non-contrasting color approved by the governing body to minimize the equipment's visibility. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical or closely compatible with the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(h)  Signs and advertising. No advertising is permitted on a tower or antenna. However, towers shall have mounted in a conspicuous place a sign of not more than one square foot in area, identifying the facility's owner and providing a means of contact in the event of an emergency. 
(i)  Co-location. Proposed communication antennas may and are encouraged to co-locate onto existing communication towers. New or additional special use approval is not required for the addition of an antenna to an existing approved tower or pole. All towers over one hundred (100) feet in height shall have structural capacity and ground or interior space to accommodate multiple users. Towers up to one hundred sixty (160) feet shall accommodate at least three (3) users, and towers over one hundred sixty (160) feet shall accommodate at least five (5) users. 
(j)  Noninterference. No communication tower or antenna shall interfere with public safety communication. Frequency coordination is required to ensure noninterference with public safety system and/or public safety entities. 
Sec. 9-10-9-4. - Application requirements. 
Each application shall include the following, which are in addition to the information required for special use applications generally, if required: 
(a)  A recorded plat or boundary survey. 
(b)  A site plan, based on with topographical information. 
(c)  An elevation view, perspective drawing, or simulated photograph of how the proposed telecommunication tower will look from public rights-of-way and surrounding residential streets from which it will be visible once constructed. 
(d)  Supporting engineering calculations and information which provide evidence of need and document radio frequency range, coverage area, and tower height requirements. The application must specifically address whether there is a technically suitable space available on an existing tower or other location within the search area (i.e., the grid for the placement of the antenna), and such information shall specifically include the location of all existing towers within a one-mile radius of the site proposed. 
Sec. 9-10-9-5. - Application processing. 
Decisions on applications for wireless service facilities shall be made within a reasonable period of time, which shall mean generally that such decisions shall be processed in roughly the same amount of time required for other special use applications; provided, however, that the planning and appeals board and governing body shall each table an application for special use for a wireless service facility no more than once before making a recommendation and decision, respectively, unless the applicant does not object to additional continuances. Applications that do not require a special use permit shall be acted upon by the director within thirty (30) days of the date the application is considered by the director to be complete. 
Sec. 9-10-9-6. - Criteria to consider in acting upon applications. 
In addition to the criteria for determining whether to approve or deny special uses, as specified in chapter 9-22-2, when an application for wireless telecommunication facilities or equipment is considered, the planning and appeals board and the governing body (if special use application is required), or the director in the case no special use is required, shall consider the following without limitation: 
(a)  Impacts on surrounding properties with regard to aesthetics and fit with the context of its surroundings, considering the location, height, type of facility, color and materials proposed. 
(b)  Whether impacts on surrounding properties on aesthetics can be mitigated by a monopole tower, or by a camouflaged tower (e.g., disguised as a pine tree), or by using stealth technology (i.e., making the tower resemble common features such as church steeples, bell towers, clock towers, grain silos, gateway elements, and monuments), or by requiring greater setback from impacted properties. 
(c)  Whether the tower or wireless facility would pose an unreasonable risk to adjoining properties, including consideration of a fall area where ice or other debris may fall off the tower without harm. 
(d)  The appropriateness of the location of existing towers, poles, and buildings, including electric transmission towers, that might serve as alternative locations to construction of a new tower or pole or placement on a building in a new location. It is the intent that new antennae where possible shall be co-located on existing towers and poles, placed on existing buildings, or be within a concealed support structure (e.g., camouflaged as an artificial pine tree, church steeple, clock tower, grain silo, flagpole, etc.), prior to authorizing the installation of a new non-camouflaged pole or tower. The failure to consider or unwillingness to accept viable options as described in this paragraph may be grounds for denial of a special use application for a new tower or pole. 
(e)  Whether the application demonstrates compliance with the regulations established in this chapter. 
(f)  Whether the tower would be engineered and constructed to accommodate additional communication service providers (i.e., whether the application provides for co-location as required by this chapter). 
(g)  Whether a denial of the application would have the effect of prohibiting wireless services in the jurisdiction or area or would unduly restrict competition among wireless providers. 
In addition, the governing body or director of planning and development shall make a decision on the application based on substantial evidence to allow a reviewing court to understand the reasoning behind the decision and whether that reason comports with the evidence presented. To this end, for each application for wireless service facilities, the governing body or director, whichever has jurisdiction, shall rely on findings of fact in making a decision on said application. Such findings may be part of the recommendation and report of the director, the recommendation of the planning and appeals board, the application and supporting materials submitted by the applicant, testimony from interested individuals, professionals, and the applicant, and any additional findings of fact the governing body may itself determine. Generalized community concerns, unaccompanied by supporting documentation, do not constitute substantial evidence under Section 704 of the Telecommunication Act of 1996 or this chapter. 
CHAPTER 9-10-10. - OTHER USES 

Sec. 9-10-10-1. - Aircraft landing area. 
No person shall construct or use or authorize the construction or use of an aircraft landing area (including private use heliport) on any property owned, leased, or controlled by such person, unless and until the following requirements are met: 
(a)  No person shall use or authorize the use of an aircraft landing area on any property owned, leased, or controlled by such person until such person has obtained liability insurance coverage on the operation and use of such area. Such coverage shall be obtained from an insurer authorized or licensed to transact insurance business in the state and shall provide a minimum liability coverage of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per claim. 
(b)  The proposed aircraft landing area shall be of sufficient size to meet the Federal Aviation Administration requirements for the class of airport or aircraft landing proposed, and it must be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration or other agency of the federal government with jurisdiction. There shall be sufficient distance between the end of each landing strip and the property boundary to satisfy the requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(c)  There shall be no existing or proposed flight obstructions such as towers, chimneys or natural obstructions outside the proposed aircraft landing area which would be in the approach zone to any of the proposed runways, landing strips, or landing areas. In cases where air rights or easements have been acquired from the owners of abutting properties to protect approach zones, satisfactory evidence thereof shall be submitted with the application. 
(d)  The owner of the aircraft landing area shall erect a safety barrier around the peripheral area surrounding the takeoff and landing area. The safety barrier shall be a fence, wall or hedge no less than three (3) feet in height and fully enclosed with a self-locking gate. 
(e)  An environmental impact report shall be submitted, addressing whether the facility is consistent with the comprehensive plan; whether the use will have an adverse impact on the surrounding area; and whether the noise level will impact the surrounding area. Additionally, the applicant shall submit a plan with any mitigation techniques that may be required. The director of planning and development shall review the environmental impact report, evaluate proposed mitigating techniques, and determine the sufficiency thereof, require any additional information relevant to the application, and make a recommendation to the governing body regarding approval or denial of the special use application. 
(f)  In approving an aircraft landing area, the governing body may provide that the approval is conditioned on measures or restrictions designed to mitigate any negative impacts of the use. The proposed location of an aircraft landing area within six hundred (600) feet of a residential zoning district or existing residential use may form the basis for denial of the application. 
Sec. 9-10-10-2. - Landfill. 
(a)  Access. Access from a paved collector or arterial street shall be required. Access shall not be allowed through any residential subdivision or residential development. 
(b)  Screening and buffers. The entire landfill shall be screened from view from all property lines (see also chapter 9-16-2). To accomplish this, a minimum 100-foot wide undisturbed buffer is required adjacent to all property lines. Areas within the 100-foot undisturbed buffer that do not provide an opaque screen throughout the year shall be planted with additional vegetation. 
(c)  Fencing. A minimum six-foot high solid fence/wall shall be required inside buffers adjacent to any property line containing a residential use or abutting any residential zoning district. 
(d)  State permit. The owner shall provide the director of planning and development with a current copy of a state solid waste handling permit, or pending application thereof, prior to applying for a land disturbance permit. 
(e)  Covering of loads. Vehicles shall be allowed into a landfill site only if waste is covered, to prevent blowing of material from the vehicle. 
Sec. 9-10-10-3. - Mining and quarrying. 
(1)  Application requirements. In addition to the requirements for special use applications as specified in chapter 9-22-2, all applicants for mining or quarrying shall submit to the director of planning and development the following information for review by the planning and appeals board and the governing body: 
(a)  A copy of the recorded plat for the subject property. 
(b)  The site plan required by this Code, which must show areas proposed for the handling and storage of overburden, by-products, and/or excavated materials including the estimated type and volume of extraction. 
(c)  An operations plan, which shall include: the date of commencement of operation and its expected duration; proposed hours of operation, which shall not be permitted to include the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., nor shall operations be allowed on Sundays and national holidays. 
(d)  A copy of all documents submitted or prepared for submission to the state department of natural resources for the purpose of obtaining a state mining permit. 
(e)  A statement from the state department of transportation which shall identify any state-maintained road within or adjacent to the subject property, and which shall identify any repaving, repairs, alterations, turning lanes, or other additions necessary to accommodate the potential increase in traffic volume or weight occasioned by the proposed operations. 
(f)  A statement from the director of public works or other qualified professional which identifies all city roads within or adjacent to the property and which shall identify any repaving, repairs, alterations, turning lanes, or other additions necessary to accommodate the potential increase in traffic volume or weight occasioned by the proposed operations. 
(g)  A statement as to the intended use or production of explosives or other hazardous materials and the methods and procedures proposed for the handling, use, storage, and disposal of such materials. 
(h)  A reclamation and rehabilitation plan, which shall include a detailed procedure for the rehabilitation of excavated land, the future use or uses of the land, the type of ground cover, fill, and landscaping, methods for disposing of all equipment and structures, and an estimate of the timing of phases of rehabilitation including estimated time of completion. 
(2)  Additional regulations. Any facility engaged in the extraction of earth products, such as sand, soil, gravel, rock, stone, clay, or other mining operations, etc. shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Permanent roads, defined as those to be used in excess of one year, within the excavation site shall be surfaced with a dust-free material. 
(b)  Roads other than permanent roads shall be treated with dust inhibitors which will reduce the generation of dust from the road surfaces as a result of wind or vehicular action. 
(c)  The proposed extraction shall not take place within one hundred (100) feet of a property line. 
(d)  Product piles, spoil piles, and other accumulations of by-products shall not be created to a height more than thirty-five (35) feet above the original contour. 
(e)  All blasting operations shall occur between 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
Sec. 9-10-10-4. - Utility company substation. 
Such use must be enclosed within opaque fence at least six (6) feet high, and shall be surrounded by a ten-foot wide landscape strip that provides an opaque screen to a height of six (6) feet around the substation, penetrated only by required vehicular access (see also chapter 9-16-2). No storage of vehicles or portable equipment will be allowed. 
CHAPTER 9-10-11. - SEXUALLY-ORIENTED ADULT USES 

Sec. 9-10-11-1. - Reference to regulations. 
Sexually-oriented adult uses shall comply with all requirements of chapter 6-10 of the City Code. 
Sec. 9-10-11-2. - Location restrictions. 
No sexually-oriented adult use shall be located as follows: 
(a)  Within three hundred (300) feet of a lot zoned to allow single-family, two-family or multi-family residential uses. 
(b)  Within three hundred (300) feet of the lot line of any library, school, park, playground, governmental building, civic center, church or place of worship. 
(c)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the lot line of any other adult entertainment use. 
The governing body may deny a special use request when there is evidence that the type and number of schools, churches or other places of worship, libraries, public or private recreation facilities, public businesses and residential developments in the vicinity of the location of the proposed adult use causes minors to frequent the immediate area, even though there is compliance with the minimum distances as provided herein. 
The distance restrictions set out above shall apply in any and all directions from the lot line of the proposed adult use at the point closest to the lot line of the other property, as measured in a straight line to the point on the lot line of the other property that is located closest to the lot line of the proposed adult use property. This distance shall be verified by plat showing distances furnished by the applicant, prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state. This plat shall accompany and be made part of the application for a special use approval. 
Sec. 9-10-11-3. - Obscene material. 
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize or legalize the selling, lending, renting, leasing, giving, advertising, publishing or other dissemination to any person, any book, magazine, movie film, still picture or any other written material, pornographic matter, novelty, device or related sundry item which is obscene material under the law of the state. 
Sec. 9-10-11-4. - Unlawful acts. 
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize or legalize any act of prostitution, sodomy, solicitation for sodomy, masturbation for hire or distribution of obscene materials, as those acts are defined by the laws of the state. 
CHAPTER 9-10-12. - INFILL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS 

Sec. 9-10-12-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The comprehensive plan for the city finds that many residential neighborhoods are experiencing pressures for new development, either in the form of infill development on formerly vacant or underutilized lots, or the redevelopment of low-density residential uses into higher-density residential developments. The comprehensive plan calls for land use regulations to prevent incompatible residential infill development, protect the integrity of neighborhoods, and balance the desire to preserve neighborhood character with the importance of good, quality reinvestment. 
Prior to adoption of this revised Code, the R-I and N-C zoning districts permitted lot sizes of ten thousand (10,000) square feet, which raised concerns during the comprehensive planning process since many of the city's neighborhoods zoned R-I contain lots that are approximately twice the minimum lot size. It was determined during the comprehensive planning process that residential infill development without restriction on such smaller lots would be incompatible with existing neighborhood character. Accordingly, the comprehensive plan calls for suburban residential development at a medium density (not to exceed two (2) dwelling units per acre). 
It was determined that, notwithstanding the overall density limitation of two (2) dwelling units per acre, subdividers in R-I and N-C zoning districts should be permitted to subdivide with ten thousand (10,000) square foot minimum lots, if quality and compatibility can be assured. Accordingly, this chapter provides for by-right development of infill residential development projects that have higher densities than otherwise permitted in R-I and N-C zoning districts (i.e., the prior rights to subdivided ten thousand (10,000) square foot minimum lots in these residential zoning districts are maintained), in exchange for assurances that residential infill and redevelopment will be of high quality and compatibility. 
The process for acting on infill residential development projects is accomplished by filing additional requirements along with an application for preliminary plat approval, as more fully specified in this chapter. 
Sec. 9-10-12-2. - Definitions. 
Build-to line: A front building setback line established as a benchmark for a principal building on a particular property so that a more-or-less continuous and consistent building setback will be achieved considering the front building setbacks of dwellings on abutting lots on the same side of the street or right-of-way. When a build-to line applies pursuant to this article, it supersedes the front building setback requirement for the zoning district in which the property is located. 
 Building Frontage and Build-To Line 
Established residential area: That portion of a block facing the same street as the land proposed for infill residential development, and that portion of the block of land across the street from the proposed development facing the same street as the land proposed for infill residential development. 
 Infill Site and Established Residential Area 
Sec. 9-10-12-3. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to the subdivision of property within R-I and N-C zoning districts as specified in chapters 9-5-2 and 9-5-3. Notwithstanding the density limitations or lot size minimums established in table 9-5-2, "dimensional requirements for residential zoning districts" pertaining to the R-I and N-C zoning districts, each property owner shall have the right to subdivide property in a manner that does not meet such dimensional requirements, subject to the development requirements and procedures of this chapter. Where this chapter establishes different dimensional requirements than for the district in which the infill residential development project is located, as provided in table 9-5-2, the permissions of this chapter shall supersede such zoning district dimensional requirements but only for an infill residential development pursuant to this chapter. 
Sec. 9-10-12-4. - Permitted uses. 
Detached, single-family residences, fee-simple, shall be the only dwelling type permitted in a residential infill development project. This section shall not be construed to prevent structures and uses accessory to such residences as permitted in the zoning district in which the project is located. 
Sec. 9-10-12-5. - Minimum lot size. 
The minimum lot size of lots within a residential infill development project shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
Sec. 9-10-12-6. - Minimum lot width. 
When the average width of lots in the established residential area is one hundred (100) feet or more, the lots within the infill residential development project shall be no less than eighty-five (85) feet wide at the regulatory front building setback line when fronting on an existing street. This section helps to ensure that the widths of lots in the infill residential development project are reasonably similar to the established residential area. 
Sec. 9-10-12-7. - Floor area per dwelling. 
The minimum gross heated floor area of each dwelling in an infill residential development project shall be one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet. 
Sec. 9-10-12-8. - Height of dwelling. 
When the heights of dwellings in the established residential area are predominantly two (2) stories, the height of dwellings constructed in the infill residential development project shall be no more than two (2) stories excluding basement or daylight basement. 
Sec. 9-10-12-9. - "Build to" lines. 
This section shall apply to the erection of dwellings on lots within an infill residential development project that front on an existing street. The intent of this section is to ensure that dwellings are placed on the lot in a manner compatible with dwellings abutting to the side of the lot within the infill residential development project. Substantial deviations from the repetitive or prevailing pattern of building placement on the same existing street can result in an incompatible condition. 
 Infill Development with Build-To Line 
Dwellings within an infill residential development project on lots that front on an existing street shall not deviate from the average build-to line for those properties located within the established residential area (as defined in this chapter) by more than fifteen (15) feet. Where the established residential area may be difficult to determine, the director of planning and development shall have the authority to determine the average build-to line for the infill residential development project. 
When a build-to line applies pursuant to this section, it supersedes the front building setback requirement for the zoning district in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXI, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-10-12-10. - Building orientation. 
Any lot located adjacent to an existing street shall require the front of the proposed dwelling to be orientated toward the existing street. The director of planning and development shall have the authority to wave this requirement when entrance landscaping and entrance monuments are provided as described in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXI, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-10-12-11. - Garages. 
Each lot upon its development for a single-family dwelling shall have a garage, either attached to the dwelling or detached but placed to the rear of the principal dwelling, for the storage of two (2) vehicles. Garage space capable of storing more than four (4) vehicles shall not be permitted. Where detached, the height of the detached garage shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet. Where lots abut an existing street, garages shall not be allowed to dominate the architecture of the dwellings in the infill residential development project. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXI, 12-15-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXI, adopted December 15, 2009, renumbered the former sections 9-10-12-10—9-10-12-18 as 9-10-12-11—9-10-12-19. 
Sec. 9-10-12-12. - Screening of rear yards of lots fronting an interior street. 
When a new subdivision street is proposed, the project often will result in the orientation of dwellings such that they form a line of rear yards abutting the side yard of a lot in the established residential area. To protect existing dwellings in the established residential area for exposure to multiple residences, rear yards of the lots in the new subdivision shall be separated and screened along common lot lines of the established residential area with a solid wooden fence or masonry wall of six (6) feet in height and a minimum ten-foot wide vegetative buffer, or comparable screening approved by the director of planning and development. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXI, 12-15-09) 
Note— See editor's note at section 9-10-12-11. 
Sec. 9-10-12-13. - Entrance landscaping. 
When a new subdivision street is proposed and the infill residential development project contains six (6) or more lots, the entrance to the project (where the new road intersects with the existing street) shall be landscaped with a minimum 20-foot wide landscape strip along the property frontage. If the landscape strip is platted as a part of a lot within the infill residential development project, a landscaping easement shall be provided over such lot or lots, and a landscape maintenance bond shall be required for a period of two (2) years. The landscape strip shall provide street trees approved by the director of planning and development that are indigenous to or compatible with trees in the established residential area. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXI, 12-15-09) 
Note— See editor's note at section 9-10-12-11. 
Sec. 9-10-12-14. - Entrance monuments. 
When a new subdivision street is proposed, the entrance to the infill residential development project (where the new road intersects with the existing street) may include erection of a subdivision entrance monument. If provided, it shall be composed of stacked stone or brick and shall be located to the rear of the required front landscape strip required for the entrance per this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXI, 12-15-09) 
Note— See editor's note at section 9-10-12-11. 
Sec. 9-10-12-15. - Architectural building materials. 
At least fifty (50) percent of the front facade of each dwelling within an infill residential development project shall be brick masonry, stone masonry, or split-face block masonry. All other exterior wall materials of dwellings within infill residential development projects shall consist of brick masonry, stone masonry, or split-face block masonry; or wood clapboards or weather boarding, and appropriate architectural accents. Standing-seam or corrugated metal walls or vinyl siding shall not be permitted unless specifically approved as a secondary or accent material by the director of planning and development. Architectural treatments on all sides of the building other than the front facade shall be consistent. Roof materials shall be asphalt composition, wood shake, tile, or standing seam metal. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXI, 12-15-09) 
Note— See editor's note at section 9-10-12-11. 
Sec. 9-10-12-16. - Front yards. 
Front yards of all lots within infill residential development projects shall be sodded. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXI, 12-15-09) 
Note— See editor's note at section 9-10-12-11. 
Sec. 9-10-12-17. - Detention ponds. 
When a detention pond is required by the director of public works to serve the infill residential development project, it shall be sited underground; provided, however, that if not installed underground the detention pond shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  It shall be located no closer than fifteen (15) feet to an exterior property line (i.e., abutting the established residential area). 
(b)  It shall be sloped so that fencing is not required. 
(c)  It shall be landscaped subject to the approval of the director of planning and development. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXI, 12-15-09) 
Note— See editor's note at section 9-10-12-11. 
Sec. 9-10-12-18. - Process for review and approval. 
This chapter shall be administered at the time the applicant files a preliminary plat application. No action shall be taken on the final plat for an infill residential development project unless compliance with this chapter is met. The applicant shall be required to submit maps and data for the established residential area for approval by the director of planning and development to ensure the provisions of this chapter are met. The director may require that the final plat for an infill residential development project contain restrictions on one or more lots as may be required to be imposed on dwellings or lot activities within the project. No final plat shall be approved unless it contains the plat notes and restrictions imposed by the director for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXI, 12-15-09) 
Note— See editor's note at section 9-10-12-11. 
Sec. 9-10-12-19. - Administrative variances. 
Administrative variances may be granted to the building site and yard requirements after an application has been submitted by the property owner and reviewed and approved by the director of planning and development. No administrative variance shall be granted that reduces a building setback dimension pertaining to property bordering the boundaries of the infill residential development project. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXI, 12-15-09) 
Note— See editor's note at section 9-10-12-11. 
Article 9-11 - NONCONFORMITIES 

 
CHAPTER 9-11-1. - NONCONFORMING LOTS 

Sec. 9-11-1-1. - Nonconforming lot defined. 
"Nonconforming lot" is hereby defined as a lot of record which legally existed prior to the adoption of this Code but which, due to the adoption of this Code, does not conform to the minimum access, frontage, lot size, lot width, or other lot requirements of the zoning district or overlay zone in which the lot is located as established by this Code; or a lot of record lawfully established after the effective date of this Code which, due to an amendment to this Code, does not conform to the minimum access, frontage, lot size, lot width, or other lot requirements of the zoning district or overlay zone in which the lot is located. 
Three (3) examples of nonconforming lots illustrate this definition. First, a lot that has an area of eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet when a lot area of 20,000 square feet is required by the zoning district in which it is located is a nonconforming lot with regard to lot area. Second, a lot that has a width of sixty-five (65) feet when the minimum established for the zoning district in which it is located is one hundred (100) feet is a nonconforming lot with regard to lot width. Third, a lot that has only thirty (30) feet of frontage when forty (40) feet is required is a nonconforming lot with regard to minimum required lot frontage. 
Sec. 9-11-1-2. - Development on nonconforming lots. 
A nonconforming lot may be used as a building site, or a lawful use may be established thereupon, provided that the access, height, buffer, setback, and other dimensional requirements of the zoning district or overlay zone in which the nonconforming lot is located are complied with or a variance is obtained, and, provided further, that the lot meets all the current standards and requirements of the Hall County Environmental Health Department unless connected to sanitary sewer. 
For example, a lot that does not the minimum lot size or minimum lot width for the zoning district in which it is located can still be built upon but the minimum required zoning setbacks still apply. The variance process is a possible remedy, if this creates hardship. 
  
 Nonconforming Lot of Record 
Lots which do not conform to the access or frontage requirements of this Code shall not be developed unless required access to a public street or an approved private street is provided directly or through a recorded easement. 
CHAPTER 9-11-2. - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 9-11-2-1. - Definitions. 
Nonconforming building or structure: A building or structure that does not meet one or more height, setback, building coverage, or other dimensional requirements for the zoning district in which said building or structure is located (or if within an overlay zone that establishes dimensional requirements for buildings and such overlay zone provisions are controlling, does not meet one or more of such dimensional requirements for the overlay zone in which said building or structure is located); or a building or structure occupied by a use subject to the provisions of article 9-10, and which does not meet one or more height, setback, building coverage, or other dimensional requirements of article 9-10 for said specific use. 
Sec. 9-11-2-2. - Expansion. 
A nonconforming building or structure, as defined in this chapter, may be expanded, enlarged, or extended if such expansion, enlargement, or extension is for a use that conforms to the use requirements for the zoning district in which the building or structure is located (or if within an overlay zone that establishes use restrictions and such overlay zone uses are controlling, conforms to the use requirements for a the overlay zone in which said use is located). Any such expansion, enlargement, or extension of a nonconforming building or structure shall meet the minimum yard, setback, buffer, height, bulk, and other dimensional requirements for the zoning district (or, if applicable and controlling, the overlay zone) in which said non-conforming building or structure is located, and all other requirements of this Code. 
 Expansion Allowed in Conformity With Regulations 
To illustrate with examples, a building that has a front building setback of fifteen (15) feet, when a 30-foot front building setback is required, is a nonconforming building. It may still be expanded, but the building addition must meet the required front building setback of thirty (30) feet. A building with a height of forty (40) feet may be expanded, but if the height limit for the zoning district in which it is located is thirty-five (35) feet, it is a nonconforming building, and any building addition must observe that regulatory height limit. A building that exceeds the permitted maximum building coverage for the zoning district in which it is located is a nonconforming building that cannot be expanded, since any addition would increase the nonconformity. 
Sec. 9-11-2-3. - Replacement or repair after damage. 
Any portion of a building that meets the definition of a nonconforming building, shall not be rebuilt, altered, or repaired after destruction or damage exceeding sixty (60) percent of its replacement cost or square footage at the time of damage as determined by the building official, except in conformity with the dimensional requirements for the zoning district in which it is located and all other applicable regulations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXII, 12-15-09) 
CHAPTER 9-11-3. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 9-11-3-1. - Definitions. 
Abandon: To stop the use of property or the occupancy of a building for twelve (12) months or more. 
Abandonment: A condition where the use of property has stopped or the building has been vacant for twelve (12) months or more. 
Discontinuance: A lapse in the activity or operation of a nonconforming use for a period of six (6) months but less than twelve (12) months. When a business registration is required for said nonconforming use and the business registration pertaining to said use has lapsed in excess of six (6) months, said lapse of business registration shall constitute discontinuance. Discontinuance for twelve (12) months or more shall be considered "abandonment." 
Nonconforming use: A use or activity that: 
(1)  Was lawfully established prior to the adoption of this Code, but which, by reason of such adoption or amendment, is no longer a use or activity permitted by right in the zoning district in which said use or activity is located (or if within an overlay zone that establishes use restrictions and such overlay zone uses are controlling, is no longer a use or activity permitted in the overlay zone in which said use is located) as established in this Code, or 
(2)  A use or activity that was lawfully established prior to the amendment of this Code, but which, by reason of such amendment, is no longer a use or activity permitted by right in the zoning district in which said use or activity is located (or if within an overlay zone that establishes use restrictions and such overlay zone uses are controlling, is no longer a use or activity permitted in the overlay zone in which said use is located) as established in this Code or an amendment thereto. 
Sec. 9-11-3-2. - Owner responsibilities. 
When questions arise as to whether a use constitutes a nonconforming use, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of a nonconforming use to prove to the director of planning and development that such use was lawfully established and existed on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Code. 
Sec. 9-11-3-3. - Continuation. 
A nonconforming use may be continued except as otherwise provided in this chapter. For example, a convenience store in an R-I-A zoning district is a nonconforming use, because it is not listed as a permitted use in that zoning district, and may be continued subject to the limitations of this chapter. 
Sec. 9-11-3-4. - Discontinuance. 
A nonconforming use shall not be re-established after discontinuance, as defined in this chapter, unless the property owner proves to the director of planning and development that a diligent effort has been made to sell, rent, or use the property for the nonconforming use. If the director determines that such diligent effort has been made, the owner may re-establish said nonconforming use or seek to re-establish said nonconforming use until the expiration of twelve (12) months following initial discontinuance. If the nonconforming use is re-established under the provisions of this section after discontinuance but prior to expiration of twelve (12) months following initial discontinuance, said re-established nonconforming use may be lawfully continued. 
For example, an auto body shop in a residential zoning district is a nonconforming use. It loses its privileges as a nonconforming use under the terms of this chapter, if it is discontinued, but an applicant who can show he or she diligently tried to sell, rent, or use the property for the nonconforming use during that time period can petition the director for relief (i.e., to retain privileges afforded said nonconforming use). 
Sec. 9-11-3-5. - Abandonment. 
A nonconforming use shall not be re-established after abandonment, as defined in this chapter. This means that, after a 12-month period, the property owner loses the privileges to reestablish a nonconforming use. 
Sec. 9-11-3-6. - Change of use. 
A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. A change in tenancy or ownership shall not be considered a change to another nonconforming use, provided that the use itself remains unchanged. 
For example, an auto body shop cannot be changed to an auto sales lot in an R-I-A zoning district because that would be a change from one nonconforming use to another. The auto body shop could, however, be sold to another individual or company and retain privileges as a nonconforming use, so long as the use was the same (auto body shop) and not expanded or changed. 
Sec. 9-11-3-7. - Expansion. 
A nonconforming use shall not be expanded, enlarged or extended, in land area or in floor space or volume of space in a building or structure. 
For instance, if an office building is located in an R-I-A zoning district, it is a nonconforming use since it is not permitted outright in that zoning district. The building cannot be expanded under the terms of this chapter. As another example, a for-profit mini-storage building in an R-I zoning district is a nonconforming use. The storage operation cannot be increased in volume beyond what lawfully existed when the storage building became a nonconforming use. No additional building or building addition can be used for such use. 
 Cannot Be Expanded 
Sec. 9-11-3-8. - Damage and repair or re-establishment. 
A nonconforming use shall not be re-established or repaired if the activity is destroyed or sustains damage exceeding sixty (60) percent of its assessed value or square footage as determined by the director of planning and development. 
A building containing a nonconforming use shall not be rebuilt, altered, or repaired after destruction or damage exceeding sixty (60) percent of its replacement cost or square footage at the time of damage as determined by the building official, except for a use which conforms with the zoning district in which said use is located (or if within an overlay zone that establishes use restrictions and such overlay zone uses are controlling, for a use permitted in the overlay zone in which said use is located), and provided such rebuilding, alteration or repair is completed within one year of such destruction or damage. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, a residential or office use that is a nonconforming use that operated within a conforming or nonconforming building may be re-established in such building sustaining damage exceeding sixty (60) percent of its replacement cost or square footage at the time of damage as determined by the building official, provided the damaged nonconforming or conforming building containing such nonconforming use is repaired or rebuilt within eighteen (18) months following the date of damage. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXIII, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-11-3-9. - Unsafe buildings. 
If a building, structure or part thereof is occupied by a nonconforming use or contained a nonconforming use which has been discontinued or abandoned, and such building, structure, or part thereof is declared to be unsafe by the building official, then upon order of the building official, the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of such building, structure, or part thereof shall be allowed and shall be made by the property owner in accordance with such order. 
CHAPTER 9-11-4. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— Regulations for nonconforming signs are provided in article 9-18. 

CHAPTER 9-11-5. - CORRECTION OF NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS 

Sec. 9-11-5-1. - Definitions. 
Nonconforming situation: Any development, land improvement, or activity, not otherwise included within the definition of nonconforming lot, nonconforming building or structure, nonconforming use, or nonconforming sign, which does not meet the provisions of this Code at the time of its adoption or amendment. Examples of nonconforming situations include but are not limited to, noncompliance with off-street parking regulations, access requirements, failure to adhere to landscape strip requirements, tree protection, and landscaping requirements. 
Sec. 9-11-5-2. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this chapter to require the complete correction of nonconforming situations at the time of any building addition or significant modification of a use or development on a given parcel of land, if such nonconforming situation can physically be made to comply with the requirements of this Code. 
It is the intent of this chapter to require the reduction in the extent of nonconforming situations at the time of any building addition or significant modification of a use or development on a given parcel of land, if such nonconforming situation cannot be physically be made to comply entirely with the requirements of this Code. 
It is the intent of this chapter to provide authority to the director of planning and development to administer the provisions of this chapter in a manner that meets these intentions stated in this section, and that the director exercise that authority, subject to more specific guidance as provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 9-11-5-3. - Determination of nonconforming situations. 
For any proposed building or development, or modification of a building or development, it shall be the duty of the director of planning and development to identify the extent to which the improvements on land on which the building or development is proposed constitutes a nonconforming situation, as defined in this chapter. The director shall conduct a review and identify such nonconforming situation(s), at the time plans for such proposed building or development are submitted for review, and at any earlier opportunity, if presented. 
In the event that one or more nonconforming situations are found to exist by the director, they shall be documented and notice of the need to correct or reduce said nonconforming situations shall be provided by the director to the building or development applicant. 
Sec. 9-11-5-4. - Standards of review for compliance. 
In determining the need to completely correct or reduce the noncompliance of nonconforming situations, the director of planning and development shall be guided by the following standards: 
(a)  Strict compliance. A standard of "strict compliance" (complete correction of all nonconforming situations) shall be applied by the director where physical standards can clearly be made in the subject development proposal without significant alteration of the development as proposed. 
(b)  Reasonable progress toward compliance. In lieu of strict compliance, a standard of "reasonable progress toward compliance" shall be applied by the director in cases where complete correction or compliance with the nonconforming situation would require undue hardship, practical difficulty, or might unreasonably reduce the size, scale, or other significant aspect of the development proposal to a point where strict compliance would jeopardize the building or development proposal. In applying a standard of reasonable progress toward compliance, the director shall have authority to approve the building, development, or improvement even though it does not meet a standard of strict compliance, if the relief granted is the minimum necessary to effectuate the building, development, or improvement. 
(c)  Proportionality. Whenever something less than strict compliance is authorized by the director, the director in determining the amount or extent of compliance required, shall apply a standard of "proportionality," meaning that the scope, scale, extent and cost of requirements to correct nonconforming situations are more or less the same as the scope, scale, extent and cost of the improvement or development proposed. 
Sec. 9-11-5-5. - Appeal. 
Any decision of the director of planning and development in administering and interpreting the provisions of this chapter may be appealed by the applicant to the planning and appeals board, within a period of fifteen (15) days following such decision, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9-22-7 for appeals of administrative decisions. 
Article 9-13 - SUBDIVISIONS AND LAND DEVELOPMENT 

 
CHAPTER 9-13-1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-13-1-1. - Purpose and intent. 
This article is intended to serve the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city; 
(2)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(3)  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments in conformance with public improvement plans of the city; 
(4)  To assure adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments, especially for the purposes of assuring that all building lots will be accessible to fire fighting equipment and other emergency and service vehicles; 
(5)  To assure the provision of needed open spaces and building sites in new land developments through conservation subdivision design and the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; 
(6)  To assure the adequate provision of water supply, sewage disposal, stormwater drainage, and other necessary improvements; 
(7)  To assure equitable handling of all subdivision plats and land development plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for the subdivider and land developer; 
(8)  To assure, in general, the wise development of new land areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan of the city; 
(9)  To assure the accurate description of property and adequate and proper identification of property in public records; 
(10)  To help conserve and protect the natural, economic and scenic resources of the city; 
(11)  To help eliminate the costly maintenance problems which develop when streets and lots are laid out without proper consideration given to various public purposes; 
(12)  To protect lot purchasers who generally lack the specialized knowledge to evaluate subdivision improvements and design. 
Sec. 9-13-1-2. - Delegation of authority to administrative officers. 
The governing body hereby delegates to the appropriate administrative officers the authority to administratively approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove preliminary plats, final plats, lot combination plats, boundary line adjustments, and dedication plats; provided, however, such delegation does not authorize appropriate administrative officers to accept public improvements for the governing body. The city director of planning and development, the city director of public works, and the city director of public utilities are vested with the authority, as more fully described in this section and article, to review, approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove subdivisions and land development plans and permits. 
(a)  Director of planning and development. This administrative officer shall have final authority with regard to the review and approval of land development plans and permits, preliminary plats and final plats. 
(b)  Director of public works. This administrative officer shall review land development plans and permits and review of streets and non-utility related public improvements and recommendations for acceptance of public improvements by the governing body. The director of public works is further authorized to promulgate additional technical standards and construction specifications for land development improvements not already specified by this Code, including but not limited to streets, storm drainage systems, driveways, curb cuts, and parking lots. 
(c)  Director of public utilities. This administrative officer shall have final authority with regard to the design of public utilities for subdivisions and land developments. The director of public utilities is further authorized to promulgate additional technical standards and construction specifications for land development improvements not already specified by this Code, including but not limited to water and sanitary sewer systems and utilities. 
Sec. 9-13-1-3. - Land is one lot until subdivided. 
Until property proposed for subdivision has received final plat approval and been properly recorded, the land involving the subdivision shall be considered as one lot, or as otherwise legally recorded. 
Sec. 9-13-1-4. - Subdivision of land. 
No person shall subdivide land except in accordance with this article and Code. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, owner, agent or subdivider, by deed or map, to sell, transfer, agree to sell, offer at public auction, negotiate to sell or subdivide any land until a preliminary plat, if required, and final plat have been approved by the director of planning and development and final plat recorded in accordance with this article. Said restriction applies to lands subdivided for nonresidential as well as residential uses. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from this article or from the penalties established for violations of this Code. The city through its attorney or other designated official may enjoin such transfer of, sale, or agreement by appropriate action. 
The planning department may require that a final plat for multiple (five (5) or more) lots being subdivided off an existing road be validated by stamp from the public works department. The planning department may also require that any final plat be validated by stamp from the public utilities department and/or Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
Sec. 9-13-1-5. - Reference to state and federal land subdivision laws. 
The subdivision of land shall comply, as applicable, with the federal and state full disclosure requirements for land sales. All subdivision plats shall also comply with applicable state law regarding accuracy and content of all such subdivision plats. 
Sec. 9-13-1-6. - Special review of subdivisions along state routes. 
No subdivision plat containing land which abuts a state route shall be approved until such plat has been submitted for review and comment by the state department of transportation, in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 32-6-151. 
Upon receiving such a plat, the city shall submit two copies of the proposed subdivision plat to the state department of transportation if such proposed subdivision includes or abuts on any part of the state highway system. The state department of transportation, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the plat, shall recommend approval and note its recommendation on the copy to be returned to the director of planning and development or recommend rejection. Failure of the state department of transportation to act within this 30-day period shall constitute approval. If the plat is recommended for rejection, the reasons for rejection and requirements for approval shall be given the director of planning and development in writing; but such recommendation shall be advisory only and shall not be binding on the director or planning and appeals board. 
Sec. 9-13-1-7. - Lots must comply with zoning requirements. 
No person shall subdivide land, and the director of planning and development shall not approve any subdivision of land, unless the lots created pursuant to said subdivision meet or exceed all applicable requirements of the zoning district and/or overlay zone, as applicable, and as may be amended from time to time. 
Sec. 9-13-1-8. - Improvements required for final platting. 
No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the director of planning and development or accepted for recordation by the clerk of superior court until all improvements required by this article have been constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the director of public works or, in the case of utilities, the director of public utilities. 
Sec. 9-13-1-9. - Lot combinations and boundary line adjustments. 
An existing lot line forming the boundary between two conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that have merged to form one building lot may be removed or eliminated through a final plat revision process which conforms to the final plat requirements of chapter 9-13-14. Where separate lots of land are proposed to be combined, they shall be submitted to the director of planning and development as a final plat for review, approval and recording. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination shall be required to be approved by the director of planning and development and recorded as a final plat. Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the replat is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. 
One or more existing lot lines forming boundaries between conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision, or one or more lot lines between abutting lots or parcels may be adjusted through a final plat revision process that requires the approval of the director of planning and development and recording of a plat meeting the specifications of a final plat. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat of the entire lots involved in the boundary line adjustment shall be required to be approved by the director of planning and development and recorded. Such plat showing said boundary line adjustment shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision and shall include thereon that the replat is for the purpose of adjusting the lot lines between specific lots. 
 Boundary Line Adjustment and Lot Combination 
Sec. 9-13-1-10. - Recordation and transfer of land. 
The clerk of superior court of Hall County shall not file or record a plat that would result in the division of a property into two or more lots that does not have the approval of the city as required by this article. The clerk of the superior court of Hall County shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision, whether evidenced as a plat or as an attachment to a deed, unless such plat is a final plat approved for recording by the director of planning and development or designated representative and contains said officer's signature thereon. 
Any deed or other instrument of conveyance, including a security deed, bond for title, or any other document purporting to convey, then or in the future, title to real estate, filed for record with the clerk of the superior court, wherein the property to be conveyed is described in some manner other than by reference to a recorded plat, shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by the party filing such deed or other instrument, which certificate shall be in the following form: 
I, _______, do hereby certify that the instrument herewith filed for record in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Hall County, Georgia, does not involve the subdivision of property and does not subdivide a tract of land into two or more tracts or lots. 
This _______ day of _______, 20_______. 
_______ (Signature) 
Sec. 9-13-1-11. - Exemptions from plat approval. 
The following types of land subdivisions, transfers, and sales are specifically exempted from the plat approval requirements of this article; provided, however, that such exemptions shall not apply to land development requirements and improvement requirements of this article or compliance with other applicable requirements of this Code: 
(a)  The creation and sale of cemetery plots. 
(b)  The sale of lots consistent with previously approved and recorded plats or deeds. 
(c)  The creation of leaseholds for space within a multiple-occupancy building or the division of property into leaseholds (but not for sale) for commercial, industrial, or institutional use. 
(d)  The creation of leaseholds (but not for sale) for the agricultural use of property where the use does not involve the construction of a building to be used as a residence or for other purposes not directly related to agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon. 
(e)  Any division of land to heirs through a judicial estate proceeding, or any division of land pursuant to a judicial partition, or any division of land occurring from the foreclosure of a deed of trust; provided, however, that such exemption shall not require the city to issue permits if the resulting lots or parcels fail to meet any applicable zoning provisions regarding lot size, lot width, or other dimensional requirements. 
Sec. 9-13-1-12. - Development of land. 
No person shall disturb or develop land except in accordance with this article and this Code. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, owner, agent or subdivider to disturb or develop any land until land development plans have been approved by the city and a land development permit issued, if required, in accordance with this article and this Code. No person shall commence construction of any improvements on any lot, prior to the approval of a preliminary plat if required by this article, nor prior to approval of submission of civil drawings and construction plans and issuance of a land development permit for said improvements as required by this article and Code. 
CHAPTER 9-13-2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 9-13-2-1. - Terms related to streets. 
Access: A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
Arterial street: See "Street classifications." 
Center line: That line connecting the succession of midpoints between the identifiable limits of any improvements on the ground or of any easement. 
Collector street: See "Street classifications." 
Cul-de-sac: A dead-end street of limited length having a primary function of serving adjoining land, and constructed with a turnaround at its end. 
Cul-de-sac, temporary: A non-permanent vehicular turn around located at the termination of a street or alley, created for construction and not accepted as a public improvement. 
Curb cut: The providing of vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting street; the physical improvement designed to provide such ingress/egress. 
Dead-end street: A street connected to another street at only one end. 
Deceleration lane: An added roadway lane, of a specified distance and width and which may include a taper, as approved by the city engineer, which permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
Deflection angle: The angle between a deviation in the direction of the center line of a street and the extension of the center line along a straight course from the point from which the center line changed direction. 
 Deflection Angle 
Design variance: An alteration or relaxation of the terms of this article where such alteration will not be contrary to the public interest, convenience and welfare, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property over which the applicant for a variance has no control, a literal enforcement of these regulations would create unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant in the use of the property. 
Development: 
(1)  A land development project involving the construction of streets, utilities, buildings, or other improvements required for the habitation or use of property, such as a residential neighborhood, an apartment complex, a store, or a shopping center; 
(2)  Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials; 
(3)  The act of constructing or carrying out a land development project, including the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Development site: Any and all areas within which "development" takes place. 
Driveway: A constructed vehicular access serving one or more properties and connecting to a public or private street, as distinguished from a platted, public or private street. 
Half street: A portion of the ultimate width of a road or street where the remaining portion of the road or street shall be provided at a future date. 
Major street or major thoroughfare: An arterial or collector street (see "Street classifications"). 
Pedestrian way: A public right-of-way or private easement across a block or within a block to provide access for pedestrians and which, in addition to providing pedestrian access, may be used for the installation of utility lines. 
Reserve strip: A strip or tract of land reserved for the purpose of controlling or limiting access from properties to abutting streets. 
Right-of-way: Land reserved for and immediately available for public use as a street or other purpose. 
Roadbed: That portion of a street improved for vehicular travel, including the curbs and shoulders. 
Roadway: The paved portion of a street improved for vehicular travel, measured from back of curb to back of curb. 
Sidewalk: A hard-surfaced pedestrian access area adjacent to or within the right-of-way of a street. 
Street: An improved way for the conveyance of motor driven, rubber-tired vehicles, such as automobiles and trucks. 
Street classifications: Streets are classified according to the function that they are to serve, the type, speed, and volume of traffic they will carry and the required standards of design. The classifications and locations of major thoroughfares are shown in the comprehensive plan. The classifications of streets and roads are generally as follows: 
1.  Expressways: Limited access Interstate highways. 
2.  Arterial streets: State and U.S. numbered highways. 
3.  Marginal-access streets: Streets that are placed parallel and adjacent to expressways or arterials to provide direct access to abutting properties. 
4.  Collector streets: Major streets that carry traffic between neighborhoods and arterial streets, serve nonresidential or multi-family areas or developments, and streets within a residential subdivision that collect traffic from one hundred (100) dwelling units or more. 
5.  Local streets: Streets in residential subdivisions and some nonresidential areas that primarily provide access to individual lots, do not carry through traffic, and serve fewer than one hundred (100) dwelling units. 
6.  Alleys: Public or private ways, whether unopened or opened for use, which afford only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Street jog: The incidence where two (2) streets or two (2) portions of a single street are separated by a relatively short distance, usually at their intersection with another street. 
 Street jog 
Street, private: A road or street that has not been accepted for maintenance by the governing body and that is not owned and maintained by a state, county, city, or another public entity. 
Tangent: The straight-line distance between the ending of one curve of a line (center line of a street) and the beginning of another curve of the same line (center line). 
 Tangent 
Sec. 9-13-2-2. - Terms related to subdivisions. 
Block: An area of land that is entirely surrounded by streets, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, or other well defined and fixed boundaries. 
 Block, Block Length, and Block Width 
Conservation subdivision: A subdivision, where open space is the central organizing element of the subdivision design, that identifies and permanently protects all primary and all or some of the secondary conservation areas within the boundaries of the subdivision, and that clusters housing together on smaller lots than in conventional subdivisions. 
Dedication: The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use or purpose, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. 
Dedication plat: A plat that indicates property to be dedicated for public right-of-way or land for public use, drawn to final plat specifications and following procedures for final plat approval. 
Easement: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
  
 Easements 
Easement, perpetual: An easement held in perpetuity. 
Escrow account: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee where the subdivider deposits either cash, a note, a bond, or some other instrument readily convertible to cash for specific face value specified by the director of public works or designated official of the city to cover the costs of required improvements. 
Final plat: The final drawing of a subdivision and, as applicable, dedication, prepared for filing for record with the clerk of the Hall County Superior Court, and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this article. 
Homeowners association: An organization formed for the maintenance and operation of the common areas of a development, where membership in the association is automatic with the purchase of a dwelling unit or lot within the development, with the ability to legally assess each owner of a dwelling unit or lot and which has authority to place a lien against all dwelling units and lots within the development. 
Letter of credit: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee whereby a subdivider secures an instrument from a bank or other institution or from a person with resources sufficient to cover the cost of improvements required by the governing body. The instrument pledges the creditor to pay the cost of improvements in case of default by the subdivider. 
Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been lawfully recorded in the records of the clerk of superior court of Hall County; or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been lawfully recorded in the same office prior to the adoption of zoning in the city (June 20, 1955). 
Lot: A parcel of land held in single ownership. 
(1)  Corner lot: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
(2)  Double frontage lot: Any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two (2) streets. 
(3)  Flag lot: A tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a street is less than the required minimum width required for construction of a building or structure on that lot. Also called a panhandle lot. 
(4)  Interior lot: A lot having frontage on only one street. 

 Types of Lots 
Lot area: The total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
Lot area, minimum: The smallest permitted total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of street right-of-ways but inclusive of easements. 
Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines. 
Lot frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any street. 
Lot width: The distance between side lot lines measured along the front principal building setback line. 
  
 Lot Definitions 
Metes and bounds: A system of describing and identifying land by a series of lines around the perimeter of an area; "metes" means bearings and distances and "bounds" refers to physical monuments. 
Performance bond: A type of improvement guarantee in the form of a bond, secured by the subdivider or land developer from a bonding company, in an amount specified by the director of public works or designated official of the city to cover the costs of required improvements, and payable to the governing body. The governing body may call in the performance bond in the event the subdivider or land developer defaults on required improvements. 
Preliminary plat: A drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate its general design. 
Protective covenants: Contracts made between private parties as to the manner in which land may be used, with the view toward protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
Public improvement: The construction, enlargement, extension or other construction of a facility intended for dedication to the city, including but not limited to a street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, cross drain, catch basin, traffic control and street name sign, or other roadway appurtenance other than a driveway apron connection; domestic water supply system main, fire hydrant, valve or other appurtenance other than a supply line to a building; or sanitary sewerage main or outfall, lift station, force main, manhole or other appurtenance other than a drain line from a building. 
Professional engineer: An engineer licensed and registered to perform the duties of a professional engineer (P.E.) by the state. 
Public utility: A utility owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
(1)  Public sewerage system: A sanitary sewerage system for the collection of water-borne wastes complete with a sewage treatment plant that is owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
(2)  Public water system: A system for the intake, treatment and distribution of potable water that is owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
Publicly dedicated: Land or improvements that has or have been transferred by plat or deeded to and accepted by the city for public use and maintenance. 
Registered land surveyor: A land surveyor licensed and registered to perform the duties of a registered land surveyor (R.L.S.) by the state. 
Reservation: A method of holding land for future public use or dedication to the public by showing proposed public areas on a subdivision plat or a corridor map. 
Septic tank: An approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewerage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Subdivider: Any person, as defined by this Code, who undertakes the subdivision of land, and any person having such a proprietary interest in land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this Code, or the authorized agent of such person. 
Subdivision: The division of a property or tract of land into two (2) or more tracts or lots; or a land development project in which two (2) or more lots are created, along with the streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots. The word "subdivision" includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to the actual land or area which is subdivided. 
(1)  Subdivision with public improvements: The division of land into two (2) or more lots that will require the construction or extension of public streets, water or sanitary sewerage (other than the direct connection of buildings to existing facilities). 
(2)  Minor subdivision: The division of land into two (2) or more lots, each of which will be adequately served by existing public streets, water and sanitary sewerage and that does not involve a public dedication. 
CHAPTER 9-13-3. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS 

Sec. 9-13-3-1. - Suitability of land. 
Land physically unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding, poor drainage, steep slopes, rock formations or other such features that may endanger health, life or property, aggravate erosion, increase flood hazard, or necessitate excessive expenditures of public funds for supply and maintenance of services shall not be approved for subdivision or development unless adequate methods are formulated by the subdivider or developer for solving the problems. 
Sec. 9-13-3-2. - Conformance with comprehensive plan. 
All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission to the director of planning and development. 
Sec. 9-13-3-3. - Block lengths and widths. 
Intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals so as to provide adequate cross traffic and connectivity. Blocks in residential subdivisions should not exceed one thousand eight hundred (1800) feet nor be less than six hundred (600) feet in length, except where topography or other conditions justify a departure from these standards. In blocks longer than eight hundred (800) feet, pedestrian ways and/or easements through the block shall be required near the center of blocks. 
  
 Block Length, Block Width, and Pedestrian Way 
In addition, for blocks longer than eight hundred (800) feet in length, the director of planning and development may require one or more public easements of not less than twenty (20) feet in width to extend entirely across the block for fire protection or utilities. 
The width of the block shall be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth, except where reverse frontage lots on arterial streets are provided, or when prevented by topographic conditions or size of the property, or for lots along the periphery of the subdivision, in which case the director of planning and development may approve a single row of lots. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and deliveries. 
Sec. 9-13-3-4. - Width, depth, and size. 
Residential lots shall have a depth not greater than three (3) times the width of the lot at the building line, unless unusual circumstances make these limitations not practicable. Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building setback requirements from both abutting streets. 
Where individual septic tanks are used, the Hall County Environmental Health Department shall approve minimum lot sizes to conform to health standards of the state department of public health and the county. 
Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to provide service areas and off-street parking suitable to use intended. 
Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements or required building setback lines. 
 Adequate Building Area Required 
Sec. 9-13-3-5. - Lot lines. 
All side lot lines shall be perpendicular to street lines, and all rear lot lines shall be parallel or radial to street lines, unless not practicable because of topographic or other features. 
Sec. 9-13-3-6. - Building lines. 
A building line, meeting or exceeding the front building setback requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located, shall be established on all lots. 
Sec. 9-13-3-7. - Double frontage lots. 
Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. The director of planning and development may require a no-access, planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet, across which there shall be no right of access, shall along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
Sec. 9-13-3-8. - Flag lots. 
Flag lots, which meet minimum lot area requirements and meet the minimum lot width at the front building setback line where the building is placed, may be allowed where conditions of hardship make standard design or frontage impossible, impractical, or inefficient with regard to land use. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle portion of the lot shall not be less than forty (40) feet wide, and the panhandle portion of the lot shall be no less than forty (40) feet wide and not more than two hundred (200) feet long. Not more than two (2) such panhandle access points shall abut each other. The director of planning and development may require shared driveways for abutting flag lots. 
Sec. 9-13-3-9. - Lot remnants not permitted. 
All remnants of lots below any minimum lot size which may be required, left over after subdividing a larger tract or land-locked parcel, must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain as unusable or noncompliant parcels. The director of planning and development may permit a lot remnant for a specific purpose such as a detention pond, provided that access and design is appropriate and the lot remnant is restricted to specific nonresidential use. 
Sec. 9-13-3-10. - Monuments. 
For all subdivisions, a state registered land surveyor shall install permanent survey monuments at all property corners, at each point at which a property line changes direction, and land lot lines, prior to final plat approval. Each monument shall be a ½-inch diameter steel rod or #4 rebar, at least twenty-four (24) inches long. When rock is encountered, a hole shall be drilled four (4) inches deep in the rock, into which shall be cemented a steel rod ½-inch in diameter. The top of each such monument shall be approximately level with the finished grade. 
Permanent survey monuments shall also be installed in accordance with the most recent edition of Section 180-7-.05, "Monument," of the Rules of State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors and the Georgia Plat Act (O.C.G.A. 15-6-67). 
CHAPTER 9-13-4. - PRELIMINARY PLATS 

Sec. 9-13-4-1. - Preliminary plat approval required. 
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure compliance with the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of subdivisions through the submittal of a preliminary plat. Any subdivision involving the dedication of a public street or public land, and any subdivision involving a new private street, shall require the submission of a preliminary plat. 
Sec. 9-13-4-2. - Relationship of preliminary plat to land development permit. 
The director of planning and development or designee must first approve a preliminary plat for subdivision activity prior to the issuance of a land development permit or initiation of any land disturbing or construction activities. An application for preliminary plat approval may be processed independently or in conjunction with an application for issuance of a land development permit. Applicants are cautioned, however, that the preliminary plat approval is discretionary with regard to consistency with the comprehensive plan and design requirements of this article, and therefore, proceeding simultaneously with preliminary plat and land development permit applications may result in the revision of civil engineering drawings and construction plans if the layout of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision must be significantly modified. 
Sec. 9-13-4-3. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
A preliminary plat shall be prepared by a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a landscape architect, a land planner, or any other person professionally familiar with land subdivision and land development activities. The preliminary plat shall meet the following specifications: 
(a)  Proposed name of subdivision. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the city or county. If shown to the contrary, the planning department may refuse to accept such subdivision name. 
(b)  Plat scale and sheet size. The preliminary subdivision plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one hundred (100) feet or less to one inch. The recommended maximum dimensions of the sheet size is thirty-six (36) inches by forty-eight (48) inches and the minimum dimensions of seventeen (17) inches by twenty-two (22) inches; however, the director of planning and development may approve other sheet sizes and scales as appropriate. For property of over one hundred (100) acres, a smaller scale may be used where, in the judgment of the director of planning and development, presentation of detailed data is not necessary to evaluate the entire project. It is the intent of this provision that in all cases sufficient information shall be provided for an adequate evaluation of the public and private improvements. 
(c)  Owner contact information. Name, address and telephone number of the property owner. 
(d)  Applicant contact information. Name, mailing address, telephone and fax numbers and E-mail address of the applicant. 
(e)  Miscellaneous. Tax parcel number(s), date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(f)  Use. Proposed use of the property. 
(g)  Location and tract boundaries. Location (land district and land lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre), and the approximate boundaries of the tract to be subdivided or developed by bearings and distances, The preliminary plat must reference and be based on a boundary survey of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision, prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(h)  Location map. A location map of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Location maps must be drawn at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to two thousand (2,000) feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide or as the required location map. 
(i)  Prior subdivision. Name of former approved subdivision, if any, for all of the land in the preliminary subdivision plat that has been previously subdivided, showing boundaries of same. 
(j)  Zoning. Zoning district designation of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries and overlay zone boundaries as appropriate. 
(k)  Conditions of approval. A copy of zoning, special use and variance conditions, if applicable. 
(l)  Natural features and flood plains. Natural features within the property, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all water courses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year flood plain, if any, shall be outlined. 
(m)  Streets, easements, political boundaries and built features. Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including street right-of-way and pavement widths, names of existing streets, all easements, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location and dimensions of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features. 
(n)  Subdivision layout. The proposed subdivision layout including lot lines and street right-of-way lines, with proposed street names or letter designations and right-of-way widths, along with the front building setback line and the approximate dimensions of the length and width of each lot. 
(o)  Phasing. The proposed phasing of the development, if it is proposed to be platted in phases. 
(p)  Water and sewage disposal. A statement as to the source of the domestic water supply and provisions for sanitary sewage disposal. For those properties that will not be served by a public sanitary sewerage system, location and results of percolation tests as required and approved by the Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
(q)  Stormwater management. The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. Compliance with chapter 9-13-13 shall not be required at the time of preliminary plat approval but will be required for the issuance of a land development permit or grading permit. 
(r)  Additional information. Additional information as may be required to ensure compliance with this article and Code. 
(s)  Certificate of project approval. A certificate of project approval, as follows or as may be modified from time to time, shall be shown on the preliminary plat: 

 Approved for Land Disturbance 
Sec. 9-13-4-4. - Preliminary plat application requirements. 
Applications for preliminary plat approval shall include the following: 
(a)  Application form. A properly completed application form, as furnished by the planning department, requesting review for project approval. The planning department may choose to complete this form for the applicant. 
(b)  Copies of plats. A set number, as fixed from time to time by the director of planning and development, of copies of the preliminary subdivision plat meeting preliminary plat specifications of this chapter and showing the entire ownership. 
(c)  Fees. Payment of all applicable application and review fees, as established by the governing body from time to time. 
Sec. 9-13-4-5. - Review and approval process. 
The director of planning and development is responsible for administering the review and approval process for preliminary subdivision plats, which shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. The procedures of this section may be supplemented by the director of planning and development where additional specification is required. 
(a)  Review for completeness and application acceptance. The planning department shall review the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will not be processed and will be returned to the applicant. 
(b)  Distribution and agency review of preliminary plat. The planning department shall forward a copy of the preliminary plat application to other city departments as may be appropriate, the state department of transportation if the proposed subdivision has frontage on or proposes access to a state or federal road, or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. Agency review shall specifically include the approval from the Hall County Environmental Health Department if septic tanks are proposed and the city public utilities department in cases where connection to city water and/or sewer is proposed or required. 
(c)  Time period for completion of review. Within two (2) to three (3) weeks following receipt of the application, during which agency review shall be completed, the planning department shall indicate on the preliminary plat or in writing all comments related to compliance with this article and Code. The planning department shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, who shall work with each Department as necessary to resolve all issues. 
(d)  Action. When the planning department has determined that the preliminary subdivision plat is in compliance with the requirements, purpose and intent of this article and Code, it shall be approved. The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments. 
(e)  Variances. The planning department shall not approve any preliminary plat that would result in a lot or situation that would clearly require a variance, until or unless such variance is lawfully obtained. 
(f)  Certificate of project approval. Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the director of planning and development or his or her designee shall sign and date the certificate of project approval stamped on a reproducible copy of the preliminary subdivision plat. One copy of the approved drawing shall be transmitted to the applicant and the planning department shall retain the additional copies for distribution and record-keeping purposes. 
(g)  Duration of approval. The certificate of project approval shall remain in effect for a period of one consecutive year after which time it shall become null and void and a new certificate may be required if no permit has been issued or no development activity has begun. 
Sec. 9-13-4-6. - Amendments to preliminary plat approval. 
The director of planning and development, in consultation with the director of public works and/or the director of public utilities when engineering or utility considerations are involved, is authorized to approve minor amendments to preliminary plats (i.e., those that do not affect the public or private street configuration or that reconfigure lots and which do not increase the number of lots), without the need to reapply for preliminary plat approval. The application requirements and procedures for amending preliminary plats, unless minor in nature, shall be the same as for preliminary plat applications. 
CHAPTER 9-13-6. - MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 

Sec. 9-13-6-1. - Minor land development permit required. 
A minor land development permit may be required for small projects that would otherwise not require a land development permit or preliminary plat as identified in this article. For multi-family and nonresidential properties, this may include but is not limited to items such as minor tree removal, clearing and grubbing, grading, landscaping, small driveway/parking installations and small building additions located on existing impervious surface areas as determined by the planning director. For single-family residential properties, this may include but is not limited to parking, patio, walkway and retaining wall additions as determined by the planning director. Regular maintenance of property including landscaping and gardening shall be exempt from these requirements. This chapter does not exempt the requirement of a separate building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXV, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-13-6-2. - General application requirements. 
The application for a minor land development permit shall be submitted to the planning department and may include the following items below as approved by the planning director: 
(a)  Application form. Application on the form completed by the planning department. The planning department may choose to complete this form for the applicant. 
(b)  Fee. Payment of any land development permit fee, as established from time to time by the governing body. 
(c)  Plat. A copy of the approved recorded plat of the subject property. 
(d)  Site plan. A site plan shall be prepared by a person familiar with land development activities. The site plan shall include at minimum the project location, total project area and all erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
(e)  Completeness. The application shall be checked for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will not be processed and will be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXV, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-13-6-3. - Review of permit applications. 
The planning department shall forward a copy of the permit application and all supporting documents to other city departments and government agencies or others as appropriate, for their approval. The applicant may be required by the planning department to secure development approval from other agencies if they are affected by (or have jurisdiction over) the development. Development approval may be required from but not limited to: 
(a)  The Gainesville Public Utilities Department. 
(b)  The Gainesville Public Works Department. 
(c)  The Hall County Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXV, 12-15-09) 
CHAPTER 9-13-7. - LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 

Sec. 9-13-7-1. - Land development permit required. 
A land development permit shall be required to authorize all activities associated with development activity, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, and the construction of such improvements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks, or other structures permanently placed on or in the property except for buildings, signs, or other structures requiring the issuance of a building permit. Any person seeking development activity on land within the city shall first submit to the planning department an application for a land development permit, including all civil design and construction drawings required by chapter 9-13-7. 
A land development permit shall not be required for detached, fee-simple single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings (duplexes). All other forms of residential development including but not limited to detached, single-family dwellings and attached dwellings in condominium ownership, townhouses, and apartments shall require a land development permit. 
Sec. 9-13-7-2. - Types of plans required. 
Persons seeking to engage in development activity on land in the city shall not commence or proceed until civil design and construction drawings are approved and a land development permit is issued by the planning department. 
The civil design and construction drawings for a project shall conform in all respects with the approved preliminary plat, if applicable, and all other requirements of this chapter. Applications for approval of civil design and construction drawings shall include each of the plans described in this chapter as appropriate to the project and summarized below (which shall not be considered limiting): 
(a)  Erosion and sediment control plan. Plans must be prepared to meet the erosion and sedimentation control requirements using best management practices under article 9-14 and as required by this chapter. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The erosion and sediment control plan shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(b)  Tree plan. A proposal for development or improvement of any tract of land shall include a tree protection plan as required by chapter 9-16-5 and this chapter. Such plan shall be submitted to the city prior to any grading, bulldozing or other removal of existing vegetation that may effect the health of existing tree coverage. 
(c)  Stormwater management report. The location and size of all proposed drainage improvements shall be designed in accordance with and meet all standards relating to stormwater management as specified in chapter 9-13-12 and this chapter. 
(d)  Street improvement plan. When new streets, public or private, are provided, or when an existing public or private street is modified, a street improvement plan shall be provided. Such plan must demonstrate compliance with chapter 9-13-9. 
(e)  Structural buffer plan. When a structural buffer is required by this Code (see chapter 9-16-2) or provided by the applicant, a structural buffer plan shall be submitted as a part of the land development permit application. Plans shall not be required for natural buffers, but natural buffers shall be shown on the grading plan and tree plan. 
(f)  Flood plain permit. When a flood plain permit is required by article 9-15, a flood plain permit application shall be submitted as a part of the land development permit application and as provided in this chapter. 
(g)  Sewage disposal plan. Sanitary sewerage plans shall include profiles of all mains and outfalls, lift station and force main details, typical manhole construction details, and other information as may be required by the director of public utilities. For projects to be served by on-site sewage disposal systems, such plans shall show the location of septic tank, extent of drain field and attendant structures, location and results of percolation tests, and other information shall be shown as required by the Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
(h)  Domestic water supply plan. The domestic water supply plan shall depict all water system improvements, water mains, fire hydrants, valves and other appurtenances, and other information as may be required by the director of public utilities. 
(i)  Grading. A grading plan showing existing and proposed contours within and immediately adjacent to the proposed land development. When new streets are involved in the land development they shall comply as applicable with section 9-13-9-13 of this Code. Land development projects within the Limestone Parkway overlay zone shall meet the requirements of chapter 9-8-3 of this Code, as applicable. 
(j)  Site design review. Unless accomplished independently, the application for land development shall include information sufficient to meet the requirements for site design review and approval as specified in article 9-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § X, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-13-7-3. - Preparation by professional. 
All civil design and construction plans and supporting studies shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer and stamped by said registered professional engineer. All other maps, drawings and supportive computations required to be submitted by this article shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying or erosion and sediment control, as applicable to the type of plan submitted. 
Sec. 9-13-7-4. - Separate requirements for phased applications. 
If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate land development permit or grading permit, or both if applicable, shall be required for each phase. 
Sec. 9-13-7-5. - Relationship of permit to plat approval. 
An application for preliminary plat approval may be processed independently or in conjunction with an application for issuance of a land development permit. Applicants are cautioned, however, that the preliminary plat approval is discretionary with regard to compliance with the comprehensive plan and design requirements of this article, and therefore, proceeding simultaneously with preliminary plat and land development permit applications may result in the revision of engineering plans if the layout of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision must be modified. 
Sec. 9-13-7-6. - General application requirements for land development permits. 
No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the city without first applying for and obtaining a land development permit from the planning department to perform such activity. The application for a land development permit shall be submitted to the planning department and must include the following: 
(a)  Application form. Application on the form completed by the planning department. The planning department may choose to complete this form for the applicant. 
(b)  Civil design drawings and construction plans. A set number, as fixed from time to time by the director of planning and development, of copies of the applicable civil design and construction drawings, including the appropriate number of copies of an erosion and sediment control plan with supporting data, as appropriate to the proposed project, and any other plans specified by this article and applicable to the proposed development. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data and conform to the specifications and standards specified in this chapter. 
(c)  Statement of taxes paid. A statement by the Hall County Tax Commissioner certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. No land development permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides such a statement. 
(d)  Fee. Payment of any land development permit fee, as established from time to time by the governing body. 
(e)  Plat or plan prior approvals or applications. A copy of the approved preliminary plat, if subdivision is required and preliminary plat approval has been obtained, or an application for preliminary plat approval. 
The application shall be checked for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will not be processed and will be returned to the applicant. 
Sec. 9-13-7-7. - General specifications for drawings and plans. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, each certified civil design plan and construction drawing required to be submitted by this chapter shall at minimum conform to the following specifications: 
(a)  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
(b)  Vicinity map showing location of project and existing streets. 
(c)  Boundary line survey. 
(d)  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
Plans and drawings shall show existing and planned contours for the property and all land within fifty (50) feet of the proposed project boundaries, at a map scale of one inch = one hundred (100) feet or larger scale, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following minimum contour intervals. The procedure or method used at arriving at the contour interval shall be indicated on the plans. 

 
(e)  Adjacent areas and features such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
(f)  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
(g)  Delineate the required buffer width adjacent to state waters. 
(h)  Delineate the required horizontal greenway (buffer width) along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
(i)  A site location drawing of the proposed project indicating its location in relation to roadways, jurisdictional boundaries, overlay zones, streams and rivers, as well as the delineation of the 100-year flood plain and administrative floodplain (see article 9-15), if existing, and the reference data used in making the 100-year or administrative flood plain determination. 
(j)  Computations, timing schedule and other supportive data required for review of the applicant's plan. 
Sec. 9-13-7-8. - Specifications for erosion and sediment control plans. 
Erosion and sediment control plans shall meet the following minimum specifications, and also as provided in article 9-14. 
(a)  Narrative or notes, and other information. Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
(b)  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
(c)  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
(d)  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact that is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
(e)  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
(f)  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sediment control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
(g)  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, calculations including off-site drainage areas and other information as may be needed to satisfy the requirements of articles 9-13 and 9-14. 
(h)  Location of erosion and sediment control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6, and meeting the requirements of article 9-14. Practices may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Construction exit. 
(2)  Sediment barrier. 
(3)  Sediment basin. 
(4)  Grassed waterway (open swale). 
(5)  Storm drain outlet protection. 
(6)  A plan for temporary and permanent vegetative and structural erosion and sediment control measures. 
(i)  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
(j)  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(k)  Maintenance statement. "Erosion and sediment control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sediment control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection." 
(l)  A description of the sediment control program and sediment control practices. 
(m)  An adequate description of general topographic and soil conditions of the tract as available from the Hall County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(n)  A description of the maintenance program for sediment control facilities including inspection programs, vegetative establishment of exposed soils, method and frequency of removal and disposal of solid waste material removed from control facilities and disposition of temporary structural measures. 
Sec. 9-13-7-9. - Specifications for tree plans. 
Tree plans shall be required, which shall show the information specified in this section (for more detailed requirements please see article 9-16). Tree plans involving development of five (5) acres or more shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect or registered arborist. 
(a)  The extent of the development site. 
(b)  All significant trees and all other trees ten (10) inches DBH or larger which will remain on the development site and be protected during construction; and trees less than ten (10) inches DBH that are submitted for credit as part of the required minimum tree units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings). 
(c)  In heavily wooded areas that will not be disturbed, the plan may show only the boundaries of each stand of trees and a list of the number, size, and type (e.g., hardwood, softwood; deciduous, evergreen) of trees in each stand which are submitted for credit. An averaging method may be used for large tracts of tree save areas. 
(d)  Areas subject to other provisions of this Code regarding retention of undisturbed natural vegetative buffers shall also be shown. 
(e)  Locations of proposed and existing on-site utility lines and easements. Indicate areas where trees cannot be planted because of interference with: 
(1)  Existing or proposed utilities on public rights-of-way or on utility rights-of-way or easements, and 
(2)  Existing utilities on adjoining properties. 
(f)  Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading, and trenching. 
(g)  Limits of tree conservation areas, showing trees to be maintained and planted, specifying type and size. Tree protective fencing shall be delineated and labeled on all sheets of plans/plats. 
(h)  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a significant tree or any other tree ten (10) inches DBH or larger which would affect it adversely, with drawings or descriptions as to how the grade, drainage, and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
(i)  Tree protective fencing diagram or illustration. 
(j)  Planting schedule, if applicable. 
(k)  Requirements for landscaping, as specified in article 9-16. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXVI, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-13-7-10. - Specifications for stormwater management report and plans. 
Stormwater management reports and plans shall be submitted and shall include all specifications of article 9-13-12. 
Sec. 9-13-7-11. - Specifications for street improvement plans. 
Street improvement plans shall demonstrate compliance with article 9-13-9, and where private streets are involved, compliance with article 9-13-10. Such plans shall include the following: 
(a)  Center line profiles and typical street sections at 50-foot intervals of all proposed streets. Profiles shall be drawn on standard plan and profile sheet with plan section showing street layout, pavement and right-of-way width, curvature, and required drainage facilities. Typical street sections shall be provided for street widenings. 
(b)  Where sanitary sewer or stormwater sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade, size, location and bedding class of pipe, and the location and invert elevation of manholes shall be indicated on the road profile. 
(c)  Center line profiles covering streets that are extensions of existing streets shall include elevations at 50-foot intervals for such distance as may be adequate to provide continuity consistent with the standards required by this Code for street improvements, but no less than two hundred (200) feet. 
(d)  All plan elevations shall be coordinated and sited into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey or state department of transportation benchmarks where feasible or into reference monuments established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(e)  A street striping and signage plan, showing improvements in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition as published by the Federal Highway Administration, shall be prepared for any street newly constructed or widened to four (4) or more lanes. 
Sec. 9-13-7-12. - Specifications for structural buffer plans. 
When required to be submitted (see chapter 9-16-2), structural buffer plans shall provide the following: 
(a)  All grading and construction details for earthen berms, walls and fences that are proposed as part of the visual screen. 
(b)  A planting plan showing the location and type of proposed plant materials. 
(c)  Typical cross-sections of the buffer illustrating the improvements proposed and typical location of vegetation. At least one cross-section shall be provided for each structural buffer. 
Requirements for landscaping, as specified in article 9-16, unless compliance is demonstrated on a separate landscape plan or through prior project site plan approval. 
Sec. 9-13-7-13. - Flood plain permit. 
If development or construction is proposed within or affecting an area of special flood hazard (see article 9-15), a flood area permit application shall be included with and reviewed along with a land development permit application. If a flood plain permit is required, the application shall also include the following: 
(a)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential building will be floodproofed; 
(c)  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in article 9-15; and 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
Sec. 9-13-7-14. - Administration. 
The planning department is responsible for administering the review and approval process for issuance of land development permits. 
Sec. 9-13-7-15. - Review of permit applications. 
The planning department shall forward a copy of the permit application, including the civil design and constructions drawings for the project, to other city departments and government agencies or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. The applicant may be required by the planning department to secure development approval from other agencies if they are affected by (or have jurisdiction over) the development. Development approval may be required from but not limited to: 
(a)  The city public utilities department. 
(b)  The city public works department. 
(c)  The Hall County public works department. 
(d)  The Hall County soil and water conservation district. 
(e)  City fire department. 
(f)  Hall County environmental health department. 
(g)  State department of transportation. 
(h)  State department of natural resources. 
(i)  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(j)  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Upon receipt of comments from other city departments and external agencies as appropriate, the planning department shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution and as appropriate shall indicate on a copy of the civil design and construction drawings or in writing all comments related to compliance with this article or Code, conditions of zoning approval, and other city regulations, as appropriate. 
Sec. 9-13-7-16. - Review of soil erosion plans. 
Upon receipt of a land development permit application, the planning department shall refer the soil erosion and sediment control plan to the Hall County Soil and Water Conservation District and the city public works department for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sediment control plan. The results of the district and public works department reviews shall be forwarded to the planning department. No land development permit shall be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district and the public works department, and any variances and bonding, if required, have been obtained. 
Sec. 9-13-7-17. - Action on permit applications. 
The applicant shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the comments of reviewing city departments, external agencies, and the planning department. Although review may have been achieved, if another city department or external agency requires approval or permit, the owner shall also be responsible for obtaining approval from all other agencies affected by the project prior to issuance of the land development permit by the planning department. 
No land development shall be issued unless the erosion and sediment control plan has been approved by the soil and water conservation district and the public works department, and that the planning department has affirmatively determined that the plans required are in compliance with all requirements of this article and Code. 
If the land development permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. Following satisfaction of all comments from the city and external agencies and receipt of approvals from all affected agencies, the planning department shall issue a land development when all requirements of this article and Code are met. Such approval authorizes land-disturbing activities to begin based on the approved civil design and construction drawings. 
Sec. 9-13-7-18. - Permits for annexed lands. 
If the tract, for which a land development permit is sought, is being annexed into the city, then a land development may not be issued until the date the annexation becomes effective pursuant to state law under O.C.G.A. 36-36-2. No application for a land development or building permit shall be filed on newly annexed property until the first of the month following the annexation approval date. 
Sec. 9-13-7-19. - Responsibilities limited. 
Approval of plans by the planning department shall not imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, or any other profession, from the professional, corporation, or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
The completion of inspections by the city and authorization for work continuation shall not transfer responsibility for the quality of the work performed or materials used from the owner, nor imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for project design or engineering from the professional, corporation, or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
The approval of an erosion and sediment control plan or other plans under the provisions of this article and Code, the issuance of a land development permit, or the compliance with the provisions of this article and Code shall not relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city or the soil and water conservation commission district for damage to any person or property. 
The fact that any activity for which a land development permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article and Code or the terms of the permit. 
Sec. 9-13-7-20. - Bond requirements for violators of soil erosion and sedimentation regulations. 
If the applicant has had two (2) or more violations in the city of previous land development, this article and Code as it pertains to soil erosion and sediment control, or the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the director of planning and development may deny the land development permit application, or may require the applicant to post a performance bond prior to issuing the land development. If the applicant does not comply with this article and Code, or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the planning department may call the performance bond or cause any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
Sec. 9-13-7-21. - Suspension, revocation, or modification. 
The land development permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this Code. A holder of a land development permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the land development permit. 
Sec. 9-13-7-22. - Expiration of permit approval. 
A land development permit shall expire within one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXVII, 12-15-09) 
CHAPTER 9-13-8. - IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-13-8-1. - Applicability. 
The improvements specified in this chapter shall be provided by the subdivider or developer or at the subdivider's or developer's expense in every subdivision or land development in accordance with the standards contained in this article and Code. 
Sec. 9-13-8-2. - Survey monumentation. 
Survey monumentation of the public streets and lot lines in a subdivision shall be provided, where applicable. See also section 9-13-3-10 of this Code. 
Sec. 9-13-8-3. - Streets. 
Streets, whether public or private, shall provide access to a development and to all lots in a subdivision, including the extension of streets required to provide access to adjoining properties. 
(a)  Streets contained wholly within a subdivision shall be improved to the full standards contained in chapter 9-13-9. Streets that adjoin a development shall be improved to the minimum standards of a local street from the center line of the street along the development's frontage. 
(b)  Streets in nonresidential areas or serving a multi-family development shall be improved to "collector" street standards. In residential subdivisions, streets that serve one hundred (100) dwelling units or more shall be improved to "collector" street standards, while those serving fewer than one hundred (100) dwelling units shall be improved to "local" street standards. 
(c)  The city may participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that improvements are needed to bring an existing public street to a higher level of classification than required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
(d)  Curb and gutter shall be required along all streets and internal roadways. See also section 9-13-9-23. 
Sec. 9-13-8-4. - Stormwater facilities. 
Stormwater drainage and detention facilities shall be provided as required by the public works director and in accordance with chapter 9-13-12. 
Sec. 9-13-8-5. - Sidewalks. 
Minimum five-foot wide sidewalks shall be provided along each side of any street within or adjacent to the development, in accordance with section 9-13-9-26. 
Sec. 9-13-8-6. - Traffic control devices. 
Street name signs, stop bars and traffic control signs shall be installed by the city at the developer's expense. See also section 9-13-9-25. 
Sec. 9-13-8-7. - Public water. 
Public water service shall be provided to every lot in a subdivision and to every development for both domestic use and fire protection, as more specifically provided in chapter 9-13-11. 
Water mains shall be connected to the existing city water system and extended past each lot. A contractor approved by the city shall install all elements of the water system, including mains, valves and hydrants at the developer's expense. The governing body may elect to participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that pipe sizes are needed in excess of that size required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
Sec. 9-13-8-8. - Fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall be located along the streets in every subdivision and within every development project, as approved by the city fire department and the director of public utilities. 
Sec. 9-13-8-9. - Sanitary sewerage. 
Every lot in a subdivision and every development shall be connected to the city's public sanitary sewerage system unless on-site disposal is approved by the public utilities department and the Hall County Environmental Health Department. Sewer lines shall be connected to the existing sanitary sewerage system and extended past each lot, as more specifically provided in chapter 9-13-11. 
Every element of the sanitary sewer system, including mains, lift stations, outfalls, and laterals, shall be installed at the developer's expense by a contractor approved by the city. The governing body may elect to participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that sewer mains or related improvements are needed in excess of the facilities required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
Sec. 9-13-8-10. - Design variance. 
The director of public works is authorized to, upon application, approve variances to the design requirements of this article, for good cause shown. Such application for variance shall be processed in conjunction with a preliminary plat application or land development permit application as appropriate. 
CHAPTER 9-13-9. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS 

Sec. 9-13-9-1. - Access. 
(a)  Every development and every lot within a subdivision shall be served by a public street meeting the requirements of this chapter or an approved private street meeting the requirements of this chapter and chapter 9-13-10. 
(b)  Every development and every subdivision shall have access to the public street system via a paved roadway. 
(c)  When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
(d)  No subdivision or development shall be designed in a way that would completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
(e)  Reserve strips, as defined in chapter 9-13-2, shall be prohibited. 
Sec. 9-13-9-2. - Conformance to adopted major thoroughfare and other plans. 
All streets and other features of the adopted comprehensive plan shall be platted by the subdivider or installed by the land developer in the location and if any, to the dimensions indicated on the major thoroughfare plan or transportation element of the comprehensive plan adopted by the governing body, as well as the transportation plan of the metropolitan planning organization (MPO). 
Sec. 9-13-9-3. - Continuation of existing streets. 
Streets existing at the property line of a subdivision or land development, or which terminate within the boundaries of a subdivision or land development, shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. The director of planning and development may waive this requirement in instances where in his or her opinion such continuation or extension would be undesirable or incompatible with surroundings. 
Where, in the opinion of the director of planning and development, it is necessary to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication of right-of-way to the boundary of such property through the subdivision or land development. 
Sec. 9-13-9-4. - Street plans for future phases of the tract. 
Where land proposed to be subdivided or developed includes only part of the tract owned by the subdivider or land developer, a tentative plan of a future street system for the portion not slated for immediate subdivision or land development consideration shall be required by the director of planning and development. When such tentative plan is required, it shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider or land developer at the time of submission of an application for preliminary plat, if required, or land development plan permit. 
Sec. 9-13-9-5. - Development along arterial street or limited access highway. 
Where a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an arterial street or a limited access highway, the director of planning and development may require a street to be constructed approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, from which the lots or land development shall be accessed instead of the arterial street or limited access highway. In such cases, the director of planning and development shall require a ten-foot wide no-access easement planted to prohibit travel across it. 
Sec. 9-13-9-6. - Separation of new streets along arterial street. 
Subdivision streets that intersect an arterial street shall do so at intervals of not less than eight hundred (800) feet, or as required by the state department of transportation, whichever is greater. 
Sec. 9-13-9-7. - Street names. 
Street names shall be reviewed for correct usage and reasonable meanings consistent with the language used and are subject to the approval of the director of planning and development or designee. For instance, the term "parkway" shall not be appropriate for an undivided, two-lane road. Streets that are a continuation of or in alignment with existing named streets shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets in the city or county, regardless of the use of any suffix such as "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive," "place," "way," "court," or other designation. 
Sec. 9-13-9-8. - Street alignment, intersections, and jogs. 
Streets shall be aligned to join with planned or existing streets. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles (ninety (90) degrees), but in no case shall such a street intersection be less than eighty (80) degrees. Where street offsets or jogs cannot be avoided, offset "T" intersections shall be separated by a minimum centerline offset of two hundred (200) feet. 
Sec. 9-13-9-9. - Right-of-way widths. 
All state or U.S. numbered highways shall meet all design requirements of and be approved by the state department of transportation. The right-of-way width shall be the distance across a street from lot line to lot line. Minimum right-of-way widths shall be as required in table 9-13-9-1. 
 Typical Street Section A 
TABLE 9-13-9-1  STREET IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 

 
Sec. 9-13-9-10. - Perpetual easement. 
A five-foot wide perpetual easement shall be provided outside of the right-of-way line along both sides of all collector and local streets. See typical street section A. 
Sec. 9-13-9-11. - Pavement widths. 
Street pavement widths, as measured from back-of-curb to back-of-curb, shall be provided as required in table 9-13-9-1. All roadways shall be constructed according to methods as contained in the most recent version of the state department of transportation Standard Specifications for Roadway Construction, unless otherwise approved by the director of public works. 
Sec. 9-13-9-12. - Street grades. 
Maximum and minimum street grades shall be as specified in table 9-13-9-1. In addition, the grade across a cul-de-sac in all directions may not exceed five (5) percent. All changes in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve so constructed as to afford a minimum sight distance, said sight distance being measured from the driver's eyes, which are assumed to be forty-five (45) inches above the pavement surface, to an object six (6) inches high on the pavement. 
Sec. 9-13-9-13. - Grading. 
(a)  Grading of full width. All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full width by the developer so that pavement extensions or sidewalks, where required or if installed in the future, can be constructed on the same level plane. 
(b)  Clearing. Before grading is started the entire area to be paved shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials. In all areas to be graded or filled, the developer shall stockpile the topsoil later to be spread in all disturbed areas not paved. 
(c)  Slopes and shoulder improvements. The maximum slope for all fill or cut slopes shall be two (2) feet of run for each one foot of rise or fall. The minimum width for all shoulders on local or collector streets from back edge of the curb shall be eleven (11) feet. All shoulders shall slope one-fourth (¼) inch to the foot toward the roadway. When all construction is completed, all slopes and shoulders shall be cleared of all rubbish and shall have a stand of grass to prevent undue erosion, either by sprigging or seeding. Abutting property shall be suitably sloped to the right-of-way line. 
(d)  Protection of banks. Immediately after grading and filling and re-spreading of topsoil, all areas of disturbed soil shall be fertilized and seeded (or in steep areas sodded or otherwise appropriately treated) with suitable vegetative cover to prevent erosion. 
(e)  Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved, the curb lines shall be staked by the developer's registered land surveyor. Before any base is applied, all of the underground utilities that are to be located under the roadway are to be installed completely or otherwise provided in accordance with public works requirements. For proper location of utilities, see section 9-13-9-27. 
(f)  Authorization. No private improvements, such as private lawn sprinkler systems, yard lighting, and the like, shall be installed within a public right-of-way except by authorization of the director of public works. Such authorization, if issued, shall require the owner to assume all repair costs of the owner's and the city's facilities should they become damaged. 
(g)  Preparation of subgrade. Prior to placement of the street base, the subgrade shall be compacted to ninety-five (95) percent density. 
(h)  Street base, curbing and paving. Street base, curbing and paving shall be installed by the developer in accordance with the requirements and standards of this article. 
Sec. 9-13-9-14. - Sight distance. 
The minimum sight distance shall be as specified in table 9-13-9-1. 
Sec. 9-13-9-15. - Horizontal alignment. 
Where a deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, the radius of curvature of the center line of said street shall be not less than as specified in table 9-13-9-1. Tangents shall be as specified in table 9-13-9-1. 
Sec. 9-13-9-16. - Curb line radii. 
Curb lines at street intersections shall have a radius of curvature of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Intersecting street right-of-way lines shall be rounded with a radius of no less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
Sec. 9-13-9-17. - Design speed. 
Horizontal curves and superelevation shall be designed in accordance with the requirements specified in table 9-13-9-1. 
Sec. 9-13-9-18. - Alleys. 
Where an alley has been specifically authorized by the director of public works, it shall comply with the standards specified in table 9-13-9-1. In addition, dead-end alleys shall be provided with a turn-around having a radius of at least forty (40) feet. 
Sec. 9-13-9-19. - Dead end streets. 
(a)  Only local streets and alleys may be dead-end streets. 
(b)  A cul-de-sac shall be no more than six hundred (600) feet long unless necessitated by topographic or other conditions and approved by the director of planning and development. Such a street shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a right-of-way radius of fifty-three (53) feet and pavement radius of forty (40) feet (forty-two (42) feet radius to back of curb). 
(c)  A reverse curve joining a cul-de-sac turn-around to a street section shall have a right-of-way radius of twenty-nine (29) feet and a radius to the back of curb of forty (40) feet (forty-two (42) feet to edge of pavement). 
(d)  A permanent dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac shall not be allowed, except as a temporary stage of construction of a street that is intended to be extended in a later stage of construction. Such a temporary dead-end street shall be provided with a temporary turn-around within the right-of-way if one or more lots front exclusively on the street; and, extension of the street is not under construction when the final plat is submitted for recording. 
(e)  Temporary turnarounds shall consist of a tack coat and one inch of asphalt and have a radius of at least forty (40) feet. 
Sec. 9-13-9-20. - Street base. 
Street base material shall conform to the requirements of table 9-13-9-1. 
Soil cement base shall contain a minimum ten (10) percent Portland cement by volume. Soil cement base may be allowed only under the following conditions: 
(a)  None of the streets exceed eight (8) percent grade. 
(b)  Tests taken every one thousand (1,000) feet of roadway shall show that the soil meets class "B" standards of the state department of transportation. The tests shall be conducted by a qualified geotechnical laboratory and the results filed with the city in order to obtain authorization to proceed. 
(c)  The street base shall extend fully under combination curb and gutter (as illustrated below). 

 Street Base 
Sec. 9-13-9-21. - Pavement binder and topping. 
Streets shall be paved with a top course meeting the standards specified in table 9-13-9-1. If two-stage paving is approved by the director of public works, the developer shall place a binder course on the street and delay final paving until the end of the one-year maintenance period. 
All pavement sections shall be designed by a qualified professional engineer with registration in the state based on 20-year projected traffic loads for that section and the existing subgrade conditions. The minimum acceptable pavement sections shall meet the specification contained within this chapter. 
Sec. 9-13-9-22. - Testing requirements. 
It is the responsibility of the developer to insure that all required tests are made and reported to the public works department. The cost of all testing and quality control shall be performed at the expense of the developer by qualified testing laboratories. 

 
Sec. 9-13-9-23. - Curb and gutter. 
All streets shall be provided with a combination curb and gutter of three thousand (3,000) psi Portland cement concrete, or with a header curb of the same material at median or cul-de-sac islands. Curbing along streets shall meet one of the following standards: Along the outer edge of all roadways, six (6) by 24-inch combination (full face) curb: 
  
 Curb and Gutter 
For use along medians only, six-inch header curb. 
(a)  Adequate storm drainage structures shall be provided. The combination curb and gutter or header curb shall be constructed so as to present a smooth, even line both horizontally and vertically. Preshaped joints shall be placed every fifty (50) feet along the curb line. 
(b)  Valley gutters shall not be allowed across local streets at street intersections. 
(c)  If a development is proposed on a parcel where multiple driveways exist, the owner/developer shall be responsible for removing all existing driveway curb cuts and aprons and replacing them with standard curb and gutter. Only new driveways constructed to current standards shall be allowed. 
Sec. 9-13-9-24. - Turning lanes. 
Turning lanes may be required at all entrances to subdivisions and industrial and commercial developments that front on arterial and collector streets. Turning lanes shall be twelve (12) feet in width plus curb and gutter for a minimum distance of two hundred (200) feet measured from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
Sec. 9-13-9-25. - Street name signs and traffic control signs. 
Street name signs of a type approved by the city shall appear at all intersections. Traffic control signs shall be placed by the city and conform to the U.S. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. 
Sec. 9-13-9-26. - Sidewalks. 
Minimum five-foot-wide sidewalks shall be installed along all new streets. In addition, the director of public works shall require the subdivider or land developer to install, along the entire property frontage, minimum five-foot-wide sidewalks on streets leading to or going through commercial areas, school sites, places of public assembly, and other congested areas, and along existing streets abutting the subdivision or land development, or as may be otherwise specified in the city's comprehensive plan. 
Where required or provided, sidewalks shall be located not less than one (1) foot from the property line to prevent interference or encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges or other plantings or structures placed on the property line at a later date. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete no less than four (4) inches in depth, and located no less than three (3) feet from the back of the curb. All sidewalks shall be constructed to conform to requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. The director of public works, in accordance with section 9-13-8-5, may administratively vary the width and location of the sidewalk based on existing and surrounding site conditions. 
 Sidewalks 
(Ord. No. 2007-17, § VI, 5-15-07) 
Sec. 9-13-9-27. - Location of utilities in streets. 
(a)  Above-ground utilities. Telephone poles, street light poles, telephone junction boxes and other public or private utility structures placed above ground within a street right-of-way must be at least eight (8) feet back from the back of the street curb and one foot back from the edge of the sidewalk, whichever is farthermost from the roadway. 
(b)  Underground utilities. Utilities placed underground shall be placed within the right-of-way as follows (see typical street section B). 
(c)  Sanitary sewer. Sanitary sewer when placed within a street right-of-way, shall have a minimum of four (4) feet of cover and provide a minimum slope of laterals to abutting properties of one percent. 
(d)  Location of utilities. Other utilities, when placed underground along the roadway, shall be located in the shoulder of the road and shall be placed at the following distances measured from the back of curb or edge of pavement, and placed at or below the depths indicated as follows: 

 
Water and gas mains must be placed on opposite sides of the street. All utilities that will cross under pavement shall be installed completely throughout the subdivision prior to any roadway base being applied. Installation of approved utility sleeves shall be considered as an alternate. 
 Typical Street Section B, Location of Utilities 
Sec. 9-13-9-28. - Pavement cuts. 
Pavement cuts across local streets shall conform to the following: 
(a)  Pavement cuts for the installation of utilities shall be avoided whenever possible. Utility crossings shall be bored across any arterial, subject to the approval of the state DOT, and across any collector unless a pavement cut is approved by the director of public works. 
(b)  Pavement cuts across local streets shall be permitted, provided the road is repaired with at least six (6) inches of three thousand (3,000) psi Portland cement and topped with at least two and one-half (2½) inches of E or F hot plant mix asphaltic cement. The top of the concrete pad shall not exceed the elevation of the aggregate base course of the original road construction. 
Sec. 9-13-9-29. - Street lighting. 
(a)  Roadway illumination standards. In order to insure adequate illumination of public rights-of-way and promote safety and security, the "American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society" as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1993), as amended, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the City with the following exception: 
Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal foot-candle illumination level by roadway classification shall be as provided in the table below: 

 
The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third ( 1/3 ) of the average horizontal foot-candle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may not be less than one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of this average. Unless extenuating circumstances exist, fixtures for residential street lighting shall not be required to be closer than two hundred (200) feet, nor fixtures for all other roadways be closer than 100-foot spacing. If pole top fixtures are used, spacing should range between one hundred twenty-five (125) feet to one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(b)  Plans, approval, and appeal. Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public and private rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the director of public works for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards of this section. No lighting shall be installed or operated without the approval of the director of public works. Should the director of public works disapprove a request to install lighting fixtures within any public right-of-way, he shall communicate disapproval in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include specific reasons for disapproval. Any disapproval of a light or lighting system may be appealed to the planning and appeals board. If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the city engineer within ten (10) days from the date following the written notice of disapproval, it shall be the responsibility of the director of public works to transmit forthwith to the planning and appeals board all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken, and to insure that the appeals promptly placed upon the agenda of the planning and appeals board for its determination. The planning and appeals board may reserve or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, the order, requirement, and decision of determination appealed. 
(c)  Security and other lights. Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public or private rights-of-way as "security lights" or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public streets shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from the street, and shall be oriented in such a manner to insure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. The approval of the director of public works shall be obtained prior to installation of such lights. Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public or private rights-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner so as to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public or private rights-of-way. 
(d)  Procedures for approval in subdivisions. Street lights shall be required to be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions involving new streets, unless waived by the governing body on recommendation from the planning and appeals board. Unless so waived, the developer, at the time of submission of the preliminary plat of the subdivision shall present a street light layout approved by the utility company which will provide the street light service in the subdivisions. At the time of and as a requirement of the submission of a final plat, unless waived by the governing body on recommendation of the planning and appeals board as herein provided, the developer shall: 
(1)  Submit a final street light layout approved by the utility company which will provide the lighting service showing exact location of street lights within the subdivision. This drawing (lighting layout) must be approved by the director of public works prior to obtaining any building permit within that subdivision. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities in the city. The fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of thirteen (13) to sixteen (16) feet above the ground, and shall have appropriate design to place the majority of the light output over the street. One light shall be located in each cul-de-sac within the subdivision, as well as each intersection. 
(2)  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures, and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation thereof. 
(3)  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the director of public works. 
(e)  The above requirements must be met prior to obtaining any building permits for that subdivision and must be shown as a general note on the final plans. 
Sec. 9-13-9-30. - Street trees. 
(a)  Optional. Street tree planting may be permitted within the rights-of-ways of new public streets and private streets within commercial, industrial, or residential subdivisions, subject to the approval of the director of public works. See chapter 9-8-7 for street tree planting requirements in the Midtown overlay zone. 
(b)  Plan submittal and approval. When street trees are to be provided, the subdivider, owner of land to be dedicated as a public street, or the developer of a private street shall at the time of preliminary plat approval submit a plan for the provision of street trees along all said roads which shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works. 
(c)  Installation. It is the intent of this section that where street trees are provided the subdivider or developer should carefully position street trees on the plan while taking into account sidewalk locations, utility locations, and, if not constructed simultaneously with the construction of the public or private street, future driveways. When street trees are provided, the subdivider or developer shall install said street trees, according to a plan approved by the director of public works as a part of preliminary plat approval or land development permit approval, and prior to dedication or opening of said street. The director of public works may accept an agreement by the subdivider where the responsibility for street tree planting is shifted to the owners or individual builders of the lots to be subdivided, upon their development. Any such responsibility shall be legally transferred in a form acceptable to the city attorney. 
(d)  Location. Street trees must be planted within the public or private right-of-way or, if right-of-way width is insufficient to accommodate said street trees, then on private property within a street tree easement dedicated to the city. 
(e)  Guidelines. The guidelines below are intended to avoid conflicts with improvements; they are recommendations only and are subject to the approval of the director of planning and development. 

 
CHAPTER 9-13-10. - PRIVATE STREETS 

Sec. 9-13-10-1. - Private streets permitted. 
Private streets may, upon application, be permitted by the director of planning and development, subject to the requirements of this article. The director of planning and development may impose conditions on the approval of private streets to ensure various public purposes and to mitigate potential problems with private streets. No final plat involving a private street shall be approved unless said final plat conforms to the requirements of this article. 
Sec. 9-13-10-2. - Engineering plans required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct a new private street or alter an existing private street or to cause the same to be done without first obtaining approval of civil design drawings and construction plans and securing a land development permit from the director of planning and development in accordance with the requirements of this article, the same as for a public street. 
Sec. 9-13-10-3. - Standards for private streets. 
All private streets shall be constructed to all standards for public streets as specified in chapter 9-13-9, unless otherwise specifically approved as part of a planned unit development by the governing body. 
Sec. 9-13-10-4. - Street names and signs. 
Private streets shall be named, subject to the approval of the director of planning and development. The subdivider or developer of land involving a private street shall install street signs with content containing the street name and the designation "private," or as approved by the director of public works. Alternatively, the director of public works may require the subdivider or developer to pay for such signs to be installed by or under the direction of the city. Signs signifying private streets may be required by the director of public works to be a different color than that of street signs provided for public streets, in order to distinguish maintenance responsibilities in the field. 
Sec. 9-13-10-5. - Easements. 
Easements for private streets shall be designated on final plats as general purpose public access and utility easements, along with the name of said private street which shall require approval by the director of planning and development. Said easement shall at minimum be of the same width as that required for the right-of-way of a public street for the type of public street (local, collector, etc.) most closely resembling the proposed private street. Easements for private streets shall not be included in any calculation of minimum lot size or density maximums established by zoning regulations of this Code. In the cases of private streets, the general purpose public access and utility easement shall be shown in a manner on the final plat such that the private street right-of-way is drawn as its own discrete parcel to be dedicated to a private homeowners association (i.e., not shown to be a part of any lot) or other approved entity. 
Sec. 9-13-10-6. - Maintenance. 
The city shall not maintain, repair, resurface, rebuild, or otherwise improve streets, signs, drainage improvements or any other appurtenances within general purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. A private maintenance covenant recorded with the Hall County Clerk of the Superior Court shall be required for any private street and other improvements within general purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. The covenant shall set out the distribution of expenses, remedies for non-compliance with the terms of the agreement, rights to the use of easements, and other pertinent considerations. The covenant shall specifically include the following terms: 
(a)  The covenant shall establish minimum annual assessments in an amount adequate to defray costs of ordinary maintenance and procedures for approval of additional needed assessments. The covenant shall also specify that the funds from such assessments will be held by a homeowners or property owners association. 
(b)  The covenant shall include a periodic maintenance schedule. 
(c)  The covenant for maintenance shall be enforceable by any property owner served by the private street. 
(d)  The covenant shall establish a formula for assessing maintenance and repair costs equitably to property owners served by the private street. 
(e)  The covenant shall run with the land. 
(f)  The city, as a condition of approving private streets, shall require that a performance bond and/or maintenance bond by the subdivider as described in sections 9-13-13-9 and 9-13-13-10 be submitted by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 2009-38, § I, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 9-13-10-7. - Specifications for final plats involving private streets. 
No final plat involving a private street shall be approved by the director of planning and development for recording unless and until it shall contain the following on the face of the plat: 
(a)  Covenants, or reference to the deed book and page of the recorded covenants. 
(b)  "The City has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or otherwise service the private streets, drainage improvements, and other appurtenances contained within the general public purpose access and utility easement or easements for private streets shown on this plat." 
(c)  "Grant of Easement. The general purpose access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) is (are) hereby granted and said grant of rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the City, and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable television lines, and fiber optic cables, together with the right to trim interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and egress for installation, maintenance, and replacement of such lines. 
_______  Signature of Property Owner" 
Sec. 9-13-10-8. - Purchaser's acknowledgement. 
Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private street in the city, the subdivider or seller of said lot shall execute a notarized purchaser's acknowledgement of private street construction and drainage maintenance responsibilities as set forth below. A copy of the purchaser's acknowledgement shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a condition of a building permit for a principal building on said lot: 
"Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Street and Drainage Maintenance Responsibility. 
(I) (We) have read the Declaration of Covenant which pertains to the lot that is the subject of this real estate transaction _______ (insert address and attach legal description). (I) (We) understand that the Declaration of Covenant applies to the lot that (I am) (we are) purchasing and requires (me) (us) to provide a specified percentage or amount of the financing for the construction and maintenance of any private street and drainage facilities serving the lot which (I am) (we are) purchasing, and that owners of other lots in this plat may sue for and recover those costs which this covenant requires (me) (us) to pay, plus their damages resulting from (my) (our) refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorneys fees. (I) (we) further understand that the City has no obligation to assist with the maintenance and improvement of the private street, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances within the general purpose public access and utility easement for the private road serving the lot in question. I (we) understand that a copy of this purchaser's acknowledgement shall be required as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for a principal building on the lot (I am) (we are) purchasing. 
_______  Purchaser" 
Sec. 9-13-10-9. - Gated communities. 
Gates must be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from a public right-of-way. The minimum gate width must equal the required road width plus the width of any utility easements present, but in no case shall the width be less than thirty (30) feet. Gate width and placement must be reviewed by, and are subject to approval by, the fire department. 
Arrangements for access through the gate for emergency service vehicles must be reviewed by, and are subject to the approval of, the police and fire departments. Such arrangements may include: keypad code entry; occupant telephone authorized entry; personal service attendant twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week; and/or automatic gate opening upon power disconnect. 
CHAPTER 9-13-11. - UTILITIES 

Sec. 9-13-11-1. - Sanitary sewerage. 
(a)  Connection required. Except as otherwise required in this section, each subdivider and land developer shall be required to pay for the installation of a sanitary sewerage collection system connected to the city's system serving his subdivision or land development. The layout and specifications of the system shall be in accordance with city specifications, as approved by the public utilities director, and shall be installed by a contractor approved by the city. 
(b)  Connection to septic tank. Where connection to the sanitary sewerage system is not feasible in the view of the public utilities director, the lot shall contain adequate area for the installation and safe operation of a septic tank and disposal field, as approved by the Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
Sec. 9-13-11-2. - Public water. 
(a)  Connection required. Each subdivision or development shall connect to the city's public water system and shall provide service to each lot or the development as a whole, as appropriate, at the expense of the subdivider or land developer. 
(b)  Specifications. The layout and specifications of the system shall be in accordance with city specifications, as approved by the public utilities director, and shall be installed by a contractor approved by the city. 
(c)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in subdivisions and developments and shall meet the requirements of the fire department. 
CHAPTER 9-13-12. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 9-13-12-1. - Purposes. 
This chapter defines requirements for stormwater management and outlines the water quantity and quality performance criteria for managing stormwater runoff. The majority of technical stormwater criteria and standards are adopted by reference through the use of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM). 
The purposes of this chapter are also to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. 
Sec. 9-13-12-2. - Objectives. 
This chapter seeks to meet its purposes through the following objectives: 
(a)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(b)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(c)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(d)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(e)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(f)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
Sec. 9-13-12-3. - Definitions. 
Administrative floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the projected future land use map. 
Applicant: A person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement: An agreement between a land owner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention: The temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility: A detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Drainage easement: An easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. Both streams and storm drainage channels are required to have easements for maintenance purposes as specified in this chapter. 
Extended detention: The detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection: Measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of one hundred (100) years or more. 
Flooding: A volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space: Permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot: An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG): A natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover: A surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Improvements: The physical addition and changes to land that may be necessary to produce usable, desirable and acceptable lots or building sites. 
Industrial stormwater permit: A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration: The process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement: A written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development: Any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities: Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project: A discrete land development undertaking. 
New development: A land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution: A form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice: Any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility: A stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility: A stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection: The measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner: The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit: The permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development: The time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development: The time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Professional engineer: An engineer licensed and registered to perform the duties of a professional engineer (P.E.) by the state. 
Project: A land development project. 
Public utility: A utility owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
(1)  Public sewerage system: A sanitary sewerage system for the collection of water-borne wastes complete with a sewage treatment plant that is owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
(2)  Public water system: A system for the intake, treatment and distribution of potable water that is owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
Public utilities director: The director of the department of public utilities of the city, or his designee, whose duties include the review and approval of construction plans for public utilities for the city. 
Public works department: References to action by the public works department shall mean action by that administrative official of the city public works department to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the director of public works. 
Public works director: The director of the department of public works of the city, or his designee, whose duties include the review and approval of construction plans for public streets for the city. 
Redevelopment: A land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility: Stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff: Stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater better site design: Nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management: The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility: Any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure: Any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan: Means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this Code. 
Stormwater management system: The entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit: A stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff: The flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Sec. 9-13-12-4. - Stormwater management report required. 
All persons proposing development or construction in the city that meets the applicability requirements of this chapter shall prepare a stormwater management report, unless specifically exempted from the requirements of this chapter. No final subdivision plat shall be approved and no development or building permit shall be issued until and unless the stormwater management report has been reviewed and approved by the director of public works, except as exempt below. 
This report must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet submittal and permitting requirements. The engineer sealing the stormwater management report is responsible for ensuring that all permit requirements related to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act are met. 
Stormwater management reports shall not be required for activities that are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 9-13-12-5. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(a)  New development that involves the creation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(b)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(c)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the director of public works to be a hotspot land use; or 
(d)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (a) and (b) if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
Sec. 9-13-12-6. - Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempt from the requirements this chapter: 
(a)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family detached or duplex residential structures; 
(b)  Individual single-family residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(c)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(d)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the department of public works or department of planning and development. 
Sec. 9-13-12-7. - Variances. 
The director of public works may grant a variance from the requirements of this chapter if the proposed development activity will not: 
(a)  Change the rate or volume of runoff significantly, as specified in the stormwater design manual; 
(b)  Have a significant, negative impact on any wetland, watercourse, or water body as specified in the stormwater design manual; or 
(c)  Contribute to degradation of water quality. 
Sec. 9-13-12-8. - Reference to stormwater manual. 
The current version of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) will provide the primary guidance for the design and evaluation of stormwater management facilities in the city. A copy of the GSMM can be viewed in the department of public works or can be accessed at www.georgiastormwater.com. 
Sec. 9-13-12-9. - Stormwater management report contents. 
The stormwater management report shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this section, Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. The stormwater management report shall address the following issues and analyze compliance with the water quantity and water quality performance indicators specified in this chapter. 
The stormwater management report shall have the following minimum contents: 
(a)  A brief narrative description of the project; 
(b)  Geotechnical investigations including soil maps, borings, site specific recommendations, and any additional information necessary for the proposed stormwater management design; 
(c)  Site plan that depicts all streams, lakes, wetlands and other bodies of water. Should verification of jurisdictional waters of the U.S. be needed, the developer must provide the department of public works with a formal delineation of the waters of the US performed by a qualified and experienced professional and have the delineation verified in writing by the United States Army Corp of Engineers (USACE). Additionally, the plan shall depict relevant boundaries of the 100-year floodplain for ultimate build-out conditions (the administrative floodplain). The administrative floodplain boundary must be calculated using Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) methodologies for delineating floodplains using future hydrology conditions. 
(d)  Hydrologic computations, including drainage area maps depicting pre-development and post-development runoff flow paths and land use, including the locations and quantities of stormwater runoff entering and exiting the site for both pre-developed and post-developed conditions. Analysis of the off-site properties shall anticipate future development in addition to addressing existing conditions. 
(e)  Drainage area delineation maps and other exhibits at a satisfactory scale and sufficient in quantity and scope to define the boundaries of the site relative to any applicable water courses, drainage divides, drainage structures and other pertinent features. 
(f)  Estimates of the stormwater quality in terms of total suspended solids for both pre-developed and post-developed conditions using the stormwater quality site development review tool. 
(g)  Hydraulic computations; 
(h)  Structural computations; 
(i)  Unified sizing criteria volume computations according to the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and this section. 
(j)  Analysis of downstream conditions at each and every point or area along the project sites boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. 
(k)  Analysis of the portion of the drainage way "immediately" downstream from the project. In determining downstream effects from stormwater discharge control structures and the development, hydrologic-hydraulic engineering studies, using the administrative floodplain, shall extend to a point where the proposed development represents less than ten (10) percent of the total watershed (the ten (10) percent rule). If the discharge calculations indicate that adjacent properties, between the exit of the proposed development and the "ten (10) percent downstream point" might be adversely impacted by the proposed development, then the engineer will provide a summary of recommendations. 
(l)  Stormwater management plan. Whenever adverse stormwater runoff related impacts are expected to result from the development of a property, the stormwater management report shall describe in detail the proposed stormwater management plan. Plans, specifications and computations must be complete in detail sufficient to enable another engineer to fully check and verify the results and computations. The plans used for construction must contain design data, a project narrative, schedule of construction, name and address or person responsible for construction and the engineer's seal, signature and address on the engineering drawings required for the project construction. 
Sec. 9-13-12-10. - Specifications for stormwater management plans. 
The stormwater management plan shall include the following items: 
(a)  Description of the overall stormwater management strategy. 
(b)  Topographic maps showing all on-site and off-site contributing drainage areas. 
(c)  Basis for determining runoff coefficients and times of concentration. 
(d)  Inflow and outflow hydrographs with peak flows for the one-, 25- and 100-year storm frequencies. 
(e)  Hydraulic performance properties for all stormwater management facilities (e.g., stage/storage/discharge curves, infiltration capacities, overflow relationships). 
(f)  Details and calculations for all outlet control structures, including buoyancy calculations and emergency spillways. 
(g)  Configuration of the stormwater management system, including outflow and overflow control devices, shall be clearly described in report with cross-sections depicted on all construction drawings. 
(h)  Graded access easements, (maximum 3:1 slope) around all stormwater management ponds in areas inaccessible to vehicular traffic. 
(i)  Temporary sediment basins are required for all detention sites and major drainage exits. The detention facility shall be designed to provide temporary sediment control unless a live stream exists. 
(j)  Underground detention facilities with details that provide: 
(1)  The location and type of access protection for the detention facility. 
(2)  Safety requirements as specified by the city for the site. 
(3)  Outline of the inspection and maintenance covenant to be filed with director of public works for all components of the stormwater management report, and 
(4)  Summary of the proposed stormwater management approach and the expected performance. 
(k)  Construction drawings submitted for stormwater management plan approval shall include the following: 
(1)  A vicinity map; 
(2)  Topography survey showing existing and proposed terrain, including the area to be included in the downstream analyses; 
(3)  Any proposed improvements including location of buildings or other structures, impervious surfaces, storm drainage facilities, and all grading; 
(4)  The location of existing and proposed structures and utilities; 
(5)  Any easements and rights-of-way; 
(6)  The delineation, if applicable, of the administrative floodplain and any on site wetlands; 
(7)  Structural and construction details for all components of the proposed drainage system or systems, and stormwater management facilities; 
(8)  All necessary construction specifications; 
(9)  A sequence of construction; 
(10)  Data for total site area, disturbed area, new impervious area, and total impervious area; 
(11)  A table showing the unified sizing criteria volumes required by the GSMM; 
(12)  A table of materials to be used for stormwater management facility planting; 
(13)  All soil boring logs and locations; 
(14)  A maintenance schedule; 
(15)  Certification by the owner/developer that all stormwater management construction will be done according to this plan; and 
(16)  An as-built certification signature block to be executed after project completion. 
Sec. 9-13-12-11. - Use of stormwater quality site design tool required. 
An automated spreadsheet tool was developed to facilitate the consistent review of development projects across the 16-county Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District (the district) of which the city is a part. The tool was specifically designed to meet the unified sizing and water quality performance criteria outlined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. The overall goal is to provide an effective tool for city review staff and the development community to quickly evaluate the water quality performance of stormwater management plans for development sites. It allows the developer to use a variety of BMPs and provides incentives for leaving key areas, particularly riparian buffers, undisturbed. 
The city requires every project, unless otherwise exempt, to use the stormwater quality site design tool. A copy of the tool is available upon request from the department of public works. 
Sec. 9-13-12-12. - As-built certification of stormwater management facilities. 
After construction and before acceptance for occupation or otherwise, the designer shall submit a certified field run topographic map of all areas including the stormwater management facilities, a revised stormwater management report (if needed), and a long-term inspection and maintenance covenant signed by the property owner or organization. The designer shall certify that the as-built conditions regarding storage and outflow meet the requirements of this chapter. 
Sec. 9-13-12-13. - Inspection and maintenance agreement. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit of occupancy, the developer must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. A copy of this agreement is available from the department of public works. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall consist of the following: 
(a)  Responsible person(s). The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(b)  Schedule. As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for routine inspection and maintenance to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. 
(c)  Plans for annual inspections. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance events and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
Sec. 9-13-12-14. - Maintenance by private parties. 
On all commercial sites and on residential property where stormwater management facilities exist, the maintenance is the responsibility of the owner or operator of the property. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator to repair deficiencies in a timely manner. 
Sec. 9-13-12-15. - Maintenance by property or homeowners associations. 
When a subdivision or industrial/commercial park has a legally created property or homeowners association, the association will be responsible for maintenance of all drainage easements and all stormwater facilities within the entire development. The association may be required to apply larvicides, stock mosquito fish or take other measures, as required by the department of public works, to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. The association will have to be formed prior to final plat approval. 
Sec. 9-13-12-16. - Inspection and repair. 
The city department of public works personnel will perform periodic inspections of existing and new private stormwater management facilities to determine whether they are maintained properly. Should an owner fail to maintain the stormwater management facilities in a state of service intended by the stormwater management plan, then the director of public works shall notify the owner or operator in writing of the deficiencies and specific minimum maintenance requirements to remedy such deficiencies. It shall be the responsibility of the private party or association that owns or operates the facility to repair deficiencies in a timely manner. 
Sec. 9-13-12-17. - Failure to maintain. 
If the owner or operator fails to perform the required maintenance work within a maximum of thirty (30) days, then the owner or operator shall be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. At that point, the department of public works may undertake the work itself or otherwise provide for the maintenance of the system, and may call such bonds or other surety as may be outstanding on the development, or may place liens or assessments on the responsible owner's properties, in satisfaction of the cost to the city. 
Sec. 9-13-12-18. - Reference to unified stormwater sizing criteria. 
The GSMM has developed a set of unified stormwater sizing criteria that serves as the basis of designing stormwater facilities in the city. These criteria provide an integrated approach for meeting the stormwater runoff quality and quantity management requirements for those applicable developments identified in this section. 
The purpose of the unified stormwater sizing criteria is to design a stormwater management system to: 
(a)  Remove stormwater runoff pollutants and improve water quality; 
(b)  Prevent downstream stream bank and channel erosion; 
(c)  Reduce downstream overbank flooding; and 
(d)  Reduce the runoff from and safely pass extreme storm events. 
Sec. 9-13-12-19. - Stormwater design sizing criteria. 
Stormwater management typically relies on a system of natural and constructed facilities (practices) for the storage, treatment, and conveyance of runoff. This section provides an overview of the design criteria required for stormwater detention and conveyance facilities in the city. 
(a)  Stormwater facilities generally. Stormwater facilities in the city must be designed to meet the criteria in the following table using the appropriate runoff calculation methods described in this section. Additional discussion of these criteria can be found in the following subsections and in Volume II, Section 3.1 of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Summary of the Statewide Stormwater Sizing Criteria for Stormwater Control and Mitigation 

 
Notes: Source: Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume II, p. 1.3-1. 
(b)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the department of public works are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Stream channel protection. 
(1)  Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three (3) approaches: 
(2)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(3)  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
(4)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(d)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(e)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(f)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the Department of Public Works before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, Public Works may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(g)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required. The applicant may, if approved by the director of public works, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Sec. 9-13-12-20. - Stormwater runoff computation. 
Computations for rate of runoff shall be based on the average rainfall intensity and duration for Roswell, Georgia for the available period of record as tabulated in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM), Volume II, Appendix A. Computing runoff and generating hydrographs must be done by one of the methods outlined in the GSMM. The table below summarizes the hydrologic calculation methods that will be accepted by the director of public works and the section reference from the GSMM that explains each. The table also provides guidelines for using the appropriate method based on the size of the drainage area. Additional information relating to the design of conveyance structures can be found in Section 4.1 of the GSMM. As noted, the rational formula can only be used to design conveyance systems, one of the other methods listed must be used for designing the stormwater detention facilities. 
Methods for Stormwater Runoff Computation 

 
Source: Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume II, p. 3.1-2. 
Sec. 9-13-12-21. - Water quality performance criteria. 
Total suspended solids (TSS) are a key pollutant associated with sediment runoff. It also serves as a "carrier" of other pollutants such as organics, nutrients, and metals. Thus, TSS, a measure of suspended matter-including soils and sediments, will serve as the watershed improvement guideline for managing pollutants. 
(a)  Stormwater management systems (which can include both structural stormwater controls and better site design practices) must be designed to remove eighty (80) percent of the average annual post-development TSS load and be able to meet any other additional watershed- or site-specific water quality requirements. All stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to control the peak flow rates associated with storms having one-, 25- and 100-year storm frequencies as specified in the table above. 
(b)  Use of the stormwater quality site development review tool, described in this chapter, provides the developer and reviewer with a summary of the TSS reduction from each of the drainage areas and also presents the overall TSS reduction efficiency of the planned site. Please note that if this overall efficiency is less than eighty (80) percent, then the site will fail to meet the recommendations of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and will not be approved. 
Sec. 9-13-12-22. - Storm drain pipe design. 
Piped drainage structures shall be designed to meet the following criteria: 
(a)  Street catch basins, inlets, cross drains serving basins of twenty (20) acres or less and longitudinal piping shall be designed for the 25-year storm, shall have a minimum slope of one percent, and shall have a minimum size of eighteen (18) inches in diameter. 
(b)  Inlet and outlet headwalls are required for all pipes. 
(c)  The 100-year storm frequency shall be used on live streams, cross drains serving basins of twenty (20) acres or larger and any other drainage system receiving and/or transferring offsite drainage flow. 
(d)  Velocities for all pipes should be kept to a minimum of two (2) feet per second and outlet velocities, if practical, shall not exceed four (4) feet per second when flowing full. However, if outlet velocities exceed (5) feet per second then energy dissipation devices and/or channel protection must be provided. 
(e)  The downstream end of all storm drain pipe shall be located at a minimum of fifty (50) feet past the building line for pipe sizes up to and including thirty-six (36) inches in diameter, unless the storm drainage is on a live stream. 
(f)  For all pipe design, the designer shall check the 100-year hydraulic grade line to determine that no inlet structures are flooded and that the collection capacity of any structure has not been compromised by the 100-year ultimate hydraulic grade line. 
(g)  Storm drain pipes shall be constructed of class III reinforced concrete, thermoplastic corrugated-smooth lined (HDPE), or aluminized type II corrugated culvert, as determined by the public works director. Pipe materials, related connections, and fittings shall meet the following requirements and specifications noted below. 
Sec. 9-13-12-23. - Pipe references and requirements. 
Pipe references and requirements are as follows: 
(a)  Reinforced concrete: AASHTO M170, ASTM C-969, minimum eight-foot joint lengths, bell and spigot with rubber O-ring gasket conforming to ASTM C-361, class of pipe and wall thickness shall be in accordance with 1030D, Georgia GDOT specifications, Table 1. 
(b)  Aluminized type II corrugated culvert: AASHTO M36, AASHTO M274, AASHTO M196, ASTM C-969, ASTM B74512 gauge minimum. 
(c)  High density polyethylene: AASHTO M294 Type "S", AASHTO MP7 and type "S", ASTM D-3212, ASTM F-1417, ASTM F-477, ASTM C-969, and shall be certified through the Plastic Pipe Institute Third Party Certification. 
(d)  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC): AASHTO M304, ASTM D-3212, ASTM F-1417, ASTM F-477, ASTM C-969, ASTM F949, ASTM F794 and F949, and shall be certified through the Plastic Pipe Institute Third Party Certification. 
(e)  Thermoplastic pipes: All thermoplastic pipes shall have a full circular cross section with an outer corrugated pipe wall and smooth inner wall. Deflection under loads that contributes to local buckling shall not be decreased by more than five (5) percent (AASHTO M294 and MP7 Sec. 7.4) when tested in accordance with ASTM D-2412. The structural design of thermoplastic pipes shall be in accordance with AASHTO Section 12 titled "Buried Structures and Tunnel Liners." 
Sec. 9-13-12-24. - Pipe installation specifications. 
Pipe installation specifications are as follows: 
(a)  Foundation and bedding. Unsuitable or unstable foundations shall be undercut and replaced with suitable material. A four-inch to six-inch bedding of class I or II shall be placed and compacted to a minimum of ninety (90) percent standard proctor density and as per AASHTO T99, AASHTO M145. Haunching materials shall be class I, II, or III and shall be worked under the haunches by hand compaction in eight-inch maximum lifts to ninety (90) percent standard proctor density. All materials and installation (compaction and bedding) shall meet AASHTO Section 30, AASHTO Section 12, ASTM 2321 and manufacturer's latest specifications. Pipes shall be installed in a dry trench. 
(b)  Initial backfill. Shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M145, AASHTO Section 12 and shall be one and twenty-four one-hundredths (1.24) inches maximum granular size and minimum compaction of ninety (90) percent standard proctor density as per AASHTO T99. 
(c)  Water tight. All joints and connections to drainage structures shall be watertight per ASTM F-1417, inspected and approved by director of public works before backfilling. 
(d)  Street crossings. Thermoplastic corrugated-smooth lined pipe may only be installed in street cross drains where the street is classified as a local road, serves twenty-five (25) or fewer lots, and shall be approved by the director of public works. 
(e)  Live streams. Stormwater pipes carrying live streams shall be reinforced concrete or thermoplastic pipe and shall be approved by the director of public works. 
(f)  Construction. Any storm drainage pipe dedicated to the city shall be constructed using reinforced concrete pipe or thermoplastic pipe. 
(g)  Easement. Any storm drainage pipe dedicated to the city that extends outside of the street right-of-way shall be located within a 30-foot wide easement. 
(h)  Depth. All storm drainage pipes shall be at least eighteen (18) inches below the surface and shall have a slope of at least one percent. 
(i)  Connection to public system. Development storm drain outlet systems shall connect to a public stormwater conveyance system or to a free-flowing stream, assuming that the post-development stormwater requirements in this section are met. The developer shall be required to provide evidence of acceptable capacity to receive additional flow. 
(j)  Structures. Under no circumstances shall structures be constructed over an existing or proposed storm drain, whether public or private. 
(k)  Location. All pipes shall be laid in a straight line between structures and longitudinal outside street pavement within the right-of-way or outside right-of-way in dedicated easements. Pipes and fittings will be installed in strict accordance with AASHTO Section 30 and AASHTO Section 12. 
(l)  Junction boxes. Junction boxes shall be installed where the storm drain changes direction and where one pipe or more intersect. Minimum cover will be eighteen (18) inches from finished street elevation to top of pipe. 
Sec. 9-13-12-25. - Headwalls. 
(a)  Headwalls or flared end sections with concrete collars are required at the inlet and outlet on all street cross drains and storm drain pipes. 
(b)  Headwalls are to be precast concrete, stone masonry with reinforced concrete footings, or poured-in-place, reinforced concrete with reinforced concrete footings. 
(c)  Flared end sections shall be constructed of the same material as the drainage pipe to which they are being connected. 
(d)  High water elevation contour is to be based on a 25-year storm at the entrance of each head wall. 
(e)  Energy dissipation devices, such as splash pads, riprap, stilling basins, etc., shall be provided at the outlet of every street cross drain and storm drain pipe. 
Sec. 9-13-12-26. - Open channels. 
(a)  All storm water channels shall be designed to carry at least the 25-year frequency storm with one foot of freeboard. 
(b)  Velocity at design flow shall be not less than six (6) inches per second but not greater than four (4) feet per second. A higher velocity may be allowed if actions are taken that would avoid erosion or scouring of the channel. 
(c)  All storm water channels must be designed to convey flows that prevent dwelling flooding, property damage, or public access and/or utility interruption. 
(d)  The director of public works may determine that the expected long-term maintenance of a surface drainage system could prove impractical, and a storm water pipe collection system may be required. 
(e)  Any storm drainage channel that extends outside of the street right-of-way shall be located within a 30-foot wide easement. 
(f)  In cases in which a subdivision or development is traversed by a stream, there shall be provided an easement extending fifteen (15) feet from the top of each side of the stream bank. 
(g)  All drainage easements, natural ditches, and drainage areas shall be grassed and/or rip-rapped as necessary to control erosion. 
(h)  Cross drains under driveways shall meet the standards for street cross drains. 
Sec. 9-13-12-27. - General stormwater design criteria. 
(a)  The director of public works may permit several developers to construct joint facilities. The public works department shall approve or disapprove the waiver of on-site drainage or detention facilities on the basis of the engineering feasibility of a combined facility. 
(b)  The director of public works shall be authorized to approve of alternative methods of stormwater detention based on appropriate engineering studies that do demonstrate equal or better performance in accordance with city storm water management practices. Approved alternatives may include well maintained and landscaped lakes that may be provided to act jointly as detention reservoirs and recreation facilities or aesthetic focal points within forest preserve areas, city or private parks, housing developments, shopping centers, and industrial parks. Other control methods to regulate the rate of stormwater discharge which may be acceptable include, but not [to] be limited to, detention on flat roofs, parking lots, streets, lawns, underground storage, and oversized storm drains with restricted outlets. 
(c)  Detention facilities and drainage structures shall, where possible, use natural topography and natural vegetation. In lieu thereof these shall have planted trees and vegetation such as shrubs and permanent ground cover on their borders. All on-site facilities shall be properly maintained by the owner in such a way that they do not become nuisances. Nuisance conditions shall include: improper storage resulting in uncontrolled runoff and overflow; stagnant water with algae growth, insect breeding, and odors; discarded debris; and safety hazards created by the facility's operation. Private facilities are the perpetual responsibility of the landowner. 
(d)  No portion of any detention facility shall be located in any required buffer, street right-of-way or within a flood hazard area. 
(e)  The 100-year ponding limits of a detention facility shall not encroach upon a public street. 
(f)  An easement at least twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be required to provide access to the detention facility from a street. 
(g)  Every detention facility shall be completely enclosed within a drainage easement. The drainage easement shall extend at least ten (10) feet beyond the ponding limits of the 100-year storm. 
(h)  Detention facilities shall be enclosed with a minimum four-foot high chain link fence and shall be equipped with a minimum four-foot wide access as necessary for maintenance. 
Sec. 9-13-12-28. - Timing of installation. 
Construction of the storm water system shall be initiated as part of the grading of the site. Storm water detention facilities shall be constructed prior to the installation of any other site improvements, and may be utilized under proper design as sedimentation basins during 
development. Installation of all other storm drainage pipes, culverts, headwalls, and ditches, shall be coordinated with the construction of streets and other site improvements, as appropriate. 
CHAPTER 9-13-13. - LAND DEVELOPMENT INSPECTION 

Sec. 9-13-13-1. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to inspections processes during the land development permitting process as specified in chapter 9-13-7. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, or contractor to proceed with land development activities except as inspected for compliance in accordance with this chapter. 
Sec. 9-13-13-2. - Owner's responsibilities. 
The owner shall be responsible for correcting any deficiencies identified by land development inspections prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
Sec. 9-13-13-3. - Request for inspection. 
Requests for land development inspections shall be made by the owner or contractor to the applicable department at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to when the inspection is needed. Inspections shall be made and passed prior to continuation of further activity or proceeding into new phases. 
Sec. 9-13-13-4. - Inspections required. 
Inspections are required of each of the following phases of the land development process, as applicable to the actual work to be performed under the development permit: 
(a)  Land disturbance/soil erosion inspection. Prior to clearing, grubbing and/or land disturbance of the property or any activity undertaken pursuant to an approved land development permit, erosion and sedimentation control measures and devices for protection of trees and undisturbed areas shall be inspected and approved. 
(b)  Street grade and sub-grade preparation. After completing street grading but prior to trenching or continuation with sub-grade preparation, inspection and approval shall be required. 
(c)  Storm drainage. Installation of storm drainage pipe, detention, or other stormwater facilities shall be inspected and approved. 
(d)  Sub-grade of streets. After compaction and receipt of test reports, the sub-grade may be roll-tested with an 18-ton tandem dump truck and shall pass to the satisfaction of the director of public works. 
(e)  Street curbing and gutter. Inspection shall be requested after the forms or string lines have been set. Street width and vertical and horizontal alignment may be spot checked. 
(f)  Street base. After receipt of test reports, the base may be string-lined for depth and crown. The street base may be roll-tested with an 18-ton tandem dump truck and shall pass to the satisfaction of the director of public works. 
(g)  Paving. A public works inspector shall be on site during the paving process to check consistency, depth, and workmanship, as applicable. For asphalt paving, the temperature of the material will be monitored and the street will be cored after completion to check thickness and density. Satisfactory test results of the cores shall be delivered to public works department prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or certificate of occupancy. 
(h)  Final. A final inspection of land development activity and improvements installed shall be required and approved by the public works department, following submission and review of the as-built surveys required by this chapter. 
Sec. 9-13-13-5. - As-built surveys required. 
Upon completion of land development activity or the installation of improvements as authorized by the land development permit and prior to final development inspection of public and private improvements, the owner shall submit record survey drawings showing "as-built" conditions of all public infrastructure improvements. The as-built survey drawings shall be certified and sealed by a registered land surveyor, subject to the tolerances of accuracy indicated in the survey certification. 
Sec. 9-13-13-6. - Specifications for as-built surveys. 
The as-built survey drawings shall show the location, vertical and horizontal alignment, and finished elevations of the following: 
(a)  Drainage system pipes and channels. 
(b)  Stormwater detention facilities. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer system. 
(d)  Public water system. 
(e)  Public streets, including street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
Sec. 9-13-13-7. - Process for approving as-built surveys. 
As-built survey drawings required by this chapter shall be submitted to the public works department in a number of sets as the department may require. The public works department will coordinate review and approval with the public utilities department. 
Sec. 9-13-13-8. - Final land development inspection. 
Following submission and review of the as-built surveys, the public works department shall conduct a final land development inspection of the project. The owner shall be responsible for correcting any deficiencies identified in the final development inspection prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
Sec. 9-13-13-9. - Maintenance bond required. 
Prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a maintenance bond in a form acceptable to the public works department shall be required for all public improvements shown on the as-built surveys required by this chapter. The owner and subdivider shall be responsible for maintenance of all such public improvements for twenty-four (24) months from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or final subdivision plat approval, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2009-38, § II, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 9-13-13-10. - Amount of maintenance bond. 
The value of the maintenance bond shall be equal to thirty (30) percent of the actual cost of construction of the public improvements shown on the as-built surveys or final plat if they are one hundred (100) percent complete. For those subdividers who choose to delay the wearing course of pavement and/or the sidewalk improvements, the value of the maintenance bond shall be equal to thirty (30) percent of the completed work and, in addition, the subdivider shall provide a performance bond as described in section 9-13-13-11. The cost of construction shall be evidenced by copies of contractor agreements or actual invoices paid, or as otherwise determined by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2009-38, § III, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 9-13-13-11. - Amount of performance bond. 
For those subdividers who choose to delay the wearing course of pavement and/or the sidewalk improvements, the value of the performance bond shall be equal to one hundred (100) percent of the value of the wearing course and/or the sidewalks, and any other incomplete work as allowed by the director of public works. The cost of construction shall be evidenced by copies of contractor agreements or actual invoices paid, or as otherwise determined by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2009-38, § IV, 10-20-09) 
CHAPTER 9-13-14. - FINAL PLATS 

Sec. 9-13-14-1. - Final plat approval required. 
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure compliance with the legal recording requirements of subdivisions and the proper installation of all required public or private improvements through the submittal of a final plat. 
Sec. 9-13-14-2. - Conformance with preliminary plat. 
The final subdivision plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary subdivision plat and may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary subdivision plat that the owner proposes to record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of this article and Code. 
Sec. 9-13-14-3. - Responsibilities. 
The property owner is responsible for compliance with all requirements of this article and Code. Approval of a final subdivision plat and acceptance of the public improvements and dedications therein shall not relieve the owner of that responsibility. 
Sec. 9-13-14-4. - Installation of improvements. 
Prior to submission of an application for final subdivision plat approval, all public and private improvements shall have been properly installed and completed in accordance with all requirements and standards of this article and Code (except traffic signs, street name signs, street striping, and signalization, the responsibility for which is with the city). 
Sec. 9-13-14-5. - Final plat specifications. 
A final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor. In addition, if the subdivision involves public dedications of improvements, the final plat shall be approved and stamped by a professional engineer. 
The final subdivision plat shall be drawn on an appropriate material and sheet size, and using minimum line weights and letter heights as required by state law for the recordation of maps and plats (O.C.G.A. 15-6-67, as amended), and as acceptable to the clerk of the superior court. 
The final plat shall meet the following specifications: 
(a)  All data required by state law pertaining to the recordation of maps and plats (O.C.G.A. 15-6-67, as amended). 
(b)  Name of the subdivision and street names. 
(c)  Name of the former subdivision if any or all of the property has been previously subdivided. 
(d)  Location map. 
(e)  Reference to north point (magnetic, true north, or grid north). 
(f)  Graphic scale. 
(g)  Total acreage of the property being subdivided. 
(h)  Names of owners of record of all abutting land and deed/plat book references. 
(i)  Lot lines with dimensions to the 1/10 -foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corner. 
(j)  Building setback lines (front, side, rear, and build-to lines) with dimensions as to length across each lot and distance from the street right-of-way. 
(k)  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
(l)  Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements, including slope easements, if required, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use. 
(1)  Utility easements. Whenever it is necessary or desirable to locate a public utility line outside of the street right-of-way, the line shall be located in an easement dedicated to the city for such purpose. The easement shall be no less than twenty (20) feet wide for water and thirty (30) feet wide for sewer, or as otherwise acceptable to the public utilities department. 
(2)  Water course and drainage easements. A publicly dedicated stormwater easement or drainage easement is to be provided along any drainage channel, stream or water impoundment within a development. The easement is to be substantially centered on the water course or surround the high water line of the impoundment. All easements shall be no less than twenty (20) feet wide or as otherwise acceptable to the city. 
(m)  The location and size of all utility lines. 
(n)  Designated tree save areas. 
(o)  A listing of the private covenants recorded with each lot or a statement of the location of such covenants, if applicable. 
(p)  The extent of any area of special flood hazard, as defined in this Unified Land Development Code, and any wetlands protection overlay zones/buffers and required stream buffers shall be delineated and labeled. 
(q)  Conditions of zoning, special use, or other approval by the city. 
(r)  Acreage to be dedicated to the public, or as privately maintained (common area, roads, etc.). 
(s)  A surveyor's certificate and owner's certificate, as provided in this paragraph. In addition, the original final subdivision plat drawing shall bear the original signature, in black ink, of the registered land surveyor placed across the surveyor's seal in order to be valid and recordable. 
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown thereon actually exist. 
The field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in _______ feet, and an angular error of _______ per angle point, and was adjusted using _______ rule. 
This plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in _______ feet. 
By (name): _____ 
Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No. _____ 
Address: _____ 
Telephone Number: _____ 
Date: _____ 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE 
State of Georgia 
County of Hall 
The undersigned certifies that he or she is the owner and subdivider of the land shown on this plat and that the plat and the public and private improvements contained therein or associated therewith meet all applicable requirements and standards of the Gainesville Unified Land Development Code. The owner further acknowledges this plat and allotment to be his free act and deed, and dedicates to the Public forever all areas shown or indicated on this plat as public streets, easements or other public use areas, and all water system, sewerage and other public improvements (hereinafter "facilities"). However, the City of Gainesville will not take ownership and maintenance of these facilities until such time as the undersigned petitions for and the Governing Body of the City of Gainesville accepts the dedication and acceptance of the facilities as provided in section 9-13-14-12 of the Gainesville Unified Land Development Code and provided a maintenance bond as required in sections 9-13-13-9 and 10. 
Owner's name: _____ 
Owner's address: _____ 
___________ Date ________  (Owner's signature) 
(t)  Plat recording and signature block for the Clerk of Superior Court. 
(Ord. No. 2009-38, § V, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 9-13-14-6. - Final plat application requirements. 
Applications for final plat approval shall include the following: 
(a)  Application form. A properly completed application form, as completed by the planning department, requesting review for project approval. The planning department may complete the application form for the applicant. 
(b)  Copies of plats. A set number, as fixed from time to time by the director of planning and development, of copies of the final subdivision plat meeting final plat specifications of this chapter. 
(c)  Fees. Payment of all applicable application and review fees, as established by the governing body from time to time. 
(d)  Payment for materials and installations. Payment to the city for materials and installation of traffic signs and street name signs. Payment of the cost of street striping or signalization, if required and not completed by the owner, shall also be included in the application. 
(e)  Financial guarantee of improvements. A maintenance bond, providing for the maintenance of all facilities required by this article and Code in the subdivision, shall be submitted which shall be valid for a period of twenty-four (24) months following the date of approval of the final plat. If approved by the director of public works, an alternative financial guarantee of improvements may be accepted, such as one of the following: 
(1)  An escrow of funds with the city. 
(2)  An escrow upon which the city can draw with a bank or financial institution in good standing authorized to do business in the state. 
(3)  An irrevocable letter of commitment or credit, from a bank in good standing authorized to do business in the state, upon which the city can draw. 
(4)  A performance bond for the benefit of the city upon which the city can collect. 
(5)  A certificate of deposit with assignment letter from the subdivider and a bank in good standing authorized to do business in the state. 
(Ord. No. 2009-38, § VI, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 9-13-14-7. - Review and approval process. 
The director of planning and development is responsible for administering the review and approval process for final subdivision plats, which shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. The procedures of this section may be supplemented by the director of planning and development where additional specification is required. 
(a)  Review for completeness and application acceptance. The planning department shall review the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
(b)  Distribution and agency review of final plat. The planning department shall forward a copy of the final plat application to other city departments as may be appropriate, the state department of transportation if the proposed subdivision has frontage on or access to a state or federal road, or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. Agency review shall specifically include the approval from the Hall County Environmental Health Department if septic tanks are proposed and the city public utilities department in cases where connection to city utilities is proposed or required. 
(c)  Time period for completion of review. Within two (2) to three (3) weeks following receipt of the application, during which agency review shall be completed, the planning department shall collect all written comments or comments marked on plats related to compliance with this article and Code, and shall submit them to the applicant (not necessarily in consolidated form). The director of planning and development shall have sole authority to determine the applicability of any provisions of this Code to the final plat. 
(d)  Action. When the planning department has determined that the final subdivision plat is in compliance with the requirements, purpose and intent of this article and Code, it shall be approved. The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments. If revisions to a final plat are required, the applicant shall resubmit all revised drawings to the director of planning development or designee. 
Sec. 9-13-14-8. - Certificate of final plat approval. 
When all of the requirements of this article Code, and any conditions of zoning or historic preservation approval, have been met, the director of planning and development or designee shall sign and date the certificate of final plat approval stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the final subdivision plat. The executed original of the approved drawing shall be transmitted to the applicant and the planning department shall retain the reproducible copy. 
Sec. 9-13-14-9. - Recording of final plat. 
Once the final subdivision plat has received approval as evidenced by the certificate of final plat approval, it shall be recorded by the applicant with the clerk of the superior court. The applicant shall provide the planning department with one reproducible of said recorded final subdivision plat. Recordation of a final plat constitutes approval to begin the sale or transfer of subdivision lots. After recording, the reproducible copy may omit the stamp and seal of the registered land surveyor or the professional engineer, or both, upon request. 
Sec. 9-13-14-10. - Distribution of recorded final plat. 
The final plat is a source of essential information to tax officials, public safety officials, and utility officials, among others. The director of planning and development or designee shall be responsible for ensuring that each applicable agency listed in this section receives a copy of the final recorded plat with addresses assigned by the addressing department, unless that function is done by another city department: 
(1)  The Hall County tax commissioner. 
(2)  The Hall County tax assessor. 
(3)  The Hall County environmental health department. 
(4)  The city police department. 
(5)  The city fire department. 
(6)  The city building inspector. 
(7)  The city public works director. 
(8)  The city public utilities director. 
(9)  The Unites States Postal Service (local postmaster). 
At the discretion of the director of planning and development, additional agencies or persons may be added to the above list. 
Sec. 9-13-14-11. - Amendments to final plat approval. 
The application requirements and procedures for amending final plats shall be the same as for preliminary plat applications. 
Sec. 9-13-14-12. - Dedication of public streets and acceptance of public improvements. 
(a)  Petition for public acceptance. At any date after twelve (12) months has passed since the date of final plat approval, the subdivider may petition in writing to the director of public works for the governing body to accept public streets and other dedications, in whole or in part, within the subdivision. Said improvements shall not be accepted for maintenance until approved by the governing body. 
(b)  Completion of improvements. If construction of any required public improvements was authorized by the director of public works to be deferred at the time of final plat approval, said work shall have been completed during the one-year maintenance period for the subdivision. 
(c)  Final inspection. The public works department shall conduct a final acceptance inspection of the public improvements and facilities within thirty (30) days of receipt of the letter requesting acceptance. 
(d)  Correction of deficiencies. The owner shall correct all defects or deficiencies in materials or workmanship and make such repairs as necessary to approximate the as-built condition of the improvements. 
(e)  Public acceptance. Upon certification by the public works director that the public improvements and facilities depicted on the as-built surveys are in conformance with the specifications of this article and the Code and are in good repair, the governing body shall determine whether to accept the public improvements and facilities into perpetual maintenance by the city. 
(f)  Warranty deed. Subdivision streets and rights-of-way and other lands and facilities to be dedicated to the public shall be accepted by the city only upon the delivery to the governing body of a general warranty deed conveying fee simple title of such rights-of-way and lands. The warranty deed shall be accompanied by a certificate of title and a tax transfer form addressed to the governing body, certifying that the grantor in such deed is vested with marketable fee simple title to the property conveyed thereby, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, and further that the individual executing such deed has full authority to do so. 
(g)  Release of bond. Upon certification by the public works director that the public improvements and facilities depicted on the final plat are in conformance with the specifications of this article and the Code and are in good repair, and at any date after twenty-four (24) months has passed since the date of final plat approval, the governing body may release the maintenance bond. 
(Ord. No. 2009-38, § VII, 10-20-09) 
CHAPTER 9-13-15. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 9-13-15-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of conservation subdivisions is to provide flexibility of design in order to promote sustainable development of land in portions of the city already zoned for residential use. It permits the clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive lands which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. Appropriate use of conservation subdivisions can also: 
(a)  Provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure; 
(b)  Preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat; and 
(c)  Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
Sec. 9-13-15-2. - Applicability. 
This conservation subdivision option is available in the residential zoning districts as a use by right. The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of this Code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
Sec. 9-13-15-3. - Housing density determination. 
The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two (2) methods, at the discretion of the director of planning and development: 
(a)  Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
(1)  Slopes over twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
(2)  The 100-year administrative floodplain; 
(3)  Bodies of open water over five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
(4)  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
(5)  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
(b)  Yield plan. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
Sec. 9-13-15-4. - Standards to determine open space. 
(a)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least forty (40) percent of the gross tract area. 
(b)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this chapter: 
(1)  The administrative 100-year floodplain; 
(2)  A total buffer protection zone of at least seventy-five (75) feet in width along all streams which includes a 50-foot stream protection buffer and a 25-foot stream buffer setback; 
(3)  Slopes above twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
(4)  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
(5)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(c)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible. 
(1)  Important historic sites; 
(2)  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
(3)  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight (8) inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
(4)  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
(5)  Prime agricultural lands of at least five (5) acres contiguous area; and 
(6)  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(d)  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the forty (40) percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(e)  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
(f)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
Sec. 9-13-15-5. - Permitted uses of open space. 
Uses of open space may include the following: 
(a)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(b)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(c)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(d)  Passive recreation areas; 
(e)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten (10) percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(f)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(g)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(h)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(i)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this Code. 
Sec. 9-13-15-6. - Prohibited uses of open space. 
Uses of open space shall not include the following: 
(a)  Golf courses; 
(b)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(c)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
(d)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
Sec. 9-13-15-7. - Ownership and management of open space. 
(a)  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(b)  Maintenance of open space. In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, city may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowner's association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowner's association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. Should the homeowner's association go defunct responsibility falls to the actual homeowners. 
Sec. 9-13-15-8. - Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
(a)  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either a land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or a governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this chapter. If the entity accepting the easement is not the city, then a third right of enforcement favoring the city shall be included in the easement; 
(b)  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
(c)  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the city. 
The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this chapter, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
Sec. 9-13-15-9. - Conservation subdivision application requirements. 
(a)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall included the following features: 
(1)  Property boundaries; 
(2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
(4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in this chapter; 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics; 
(6)  General soil types; 
(7)  The planned location of protected open space; 
(8)  Existing roads and structures; and 
(9)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(b)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in this chapter, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land development permit. 
(1)  Allocate responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
(2)  Estimate the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outline the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
(3)  Provide that any changes to the plan be approved by the city council; and 
(4)  Provide for enforcement of the plan. 
(c)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, as described by this chapter, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(d)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning. 
(Ord. No. 2006-39, § I, 8-15-06) 
CHAPTER 9-13-16. - CORRIDOR MAP 

Sec. 9-13-16-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purposes of a corridor map are to implement the city's comprehensive plan, especially transportation and thoroughfare plans, by reserving land needed for future transportation facilities designated by a plan. The corridor map is intended to provide a basis for coordinating the provision of transportation facilities with new development by designating corridors where the construction and improvement of transportation facilities is expected, to restrict the construction or expansion of permanent structures in the intended right-of-way of planned transportation facilities as indicated on a corridor map, and to protect the rights of landowners whose land is reserved on a corridor map. 
Sec. 9-13-16-2. - Definitions. 
Corridor map: A map adopted by a governing body which designates land to be reserved for the construction of future or improvement of existing transportation or linear park and recreation facilities (e.g., greenways). The corridor map establishes the width and termini of corridors as necessary to allow flexibility in planning the design of a transportation facility or linear park and recreation facility. 
Reserved land: Land shown on the corridor map as reserved for future public use. 
Transportation facilities: Streets, highways, bikeways, sidewalks, and trails. 
Sec. 9-13-16-3. - Findings and corridor map adoption. 
The governing body reserves the right to adopt, after public hearing, a corridor map that is consistent in all respects with the comprehensive plan or plans of participating municipalities. Prior to adoption of a corridor map, the following actions shall be taken to ensure procedural due process: 
(a)  Prior to public hearing, if the proposed corridor map includes land intended for transportation facilities to be constructed or improved by the city, a copy of the proposed corridor map shall be submitted to the chief executive officer of the city who shall be allowed thirty (30) days to indicate in writing any reserved land for transportation facilities for which they are responsible that they want removed from the corridor map, in which case such reserved land shall be removed from the corridor map. 
(b)  At least fifteen (15) days before the public hearing, the director of planning and development shall notify the public of the date, time, place, and nature of the public hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the territory of the city. 
(c)  The director of planning and development shall notify all owners of parcels of land that include proposed reserved land of the date, time, place, and nature of the public hearing by mail at least fifteen (15) days before the public hearing. 
(d)  The governing body shall hold a public hearing(s) at the date, time, and place advertised, and afford all interested individuals the opportunity to be heard concerning the proposed corridor map. 
Sec. 9-13-16-4. - General provisions. 
The director of planning and development shall not issue any permit pertaining to zoning or land development on land regulated by this chapter except pursuant to the procedures and in compliance with this chapter. This chapter does not forbid or restrict the use of any reserved land that does not constitute the development of that land, nor does this chapter forbid or restrict development on the unreserved portion of any reserved land. 
Sec. 9-13-16-5. - Land development permit required to develop reserved land. 
An owner of reserved land who proposes to develop reserved land shall apply to planning department for a land development permit. It shall be unlawful to carry out development upon land shown as reserved on the corridor map without securing a development permit as required by this Code. 
Sec. 9-13-16-6. - Public hearing and notice on development permit. 
Upon receiving an application for a land development permit involving reserved land as shown on an adopted corridor map, the director of planning and development shall arrange for the application to be scheduled for public hearing before the governing body. The applicant (and the governmental unit, if land is reserved for a public use by a governmental unit other than the local government) shall be notified in writing of the date, time, and place of the hearing, by written mail, personal service, or facsimile, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. The public shall be given notice of the date, time, place, and nature of the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. The applicant shall, at the hearing, have an opportunity, personally or through counsel, to present evidence and argument in support of his or her application, as shall any governmental unit or interested individual that has an interest in the application. 
Sec. 9-13-16-7. - Action. 
Following the public hearing, the governing body may take one of the following actions: 
(a)  Approve the land development permit as proposed, with or without conditions, modify the mapped corridor to remove all or part of the reserved land from the mapped corridor, and issue with or without conditions the land development permit authorizing development on the land removed from the mapped corridor. 
(b)  Modify the proposed land development permit application and issue it for development as modified, with or without conditions, if the development can reasonably be accomplished on the subject parcel without encroaching on the reserved land. 
(c)  Delay action on the development permit for a defined period of time not to exceed three (3) months for the purpose of any of the following: negotiating with the property owner for the purchase of all or a part of the reserved land by the governmental agency responsible for the transportation facilities; acquiring the reserved land voluntarily; acquiring an easement over the reserved land that prevents the property owner from building on the reserved land; taking the reserved land through eminent domain and the payment of just compensation. 
Sec. 9-13-16-8. - Authority to acquire reserved land for public use. 
After consideration of the development permit by the governing body, the governing body or other governmental unit responsible for the transportation facilities may, but shall not be obligated to, negotiate for the voluntary dedication of the land, enter into option to purchase, or it may initiate condemnation proceedings subject to applicable state laws and use its powers of eminent domain. 
Sec. 9-13-16-9. - Final action on the land development permit. 
If the governing body delays action on the development permit as provided by this chapter and the governmental agency responsible for transportation facilities on the reserved land fails to arrange for the legal acquisition of all or a part of the reserved land within the specified time period which shall not exceed three (3) months, then the governing body shall approve the land development permit, with or without conditions, or in the absence of such approval, the land development permit shall be deemed approved as submitted. 
Article 9-14 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, adopted Oct. 16, 2018, amended article 9-14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article 9-14, chapters 9-14-1—9-14-4, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2010-17, §§ II—XXIV, adopted June 22, 2010; and Ord. No. 2013-25, § I, adopted Dec. 17, 2013. 

CHAPTER 9-14-1. - DEFINITIONS 
As-built survey drawings: Drawings specifying the dimensions, location, capacities, and operational capabilities of structures and facilities as they have been constructed. 
Available head: The depth of water that is present at the entrance to a pipe during a 100-year storm. 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, a copy of which is on file in the clerk of the city. 
Board: Board of Natural Resources. 
Bond: A bond, letter of credit or approved surety method approved by the city manager. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
City: The City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
Construction: Any building or erection of a structure or preparation of a property for same. 
CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Cutting: The removal of any soil or other solid material from a natural ground surface. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design head: The depth of water at the entrance to a pipe that was used in design to force a rate of flow through the pipe needed in the design. 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying, or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professional shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Detention facility: A detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Development: 
(1)  A land development project involving the construction of streets, utilities, buildings, or other improvements required for the habitation or use of property, such as a residential neighborhood, an apartment complex, a store, or a shopping center; 
(2)  Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials; 
(3)  The act of constructing or carrying out a land development project, including the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
District: The Hall County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage: A general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping; most commonly applied to surface water. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Drainage system: The surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams, marshes, swales and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the man-made element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, detention facilities and the storm sewer system. 
Elevation: The vertical height or heights above a datum plane which for purposes of this chapter shall be the mean sea level datum of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey of 1929 or other customarily accepted source. 
EPD: The environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
EPD director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, as amended, that includes minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 9-14-3-3 of this article. 
Excavation: The mechanical removal of earth material. 
Extended detention: The detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater. 
Facility/site outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground or an excavation. 
Filling: The placement of any soil or other solid material, either organic or inorganic, on a natural ground surface or excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Grading permit: Authorization necessary but limited to the initiation and conduct of a land-disturbing activity on a property. For purposes of this Code, a land development permit issued pursuant to chapter 9-13-7 shall constitute approval of the grading permit required by this article. 
Greenway: An area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG): A natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four (4) runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Land development: Any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development or disturbance activity: Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance: Any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development permit: The authorization necessary to carry out the planned development of land and structures, which may include authorization to initiate and conduct a land-disturbing activity. The land development permit is issued pursuant to chapter 9-13-7. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in this chapter. 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Live detention: The quantity of water capable of being effectively contained by a stormwater detention facility for a specified period of time. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et. seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia: A publication of the same name published by the state soil and water conservation commission, and as amended or supplemented from time to time, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the city. 
Natural drainage: Channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
One-hundred-year flood: A 100-year frequency flood that has the probability of occurring once every one hundred (100) years and thus has a one (1) percent chance of occurring each year. 
One-hundred-year flood plain: A land area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse or lake that has a probability of being flooded up to and including the 100-year flood. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into the receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Qualified personnel: Any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, as amended. 
Reach: A longitudinal segment of a stream or river measured along specified points on the stream or river. 
Riparian: Belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled way consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Runoff: The portion of precipitation on the land that reaches the drainage system. 
Runoff rate coefficient: The numerical factor which, when multiplied with the average slope for a particular site, will give the release rate of water from that site. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Slope: The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion and sediment control plan approved in writing by the Hall County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Soils: The upper layer of earth that can be dug or plowed; the loose surface material of the earth in which vegetation normally grows. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm-water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, as amended. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Static head: The depth of water at the entrance to a culvert when the depth is greater than the diameter of the pipe. 
Stream: A stream is defined as beginning at: 
(a)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; 
(b)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of twenty-five (25) acres or more; or 
(c)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than twenty-five (25) acres, the director of planning and development may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank: The sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream protection buffer setback: An additional setback, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed stream protection buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
Stream channel: The portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Stream protection buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, as measured horizontally, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Stream protection area or protection area: The combined areas of all required stream protection buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Structural erosion sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sedimentation control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Ten-year, 25-year and 100-year storms: Rainfall events having a probability of occurrence once every ten (10), twenty-five (25) or one hundred (100) years, respectively, or a ten (10) percent, four (4) percent or one (1) percent chance of occurring each year, respectively. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, as amended, in the Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov , as amended. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Utilities: All public and private, above or below ground, infrastructure systems providing water, stormwater, sewer, gas, telephone or cable television, and any other service controlled by the state public services commission. 
Vegetation: All plant growth, such as trees, shrubs, mosses and grasses. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(a)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(b)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(c)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
CHAPTER 9-14-2. - EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 9-14-2-1. - Generally. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for those uses specifically identified in this chapter. 
Where this chapter requires compliance with chapter 9-14-3, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a land development permit had been issued and any violations of said minimum requirements shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by land development permit holders. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-2-2. - Mining and quarrying. 
Surface mining, as same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, as amended, entitled "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968," and granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying are exempt from compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-2-3. - Minor activities. 
Minor land-disturbing activities, such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work fences, and other related activities, which result in minor soil erosion are exempt from compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-2-4. - Single-family detached dwellings. 
The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6, as amended, and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a stream protection buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, as amended. In any such stream protection buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the stream protection buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller stream protection buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the stream protection buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the EPD director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the stream protection buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller stream protection buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6, as amended, and the stream protection buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-2-5. - Agriculture. 
Exempt from the requirements of this article are those agricultural operations defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, as amended, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting, or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chicken, hens, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products and farm buildings and farm ponds. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-2-6. - Forestry land management practices. 
Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a stream protection buffer, as established in section 9-14-3-3, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-2-7. - NRCS projects. 
Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service of the United States Department of Agriculture shall be exempt from compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-2-8. - Small projects. 
Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further that nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-2-9. - State projects and state/local road projects. 
Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the state department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1, as amended; except where the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the city, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6, as amended, as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-2-10. - Electric and public utilities. 
Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, as amended, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A § 36-18-1, as amended, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6, as amended, as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
CHAPTER 9-14-3. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 9-14-3-1. - General provisions. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by chapter 9-14-2 shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sediment control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of this chapter. 
The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-3-2. - Minimum requirements/best management practices. 
(a)  Required. Best management practices as set forth in this section and sec. 9-14-3-3 shall be required for all land-disturbing activities unless specifically exempted by chapter 9-14-2. 
(b)  Defense to enforcement action. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the EPD director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a land development permit for the discharge of stormwater. Issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, as amended, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this section, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 subsection (b), as amended. 
(d)  Violations. A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, as amended, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the EPD director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(e)  Inadequate best management practices. Failure to properly design, install or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code section 12-5-30, as amended, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(f)  Requirements by EPD director. The EPD director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board of natural resources, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-3-3. - Additional minimum requirements. 
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., as amended, for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, and best management practices, including soil conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(a)  Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(b)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(c)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential. 
(d)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
(e)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(f)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(g)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(h)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(i)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., as amended. 
(j)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills. 
(k)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(l)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(m)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(n)  No public streets, drainage systems or private property shall be restricted from normal use or operation by the scattering of earth, rock, vegetation and other debris resulting from the land disturbing activity. The permittee shall be responsible for clearing, unclogging and cleaning any such facility or lands on a daily basis. 
(o)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in this section. 
(p)  Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within the 100-year flood plain except in compliance with article 9-15. 
(q)  Construction site operators are required to control waste at the construction site, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-3-4. - Stream protection buffers. 
Except as provided in section 9-14-3-5, there is established a 25-foot stream protection buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal streams flow or wave action, except where the EPD director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the EPD director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 as amended, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specification, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in the provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the stream protection buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," as amended, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the EPD director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such stream protection buffer: 
(a)  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a stream protection buffer and a stream protection buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a stream protection buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a stream protection buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(b)  The stream protection buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities provided that they occur at an angle, as measured form the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the stream protection buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-3-5. - Stream protection buffers along trout streams. 
There is established a 50-foot stream protection buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, as amended, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot stream protection buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the stream protection buffer requirements for any adjacent trout streams. The EPD director may grant a variance from such stream protection buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such stream protection buffer: 
(a)  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a stream protection buffer and a stream protection buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a stream protection buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a stream protection buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(b)  The stream protection buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities provided that they occur at an angle, as measured form the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the stream protection buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-3-6. - Provisions regarding land disturbance activity and the disturbance of stream protection buffers. 
This section shall not be construed as preventing the application of other requirements of this Code which require larger buffers along property lines than specified in this article (see Table 9-5-2 and Table 9-6-2, which may apply). Furthermore, nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., as amended, shall prevent the city from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream protection buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in this article. 
See chapter 9-16-3 for provisions regarding disturbance within stream protection buffers. 
The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-3-7. - Maintenance of control measures. 
Owner's responsibility. Maintenance of all soil erosion and sediment control measures, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-3-8. - Manual adopted by reference. 
Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
CHAPTER 9-14-4. - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-14-4-1. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal, the general development plans. The city shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. The staff of the city shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood management ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of NOI submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by seven (7) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee there of visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10, as amended. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, as amended, provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. Half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17, as amended, shall be submitted in full to the division. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the city shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the city. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by this article have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required, has been obtained. Such review will not be required if the city and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The city with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the city with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the city may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The city may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the city with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in this article, or through the use of more stringent alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20, as amended. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans shall include: 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information. Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact that is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sediment control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, calculations including off-site drainage areas and other information as may be needed to satisfy the requirements of articles 9-13 and 9-14. 
h.  Location of erosion and sediment control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6, and meeting the requirements of article 9-14. Practices may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Construction exit. 
2.  Sediment barrier. 
3.  Sediment basin. 
4.  Grassed waterway (open swale). 
5.  Storm drain outlet protection. 
6.  A plan for temporary and permanent vegetative and structural erosion and sediment control measures. 
i.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
j.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
k.  Maintenance statement. "Erosion and sediment control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sediment control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection." 
l.  A description of the sediment control program and sediment control practices. 
m.  An adequate description of general topographic and soil conditions of the tract as available from the Hall County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
n.  A description of the maintenance program for sediment control facilities including inspection programs, vegetative establishment of exposed soils, method and frequency of removal and disposal of solid waste material removed from control facilities and disposition of temporary structural measures. 
o.  Any additional requirement established by the commission. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the city of a completed application as well as all required approved plans and reports, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the city unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the city has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by this article are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by the city shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the city. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or that person's successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to that person as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The city may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-4-2. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the city shall regulate primary, secondary, and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the necessary measures to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, that person shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-4-3. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the city. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the EPD director or the city shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the EPD director or the city shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the EPD director or the city shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the EPD director or the city shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream protection buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by city or by the EPD director, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the city or by the EPD director. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth necessary measures to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, may be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control, if required to post one. The city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  [Violations.] Any person who violates any provision of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the city or the EPD director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter or ordinance to the contrary, the municipal court of the city shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations, each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-4-4. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20, as amended. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, as amended, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A § 12-7-19, as amended, and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-4-5. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the city upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the administrative hearing officer within thirty (30) days after receipt by the city of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Hall County. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 9-14-4-6. - Validity and liability. 
(a)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder, as amended, or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24, § I, 10-16-18) 
Article 9-15 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, adopted November 20, 2007, amended article 9-15 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article 9-15 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2006-40, § I, adopted September 19, 2006. 

CHAPTER 9-15-1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-15-1-1. - Findings of fact. 
The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed green space areas. 
Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to private property; 
(3)  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
These flood losses are increased by the cumulative effect of obstructions in flood pains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-1-2. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(a)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(b)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(c)  Control the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(d)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; 
(e)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood-waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(f)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-1-3. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this section are to: 
(a)  Protect human life and health; 
(b)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(c)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(d)  Minimize prolonged business interruption; 
(e)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located in flood plains; 
(f)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
(g)  Insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-1-4. - Definitions. 
Addition (to an existing building): Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter, load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Appeal: A request for a review of the director of public work's interpretation of any provision of this article by the planning and appeals board. 
Area of shallow flooding: A designated AO or AH zone on the city's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three (3) feet and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard: The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all flood plain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all flood plain and flood prone areas at or below the future conditions flood elevation, and all other flood prone areas as referenced in section 9-15-1-6. All streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation: The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway or shear wall: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
Building: Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosed for any occupancy or storage. 
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear or breakaway walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction: Any structure for which the start of construction commenced before December 17, 1974. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 17, 1974. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA: The Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)  Overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS): The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway: The channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement, i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Functionally dependent facility: A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term "functionally dependent facility" does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Future conditions flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future conditions hydrology. 
Future conditions flood elevation: The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the future conditions flood. 
Future conditions floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding by the future conditions flood. 
Future conditions hydrology: The flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
Historic structure: Any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: by an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home: A building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the flood plain or for airport zone elevations. For purposes of this section, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD): As corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the flood plain. 
New construction: Any structure for which the start of construction commenced after December 17, 1974. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 17, 1974. 
North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988: A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the flood plain. 
Owner: The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit: The permit issued by the director of planning and development to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Recreational vehicle: A vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss: Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals, or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site: The parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Start of construction: The initiation of new construction or a substantial improvement, as follows: 
(a)  For new construction: The date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a building, including a manufactured home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; the excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. 
(b)  For a substantial improvement: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural parts of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure: A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during the life of a building, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building prior to improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. 
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-1-5. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the city, i.e. floodplain and flood prone areas as defined herein at or below the base flood elevation or the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is more restrictive (including A and AE on the FIRM), and all new or substantial improvement residential units, all subdivisions, non-residential structures, manufactured home, recreational vehicles, and utilities located within these areas. In addition, all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres of more have an area of special flood hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-1-6. - Adoption by reference. 
The following are adopted by reference: 
(a)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. For those land areas acquired through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Hall County, Georgia, dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood prone areas include: 
1.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Corps of Engineers or the United States Geological Survey applicable to the city; or 
2.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the public works department. 
(c)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future conditions floodplain and flood prone areas include: 
1.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Corps of Engineers or the United States Geological Survey applicable to the city; or 
2.  Any future conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the public works department. 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-1-7. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be: 
(a)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(b)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(c)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-1-8. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or the county or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-1-9. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
CHAPTER 9-15-2. - ADMINISTRATION AND PERMITTING 

Sec. 9-15-2-1. - Director of public works administrative duties. 
The director of public works is hereby appointed floodplain administrator. The duties of the director of public works regarding any land within an area of special flood hazard shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Review all land development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(b)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(c)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the director of public works shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of this article; 
(d)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(e)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
(f)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the director of public works shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(g)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(h)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the director of public Works shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and 
(i)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the director of public works and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-2-2. - Flood area permit required. 
A flood area permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities within an area of special flood hazard. Application for a flood area permit shall be made to the director of public works on forms furnished by the department prior to any development activities occurring. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-2-3. - Floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. 
No application for a land development project within any area of special flood hazard will be approved unless it includes a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan (floodplain management plan). This plan shall be in accordance with the following criteria: 
(a)  This plan must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who will verify that all designs are consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The approved floodplain management plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all land development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all land development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and building activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
The floodplain management plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following: plans drawn to scale of the site in question, existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, and dimensions of existing or proposed structures, proposed grading plan, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage/stormwater management facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-2-4. - Specific requirements for plans. 
The following information is required as a part of flood plain management/flood damage prevention plans: 
(a)  Site plan drawn to scale, including but not limited to: 
1.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
2.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
3.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
4.  The base flood elevation and future conditions flood elevation; 
5.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future conditions floodplain; 
6.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; 
7.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
8.  Proposed grading plan; and 
9.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(b)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
1.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all structures; 
2.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation or future conditions flood elevations, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in this article. 
3.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
4.  Certification that any proposed non-residential flood proofed structure meets the criteria of this article; 
(c)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed land development project; and 
(d)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre and post development conditions base flood elevations, future conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-2-5. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(a)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the director of public works a certified as-built plan showing of the regulatory flood elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(b)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The director of public works shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-2-6. - Variances. 
A request for variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit for development activity or by an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. A request for variance shall be submitted through the director of planning and development. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapters 9-22-6 and/or 9-24-3. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(a)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the director of planning and development or the director of public works shall have the right to appeal such decision to the planning and appeals board as established by the city council with procedures to be published in writing by the planning and appeals board. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and appeals board may appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(c)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(e)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(f)  In reviewing such requests, the city and the planning and appeals board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(g)  Conditions for variances: 
1.  A variance shall be issued only when the requirements of the applicable chapter(s) have been met and there is: 
i.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
ii.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
2.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
3.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
4.  The director of public works shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(h)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the city and the planning and appeals board shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the city and the planning and appeals board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(j)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-2-7. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this chapter shall be as outlined in chapter 9-24-2 and may include: 
(a)  Administrative penalties. 
1.  Stop work order. 
2.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. 
3.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. 
(b)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or otherwise responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set for in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes and immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the administrative actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity or the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(c)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations or this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in a court of competent jurisdiction to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which a violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
CHAPTER 9-15-3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 9-15-3-1. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For special flood hazards areas and flood prone areas, the future conditions flood elevations shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using FEMA approved methodology approved by the director of public works. 
(c)  The boundaries or limits of the floodplain shall be within one-half (0.5) feet vertical accuracy on the site plan containing existing topographic information. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-2. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
(a)  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage of one hundred (100) acres or greater the floodway shall be provided by the city. If unavailable then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using FEMA approved methodology approved by the director of public works. 
(b)  The boundaries or limits of the floodway shall be shown on the (development or stormwater) site plan containing existing topographic information. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-3. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within the base flood floodplain or the future conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
1.  Raising the base flood elevation or future conditions flood elevation equal to or more than one one-hundredth (0.01) foot; 
2.  Reducing the base flood or future conditions flood storage capacity. All compensation for storage capacity shall occur either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed, or within a permanent recorded flood control easement, and shall be within a reasonable proximity to the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include: lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain; or, lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain; or raising of the administrative flood elevation within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed. All cut areas are to be graded to a slope of no less than two (2.0) percent. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel. A step-backwater analysis will be required to determine the volume of flood storage created by raising the administrative flood elevation; 
3.  Changing the flow characteristics of the waters of the administrative flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the property. Verification shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis; or 
4.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. In all cases effective transitions must be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased. 
5.  Verification of no-rise conditions ((0.01) foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 9-15-3-4. 
(b)  All proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system, located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  Any significant changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the director of public works using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six (6) months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as built surveys which demonstrate general conformance to the approved designs as submitted in the CLOMR application. A letter of map revision (LOMR) or letter of map amendment (LOMA) must be issued before the final plat can be approved or a certificate of occupancy can be issued. Significant changes or revisions shall be defined as any change to the FIRM easily observed when plotted at a scale of 1" = 1000'. The changes or revisions may be due to, but are not limited to, more current and/or superior topographic information or compensatory cut and fill grading done as a part of the development. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-4. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb the future conditions floodplain. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the director of public works prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(a)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(b)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA approved methodology approved by the public works department. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood and future conditions flood profiles; 
(c)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every one hundred (100) feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that the base flood floodplain and future conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(d)  If changes to the base flood elevation or future conditions flood elevation are proposed, profiles of the channel showing the existing and proposed base and future conditions flood elevations must be provided; and 
(e)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-5. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the base floodway, except when required for the construction of bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(b)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the public works director until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable, is issued by FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-6. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The director of public works may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-7. - General standards for flood hazard reduction. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(a)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the floodplain unless all requirements of this article have been met; 
(b)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(c)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; and 
(d)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-8. - Elevated buildings. 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(b)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(c)  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, the interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-9. - Service facilities. 
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-10. - Manufactured homes. 
Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-11. - Water and sewer facilities. 
(a)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(b)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(c)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located outside the floodplain and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-12. - Nonconformities. 
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-13. - Residential buildings within floodplains. 
(a)  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the floodplain unless all requirements of this article have been met. New construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation adjacent to the building or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of this article for elevated buildings. 
(b)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation adjacent to the building or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of this article for elevated buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-14. - Non-residential buildings within the future conditions floodplain. 
(a)  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future conditions floodplain unless all requirements of this article have been met. Non-residential new construction may be authorized by the director of public works to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the director of public works. 
(b)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the director of public works to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-15. - Accessory structures and facilities in floodplains. 
Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be designed and constructed to pass all floodwater in a manner consistent with this article and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-16. - Standards for recreational vehicles in flood plains. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(b)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "Residential Buildings—Substantial Improvements", including the anchoring and elevation requirements above. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-17. - Buildings and structures adjacent to the floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the level of the base flood (100-year) elevation or one foot higher than the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Non-residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood (100-year) elevation or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-18. - Building standards for residential single lot development for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones) or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the director of public Works shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic base flood elevation or regulatory flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this section. 
If sufficient data are not available from these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(b)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-19. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. 
In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(a)  All substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards for "elevated buildings." The applicant's or owner's engineer shall certify to the director of public works that the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file; 
(b)  Substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(c)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-15-3-20. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood and future conditions flood elevation data; 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future conditions flood plain such that encroachments into the future conditions flood plain for residential structures will not be required; 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood or future conditions flood elevation, the lowest flood and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the director of public works; 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; and, 
(f)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Article 9-16 - BUFFERS, LANDSCAPING AND TREE PROTECTION 

 
CHAPTER 9-16-1. - DEFINITIONS 
Berm: An earthen mound or embankment, usually less than three (3) feet if designed to provide visual interest only, and usually six (6) feet or more in height if intended to screen views or reduce noise. 

Buffer: A strip of land located between a side or rear property line and a building, structure, or use, intended to separate and obstruct the view of the site on which the buffer is located from an abutting property. A buffer is intended to provide screening, as defined and as may be required by this article. 
(1)  Buffer, natural undisturbed: A buffer that contains a natural area consisting of trees and/or other vegetation, undisturbed except for approved access and utility crossings, and replanted where sparsely vegetated. 
(2)  Buffer, planted: A buffer consisting of newly planted evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs native to the region. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper and evergreen trees a minimum of six (6) feet in height at time of planting. Required deciduous and evergreen shrubs shall be a minimum of three (3) feet at time of planting. 
(3)  Buffer, structural: A visual screen created through construction of a solid wooden fence, decorative masonry wall, earthen berm, or combination of fence or wall with an earthen berm, supplemented with vegetation, so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year. 


Caliper: The diameter of a tree (usually nursery stock) measured at a point six (6) inches above the ground or top of root ball for up to and including four-inch caliper trees, and at a point twelve (12) inches above the ground or top of root ball for larger sizes. 
Canopy tree: A species of tree that normally reaches a height at maturity in excess of fifty (50) feet and is used primarily for shade, such as red oak, shumark oak, Chinese elm, white oak, pin oak, and American beech. See "Parking Lot Trees" in table 9-16-5-4 for additional examples of generally appropriate canopy trees. 
Construction area: Any and all areas within which "development" takes place. 
Critical root zone: The land area circular in shape and centered on the trunk of a tree, the radius of which circle is determined by the farthest extent of the drip line from the trunk. 

Deciduous: A plant with foliage that is shed annually (e.g., weeping willow; maple). 
Development: 
(1)  A land development project involving the construction of streets, utilities, buildings, or other improvements required for the habitation or use of property, such as a residential neighborhood, an apartment complex, a store, or a shopping center; 
(2)  Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials; 
(3)  The act of constructing or carrying out a land development project, including the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Development site: Any and all areas within which "development" takes place. 
Diameter breast height (DBH): The diameter of a tree trunk (usually a mature tree) measured at a height of four and one-half (4½) feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half (4½) feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 

Drip line: A perimeter formed by the points farthest away from the trunk of a tree where precipitation falling from the branches of that tree lands on the ground. 

Evergreen: A plant or tree with foliage that persists and remains green year-round (e.g., pine; magnolia). 
Flowering ornamental tree: A tree, other than a canopy tree, that produces seasonal flowers and blossoms and is used primarily for aesthetic or ornamental purposes (e.g., flowering dogwood; eastern redbud). 
Historic and landmark trees: Any tree or group of trees which the state urban forest council has included on the state landmark and historic tree register. 
Impervious cover: Any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development: Any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity: Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance: Any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity: Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Landscape strip: An area of landscaping of specified width. 
Landscaped open space: That portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, parking, access and service areas, that is designed to enhance privacy and the amenity of the development by providing landscaping features, screening, and buffering for the benefit of the occupants or those in neighboring areas, or a general appearance of openness. Landscaped open space may include, but need not be limited to, grass lawns, decorative planting, berms, walls and fences, sidewalks/walkways, ornamental objects such as fountains, statutes and other similar natural and man-made objects, wooded areas, and water courses, any or all of which are designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect within and exterior to the development. 
Landscaping: The modification of the landscape for an aesthetic or functional purpose. The area within the boundaries of an individual lot that includes the preservation of existing vegetation and the continued maintenance thereof, as well as, the installation of trees, shrubs, ground covers, grass, and flowers. Landscaping areas may also include decorative rock, bark, mulch and other similar materials in addition to vegetation and live plant material. 
Opaque: Impenetrable to view, or so obscuring to view that features, buildings, structures, and uses become visually indistinguishable. 
Overstory tree: Those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of forty (40) feet or more. 
Parcel: Any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest city tax records. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Setback, stream buffer: An additional setback, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed stream buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
Shade tree: A broadleaf tree having an average height at maturity of at least twenty (20) feet and having a broad spread relative to its height (excluding trees with pyramidal, conical, or columnar crowns) and a dense canopy, so as to provide shade to structures or parking areas in the summer months. 
Shrub: A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems from the ground or small branches near the ground, and generally obtaining a height less than eight (8) feet; a shrub may be deciduous or evergreen. 
Significant tree: A tree in fair or better condition which has been determined to be of a high value by an Arborist, Forester, or other qualified professional because of its species, size, age or other professional criteria. A tree is considered in fair or better condition if: 
(1)  Its life expectancy is greater than fifteen (15) years; 
(2)  It has a relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or hollow with less than twenty-nine (29) percent radial tip die-back; and 
(3)  It has no major insect or pathological problems. 
Hardwood trees such as oaks and hickories and soft-wood trees such as pines and cedars whose diameters are eighteen (18) inches DBH or more and small hardwoods such as dogwoods, redbuds or sourwoods whose diameters are eight (8) inches DBH or more shall be considered significant trees due to size. A tree of lesser size than the preceding shall be significant if it is a rare or unusual species or is of historical significance. 
Site density factor: The minimum number of tree density units per acre, including recompense for significant and historic/landmark trees, that must be achieved on a property after development. 
Specimen tree: Any tree or grouping of trees which has been determined, by the director of planning and development, to be of high value because of its species, size, age, or other professional criteria. 
Stream: A stream is defined as beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of twenty-five (25) acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than twenty-five (25) acres, the director of planning and development may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank: The sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream buffer: An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, measured horizontally from the top of the stream bank, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream. 
Stream buffer setback: An additional setback, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed stream buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
Stream channel: Stream channel refers to the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Stream protection area or protection area: This area refers to the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Tree density unit: A credit assigned to a tree, based on the diameter of the tree, in accordance with tables contained in this article. 
Tree protection area: Any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees that are proposed to be retained in order to comply with the requirements of this article or any other existing trees proposed to be retained due to zoning conditions or requirements from other ordinances. 
Tree protection and/or replacement plan: A plan that identifies "tree protection areas," existing trees to be retained and proposed trees to be planted on a site to meet minimum requirements, as well as methods of tree protection to be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information. 
Tree save area: Any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees that are proposed to be retained in order to comply with the requirements of this article. The tree save area shall include no less than the total area defined by the critical root zone (CRZ) of a tree or a group of trees, collectively. 
Understory tree: Those trees that grow beneath the overstory, and will generally reach a mature height of under forty (40) feet. 
Watershed: A watershed refers to the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § II, 1-20-09) 
CHAPTER 9-16-2. - BUFFERS AND SCREENING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-05, § III, adopted January 20, 2009, amended chapter 9-16-2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 9-16-2 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from original codification. 

Sec. 9-16-2-1. - Buffer required. 
Buffers, as defined and illustrated in chapter 9-16-1, shall be required as specified in table 9-6-2. Buffers shall also be required for particular uses when specified in article 9-10. Trees retained or replanted within buffers required by this chapter shall not be included in calculations of compliance with minimum tree unit requirements established in chapter 9-16-5. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § III, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-2-2. - Screening. 
All buffers shall provide screening as defined by this article. Where another provision of this Code requires screening, such screening shall require compliance with this section, unless more restrictive provisions are required by regulations of an overlay zone or other provision of this Code. 
Minimum required screening shall consist of a natural buffer utilizing existing vegetation or a structural buffer, whichever provides an opaque visual screen to a height of six (6) feet, or any combination of existing and replanted vegetation which can reasonably be expected by the director of planning and development to create an opaque visual screen six (6) feet high within two (2) growing seasons. Where another provision of this Code has different specifications for screening, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § III, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-2-3. - Buffer materials. 
It is the intent of this Code that, when a buffer is required, the buffer shall consist of natural, undisturbed vegetation. However, replanting of a buffer shall be required where sparsely vegetated or where screening as required by this article cannot be provided with existing natural vegetation. This is the intent whether or not the term "natural" buffer or "natural, undisturbed" buffer is used. 
Where disturbance of a required buffer is permitted by this chapter, it must be replanted to a standard acceptable to provide screening as defined by this article and as determined appropriate by the director of planning and development. Natural buffers may contain deciduous or perennial vegetation, but they shall contain evergreen shrubs and trees suitable to local growing conditions that will provide a six-foot high opaque visual screen during all seasons of the year. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § III, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-2-4. - Planted buffer specifications. 
Re-planted buffers, when installed, shall meet the following criteria, which shall be shown and compliance demonstrated on plans submitted for a land disturbance permit as required by chapter 9-13-7: 
(a)  Plantings shall consist of a combination of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs native to the region. Required deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper and evergreen trees shall be at least six (6) feet in height at time of planting and achieve a height of twenty (20) feet at maturity. All shrubs planted shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in height at time of planting and achieve an overall height of ten (10) feet at maturity. 
(b)  Plantings in buffers shall be limited to thirty-three (33) percent of one tree species. Calculations are required on the tree protection plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § III, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-2-5. - Buffer encroachments. 
Buffers shall contain no driveways, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities, or any other structures or accessory uses except in the case of structural buffers, within which a fence, wall or earthen berm is constructed to provide the visual screening required to meet the standards of this article. 
Underground utilities may be permitted to cross a buffer if the screening standards of this article will be subsequently achieved to the satisfaction of the director of planning and development and as permitted by the director of public utilities. 
Required vehicular access may be allowed through a buffer as a condition of a zoning, special use or planned unit development approval by the governing body; or through an administrative variance if provided for in chapter 9-24-3. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § III, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-2-6. - Waiver of required buffer. 
The planning and appeals board may, at the time of application for rezoning or special use, waive a buffer requirement of this Code if the comprehensive plan anticipates future development on the adjoining property in a land use category (shown on the future land use map) such that a buffer would not be required by this Code. When such a request is not accomplished simultaneously with a rezoning or special use application, it shall be processed and considered as a zoning variance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § III, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-2-7. - Reduction of natural buffer by installing structural buffer. 
If a structural buffer is provided that creates an opaque screen to a height of no less than eight (8) feet, the minimum required buffer width may be reduced by up to fifty (50) percent. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § III, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-2-8. - Specifications for structural buffers. 
Structural buffers, when installed as an alternative to a natural buffer, shall meet the following criteria, which shall be shown and compliance demonstrated on plans submitted for a land development permit as required by chapter 9-13-7: 
(a)  Structural buffers shall be vegetated throughout the minimum area required for the buffer on both sides of any fences or walls and upon any earthen berms, which may include grass, ground covers, shrubs, and trees. 
(b)  All earthen berms shall have a maximum side slope of two (2) horizontal to one vertical. Earthen berms shall not be constructed within the drip line of any existing trees that will remain on the property. 
(c)  Trees shall be located or planted within any structural buffer at a density of no less than one tree for each twenty (20) feet of buffer length or portion thereof. New trees shall have a caliper of no less than two (2) inches upon planting and may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design (see illustration under definition of structural buffer). 
(d)  Fences and freestanding walls shall present a finished and decorative appearance to the abutting property, and shall be located no closer to the property line than three (3) feet. Shrubs, ground covers, or other vegetation shall be provided between the fence or wall and the property line so as to provide a decorative effect, as proposed by a registered landscaped architect or as approved by the planning development. 
(e)  Fences used in buffers must be made of rot-resistant material or protected from deterioration with water-proofing material. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § III, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-2-9. - Maintenance of buffers and structural buffers. 
Every buffer required by this Code shall be maintained by the owner of the property where the buffer is located, so as to provide an opaque visual screen to a height of six (6) feet on a continuous, year-round basis, or eight (8) feet in height in the case of a structural buffer. 
Dying, diseased or dead vegetation shall be removed, provided minimal disturbance occurs. Subsequently, vegetation removed must be replaced where necessary to fulfill buffer requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § III, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-2-10. - Stream protection buffers. 
In addition to the buffers specified tables 9-5-2 and 9-6-2 of this Code and this chapter, properties shall comply as applicable with the stream protection buffer requirements specified in chapter 9-16-3. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § III, 1-20-09) 
CHAPTER 9-16-3. - STREAM PROTECTION BUFFERS 

Sec. 9-16-3-1. - Purposes. 
This chapter sets standards for stream buffers to: 
(a)  Protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; 
(b)  Minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; 
(c)  Maintain stream water quality by creating and maintaining buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
(d)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
Sec. 9-16-3-2. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream as defined in this article. After the effective date of these provisions as originally adopted, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. Any land development activity within a stream protection buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a stream buffer setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
Sec. 9-16-3-3. - Grandfather provisions. 
This section shall not apply to the following activities: 
(a)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this chapter as originally adopted. 
(b)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(c)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this chapter as originally adopted. 
(d)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two (2) years of the effective date of this chapter as originally adopted. 
Sec. 9-16-3-4. - Exemptions. 
The following specific activities are exempt from this chapter. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(a)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
(1)  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
(2)  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
(3)  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
(4)  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
(5)  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
(6)  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(b)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited above. 
(c)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this Code takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter. 
(d)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this chapter as originally adopted takes effect or approved under the terms of this Code, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(e)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this chapter, the person performing it shall report such work to the director of planning and development on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten (10) days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the director of planning and development to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(f)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three (3) years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
Sec. 9-16-3-5. - Stream protection buffer and stream buffer setback requirements. 
(a)  An undisturbed natural vegetative stream protection buffer shall be maintained for fifty (50) feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(b)  An additional stream buffer setback shall be maintained for twenty-five (25) feet, measured horizontally, beyond the stream protection buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within this setback. 
(c)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
Sec. 9-16-3-6. - Stream protection buffer variances. 
Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(a)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this chapter as originally adopted, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this chapter, and the director of planning and development finds and determines that the requirements of this Code prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the board of planning and appeals of the city may grant a variance from these requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a), the board of planning and appeals of the city shall grant no variance from any provision of this chapter without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the board of planning and appeals. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in the local newspaper of record and shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
Sec. 9-16-3-7. - Stream protection variance buffer criteria. 
Variances will be considered only in the following cases, and the following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a stream protection buffer variance: 
(a)  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
(b)  When a property's shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter prevents land development unless a stream buffer protection variance is granted; 
(c)  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
(d)  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. 
(e)  Variances will not be considered when, following original adoption of this chapter, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(f)  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
(g)  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
(h)  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
Sec. 9-16-3-8. - Variance application requirements. 
In addition to the requirements for variance applications specified generally by this Code, a request to vary the provisions of this chapter shall at minimum include the following information: 
(a)  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
(b)  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(c)  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
(d)  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
(e)  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
(f)  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
(g)  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
(h)  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
Sec. 9-16-3-9. - Stream protection zone development review requirements. 
Any permit applications for property requiring stream protection zones must include the following: 
(a)  A site plan showing: 
(1)  The location of all streams on the property; 
(2)  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
(3)  Topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
(4)  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
(5)  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(b)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(c)  Any other documentation that the director of planning and development may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the stream protection buffer zone is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
Sec. 9-16-3-10. - Inspection of stream protection zone. 
The director of planning and development, or his/her designee, may cause inspections of the work in the stream protection buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the director, or his/her representative, in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the stream protection zone. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
Sec. 9-16-3-11. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in chapter 9-24-2. Any such action or inaction which is 
continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
CHAPTER 9-16-4. - LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 9-16-4-1. - Landscape strips required. 
Landscape strips, as defined in chapter 9-16-1, shall be required along right-of-ways for non-single-family uses according to the zoning district in which it is located as specified in tables 9-5-2 and 9-6-2. Landscape strips shall be required along side lot lines for non-single-family uses as specified in tables 9-5-2 and 9-6-2. Landscape strips shall also be provided if required for particular uses specified in article 9-10. 
Sec. 9-16-4-2. - Minimum landscaped open space required. 
Non-single-family uses shall provide minimum landscaped open space on the lot according to the zoning district in which it is located, as specified in tables 9-5-2 and 9-6-2. 
Sec. 9-16-4-3. - Landscaping encroachments. 
Landscape strips and areas devoted to meeting minimum landscaped open space requirements shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities, or any other accessory uses except for retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design, pedestrian-oriented facilities such as sidewalks and bus stops, underground utilities, driveways required to access the property, and signs otherwise permitted by article 9-18. 
Sec. 9-16-4-4. - Landscape strip planting specifications. 
(a)  One tree shall be provided within the landscape strip for every thirty (30) feet of length of street frontage, or portion thereof. Such trees may be deciduous or evergreen, but must be of a type that is suitable to local growing conditions. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper at time of planting and achieve a diameter breast (DBH) of at least twelve (12) inches at maturity. Trees required by this section within landscape strips may be included in calculations of compliance with minimum tree unit requirements established in chapter 9-16-5. 
(b)  One shrub shall be provided within the landscape strip for every thirty (30) linear feet of street frontage, or portion thereof. Shrubs shall be of a type that is suitable to local growing conditions. 
(c)  All portions of required landscape strips shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched. 
(d)  Upon planting, new trees and shrubs may be planted at regular intervals or clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design and as approved by the department of planning and development. 
(e)  Plant materials in the landscape strip shall not extend into the street right-of-way unless specifically allowed by the public works department. 
(f)  Tree planting recommendations. The following recommendations are provided regarding tree selection, planting, and maintenance: 
(1)  Tree selection should be suited to locations, climate and other factors of the site (e.g. utility lines). 
(2)  Tree species selected should be relatively maintenance free. 
(3)  The ideal urban tree is attractive and should: have a deep-growing, well-behaved root system; have a fast reaction time to environmental changes; be insect and disease resistant; have sturdy limbs and long life expectancy; have the ability to be self-pruning; be resistant to drought or other extreme weather conditions; and have features that reduce clean-up problems because of shedding of limbs, fruit, leaves, etc. 
(4)  Have a "training" program for new trees in which branches are properly pruned and the tree is trained to minimize storm damage and decay problems. 
(5)  Select trees that have an expected mature height and/or spread which will meet criteria of the Code and site. 
(6)  Try to avoid co-dominant branches (forks), and do not use trees with flat tops. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § IV, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-4-5. - Parking lot landscaping. 
Deciduous shade trees shall be provided within any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate five (5) cars or more, in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(a)  One landscaping island with a deciduous shade tree shall be provided within the parking lot for every twenty (20) parking spaces, or portion thereof. Additionally, every parking space shall be located within seventy (70) feet of the landscape island. Trees required within parking lots by this section may be included in determinations of compliance with minimum tree unit requirements established in chapter 9-16-5. 
(b)  A landscaping island shall be located at the end of every parking aisle between the last parking space and an adjacent travel aisle or driveway. The landscaping island shall be no less than nine (9) feet wide for the length of the adjacent parking space. In addition to providing a deciduous shade tree, the landscaping island shall be planted in ground cover or low-lying shrubs, except for mulch within the drip line or critical root zone of the shade tree. Landscaping materials must not encroach on site visibility at the end of parking aisles. 

(c)  Tree planting areas for shade trees and understory trees shall be no less than nine (9) feet in width and shall provide at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of planting space. If shared with other trees an additional fifty (50) square feet of planting space shall be provided. No tree shall be located less than two and one-half (2½) feet from the back of curb. 
(d)  All parking lot landscape islands shall be curbed with minimum six-inch high header curbs. 
(e)  Landscaping islands and tree planting areas shall be well drained and contain suitable soil and natural irrigation characteristics for the planting materials they contain. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § V, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-4-6. - Landscaping plans incorporated into tree plans. 
The landscaping requirements of this article and this Code shall be incorporated into tree plans as required by section 9-13-7-9 (submitted as part of a land development permit) and as specified in chapter 9-16-5. 
If no tree plan is required to be submitted, or if no land development permit is required, the planning department may require a separate landscaping plan to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter, which may include any of the following as appropriate to determine compliance: 
(a)  Location and general type of existing trees; 
(b)  Existing trees to be saved; 
(c)  Methods and details for protecting existing trees during construction; 
(d)  Locations and labels for all proposed plants and a plant list or schedule showing the existing and proposed quantities in relation to any required quantities; 
(e)  Location and description of other landscape improvements, such as earth berms, walls, fences, screens, sculptures, fountains, street furniture, signs and light fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § V, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-4-7. - Additional landscaping specifications. 
Approval of all landscaping and other materials by the planning department shall be required. The following specifications are required: 
(a)  Invasive or potentially invasive plants are not permitted. However, well-mannered non-native plants are acceptable if they are not considered invasive. 
(b)  Existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall be preserved, whenever possible, or replaced with suitable vegetation. 
(c)  Ground cover(s) should be used to supplement landscaping in appropriate areas to reduce the need for extensive grass lawns, which would require regular watering in drought conditions. 
(d)  No artificial plants, trees, or other vegetation shall be installed. 
(e)  Where existing utilities are present within a landscape strip, appropriate plant material should be used that does not grow to a height or have a root system that will interfere with above-ground or underground utilities. 
(f)  Do not plant materials in parking lot landscaping islands that will grow to a maturity of more than two and one-half (2½) feet, except for the required shade tree, unless regular pruning is provided, so as to avoid site visibility problems. 
(g)  All plant material shall conform to the current version of the American Standard For Nursery Stock published by the American Nursery and Landscape Association. A copy of this manual can be downloaded at www.anla.org. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § VI, 1-20-09) 
CHAPTER 9-16-5. - TREE PROTECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-05, § VII, adopted January 20, 2009, amended chapter 9-16-5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 9-16-5 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from original codification. 

Sec. 9-16-5-1. - Establishment of tree protection zone. 
Except as exempted by this chapter, a tree protection zone is hereby established and which applies to the entirety of a tract of land for which no tree protection plan has been approved. After such approval, the tree protection zone shall correspond to that part of a tract of land designated as such on said plan. Tree protection zones shall be shown on land development plans and preliminary subdivision plats, as applicable, or a separate tree plan shall be submitted to demonstrate compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § VII, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-2. - Exemptions from tree protection zone. 
The tree protection zone shall not apply to the following, except that any construction, paving, or other activity on a property that will damage trees on the public right-of-way is subject to the restrictions of this chapter for the protection of existing trees: 
(a)  Tracts of land for which this Code imposes no yard requirements and permits one hundred (100) percent coverage of the lot by buildings. This specifically includes the C-B, Central Business zoning district. 
(b)  Property on which a single-family dwelling is being constructed under contract to the person who will occupy the structure. 
(c)  Property already occupied by an owner-occupied single-family dwelling, unless non-residential uses or additional dwelling units are proposed for such property. 
(d)  Public utility companies conducting operations on public and utility rights-of-way and easements or on sites for electric power substations and similar facilities, which operations are for the purpose of assuring uninterrupted utility services. 
(e)  Property in use for the following: 
(1)  Tree farming: The planting, cultivating, and harvesting of trees in a continuous cycle as a regular practice on a tract of land; not including the removal of trees for purposes of development or the removal of trees without replanting. 
(2)  Agricultural activities: 
(a)  Bona-fide commercial production from the land or on the land of agricultural products, including horticultural, floricultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, and apiarian products, but not including forestry products (see "tree farming" herein); and 
(b)  Clearing trees for the purpose of planting crops, providing pasture for livestock, or constructing buildings accessory to production of agricultural products. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § VII, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-3. - Tree damage prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(a)  Cut, carve or otherwise damage or remove any tree except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Attach any wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance harmful to any tree. 
(c)  Allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to trees (such as concrete washout, fuel, lubricants, herbicides or paint) to come in contact with them. 
(d)  Set a fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § VII, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-4. - Limitations on tree removal. 
(a)  Existing significant trees or any other trees ten (10) inches DBH or larger that are in excess of the minimum required tree units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings) but outside the construction area (buildings, accessory uses, parking area) shall not be removed unless adjacent development would cause irreparable damage to the critical root zones. 
(b)  No person shall remove more than ninety (90) percent of the existing trees on a lot that is subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  An existing tree survey identifying all significant trees ten (10) inches DBH or larger shall be required as part of the approved tree plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § VII, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-5. - Tree retention priorities. 
The retention of trees is the highest priority and shall take precedence over the removal of trees and replacement with smaller trees. Tree protection and landscaping plans shall be reviewed for compliance with the following provisions, and noncompliance with this section may be grounds for disapproval of tree protection and landscaping plans required by this article: 
(a)  Existing trees in required landscape strips shall be retained to the maximum extent possible. 
(b)  Existing trees between the building line and the street shall be retained to the maximum extent possible. 
(c)  Where existing trees exist where parking lots are proposed, such trees shall be integrated into the design of the parking lot so that they may be retained in tree planting islands, to the maximum extent possible. 
(d)  Any other existing trees in parking areas to the rear of the building line or elsewhere on the site shall be retained to the maximum extent possible. 
(e)  Trees categorized as significant trees, historical or landmark trees located, shall be integrated into the design of the development to the maximum extent possible. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, VIII, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-6. - Significant trees. 
Significant trees are composed of specimen, historic and landmark trees. In order to obtain credit for a significant tree, the tree shall be protected in their natural state, free from damage. 
To encourage the protection of a significant hardwood tree additional density credits will be given for significant trees saved. Credit for any significant hardwood tree saved will be four (4) times the assigned unit value shown in table 9-16-5-2. 
If a significant tree is damaged or removed without prior approval by the director of planning and development, recompense or penalty will be required or imposed as follows: 
(a)  Any specimen tree that is removed without prior approval must be replaced by trees with a total density equal to twice the unit value of the tree removed. Additionally, replacement trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper. 
(b)  If a historic or landmark tree is damaged or removed without prior approval, the department of planning and development will require replacement by trees with a total density equal to four (4) times the unit of the tree removed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, VIII, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-7. - Preliminary tree plan for multiple sites in industrial park. 
A preliminary tree plan may be submitted for development of an industrial park where multiple sites will be cleared and graded for purposes of marketing vacant sites to industrial prospects. Planting of new trees will not be required on a lot until a use is developed on that lot, and locations of new trees need not be shown on the preliminary plan. Removal of significant trees and other trees ten (10) inches DBH or larger shall be permitted only in conjunction with an approved preliminary tree protection plan, an approved grading plan, and actual grading of building pads (i.e., not simply to clear the lot). The preliminary tree protection plan shall show the following: 
(a)  The extent of the development site. 
(b)  Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading and trenching. 
(c)  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a significant tree or any other tree ten (10) inches DBH or larger which would affect it adversely, with drawings or descriptions as to how the grade, drainage, and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
(d)  Units of trees that will be required on the lot when it is developed, calculated both: 
(1)  Without subtracting any building footprint area from the acreage, and 
(2)  By subtracting one-third ( 1/3 ) of the lot area as assumed building area. 
(e)  Location of any significant, historical and landmark trees to be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, IX, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-8. - Permit required for removal of certain trees. 
On properties which are not specifically exempted by this chapter, a permit shall be required to be issued by the director of planning and development to remove or cause the death of existing significant trees and any other trees ten (10) inches DBH or larger located within the tree protection zone or for grading or other work adjacent to a tree which would affect it adversely. An approved tree protection plan is required for issuance of a permit. 
Permit requirements of this section shall be waived if the applicant submits information from an certified arborist, registered forester, registered landscape architect, or other qualified professional who demonstrates in writing that trees to be removed are dead, are diseased or infested to the extent that removal is necessary, or have been damaged by lightning, wind, ice, or other disasters to the extent that public safety is endangered. When a tree that has died or has been irreparably damaged is counted toward meeting the minimum tree density requirements of this article, said tree shall be replaced with an equal number of tree units on the site. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, IX, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-9. - Criteria for the protection of existing trees. 
When a choice is available as to which existing trees to save, emphasis shall be given to the preservation of significant trees, as defined in this article, even isolated significant trees, over retention of other trees. Non-significant trees, however, should be saved in stands rather than as individual trees scattered over a site. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, IX, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-10. - Tree protection fencing. 
(a)  During excavation, filling, construction or demolition operations, each tree or stand of trees within tree protection zones or otherwise designated to remain on the property shall be protected against damage to bark, roots and low-hanging branches with an orange barricade fence enclosing the critical root zone of said trees to be retained. 
(b)  Fencing shall be either plastic construction area fencing, silt fencing, 12-gauge 2 × 4-inch wire mesh, double 1 × 4-inch rails on 2 × 4-inch posts, or high-visibility surveyors' tape on 1 × 2-inch posts. Height of the latter three (3) fence types shall be four (4) feet. 
(c)  Tree save area signage with the language, "Tree Protection Area - Do Not Disturb" shall be required every twenty (20) feet of fencing. 

(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, IX, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-11. - Additional tree protection requirements. 
(a)  Compaction prohibited. All building materials, vehicles, construction equipment, dirt, debris, or other objects likely to cause soil compaction or above-ground damage shall be kept outside the critical root zone of trees within tree protection zones or other trees to be protected. Where a limited amount of encroachment is unavoidable and is approved by the city, the critical root zone shall first be mulched with a four-inch layer of processed pine bark or wood chips or a six-inch layer of pine straw. 
(b)  Grade change prohibited. There shall be no raising or lowering of the ground level within the critical root zone of trees within tree protection zones or other trees to be protected. Stripping of topsoil in such critical root zones shall not be permitted. Where necessary, the use of moderate fill is permitted only with prior installation of an aeration system approved by the city. Deposition of sediment in such critical root zones shall be prevented by placement of sediment barriers, which shall be backed by 2 × 4-inch wire mesh in areas of steep slope. 
(c)  Ditches prohibited. No person shall excavate any ditch or trench within the critical root zone of trees within tree protection zones or other trees to be protected. Where such encroachment is unavoidable and is approved by the city, ditches or trenches shall be so located as to minimize root damage. If roots must be cut, root pruning procedures approved by the city must be employed. 
(d)  Paving prohibited. No person shall pave with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious material within the critical root zone within tree protection zones or other trees to be protected. 
(e)  Encroachment in critical root zones. Encroachment on the critical root zone of a tree is permitted where necessary to the development (e.g., construction of a driveway), provided the tree is not counted toward the required minimum tree units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings). 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, IX, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-12. - Minimum tree units required. 
Upon completion of development, all properties shall have the minimum tree units per acre of the development site (not including land area covered by buildings). Within the development site of any property subject to the requirements of this chapter, and unless otherwise specifically exempted from the provisions of this chapter, there shall be a number of trees so as to produce a total tree density unit of no less than: 
(a)  Eighteen (18) units per acre for property in commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(b)  Twenty (20) units per acre for property in residential zoning districts. 
For purposes of this chapter, the term "development site" excludes undeveloped portions of a lot. 

Trees on the same lot but within required buffers or undeveloped portions of the site shall not be counted toward meeting this requirement for any given development site. A development site may be proposed larger than the limits of clearing, to retain trees on a forested portion of the site that will help meet the requirement of this section, provided that the area containing trees is set aside as a tree protection area and is made a part of the boundary of the development site, through boundary line adjustment if the development site is a separate lot. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, X, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-13. - Calculation of tree units generally. 
One "tree unit" is not the same as one "tree." For existing trees, the "tree units" assigned are the cross-sectional areas of the trunks at DBH in square feet. For new trees, credits given reflect a size that will be achieved after several years of growth. When the calculation of tree units required results in a fraction, the number of tree units shall be rounded upward to the next highest whole number. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, X, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-14. - Measurement of tree units of existing trees. 
The diameter of an existing tree's trunk will be measured and a value assigned in "tree units" in accordance with table 9-16-5-2. When an existing tree meets the definition of "significant hardwood tree" as provided in this article, the value assigned is four (4) times the value shown in table 9-16-5-2. 
TABLE 9-16-5-2  TREE UNIT VALUES FOR EXISTING TREES 

 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, XI, XII, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-15. - Measurement of tree units of replacement trees. 
The diameter of a replacement tree's trunk will be measured and a value assigned in "tree units" in accordance with table 9-16-5-3. For purposes of this section, a "large species is one that will have a height at maturity of forty (40) feet or more. All fractions of tree requirements shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
TABLE 9-16-5-3  TREE UNIT VALUES FOR REPLACEMENT TREES 

 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, XII, XIII, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-16. - Criteria for replacement trees. 
(a)  Spacing and the potential size of species chosen shall be compatible with spatial limitations of the site. 
(b)  The species must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing site. Publications of the Georgia Forestry Commission, the Cooperative Extension Service of the University of Georgia College of Agriculture, or other sources acceptable to the city may be consulted regarding questions of tree characteristics. 
(c)  The trees must have the potential for size and quality comparable to those removed (e.g., an existing oak tree should not be replaced with a pine or dogwood tree). 
(d)  The trees must have crowns and root systems at maturity that will not disrupt nearby utilities, sidewalks, or public right-of-way infrastructure. 
(e)  Where trees must be added to achieve the minimum required tree units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings), the following shall apply: 
(1)  Pines may not comprise more than ten (10) percent of the required tree units. Where existing pines already comprise ten (10) percent or more of the required units, no more pines may be credited toward the required tree units. 
(2)  No more than thirty (30) percent of the required tree units can consist of a single tree species. 
(3)  At least twenty-five (25) percent of the replacement tree units must be canopy trees. 
(4)  Flowering ornamental trees shall not be counted in terms of compliance with minimum tree unit requirements, unless listed in the tree list provided in table 9-16-5-4. 
(f)  Where trees must be added to achieve the required minimum tree units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings), such additions shall be made between the street right-of-way and the front building line to the extent that physical space is available. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, XIV, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-17. - Physical site limitations. 
Where the proposed development area (i.e., the buildings, accessory uses, and parking area) for whatever reason does not permit the retention or planting of a number of trees equivalent to the minimum tree units per acre of the development site, the following regulations shall apply: 
(a)  The development site shall be enlarged, in cases where it does not comprise the entire lot. 
(b)  The tree protection zone shall to the extent possible be enlarged by removing parking spaces in excess of the minimum number required, by placing additional planting islands within the development area, or by reducing the area to be occupied by buildings. 
(c)  Alternative compliance. Where such changes to development site or plans are not feasible, as determined by the director of community development, the development applicant may propose and the department may approve one of the two (2) following alternatives: 
(1)  Off-site location. An alternative, off-site location for the planting of required trees to meet the minimum required tree units may be approved by the department. Public street rights-of-way and public properties in the city, or private property in the city that has a valid conservation easement granted in favor of tree protection, shall be acceptable alternative sites for tree planting. If this is allowed, an escrow account or bond shall be required and established to cover the costs of trees and installation. Approval for off-site planting of required trees shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of total trees required for replanting. 
(2)  Tree replacement fund. In lieu of planting trees on an approved off-site location, the development applicant may contribute to the city tree replacement fund. Contributions shall be calculated based on two-inch caliper trees and shall be based upon the number, size and type of trees that cannot be planted on the development site. The amount of the donation shall be one hundred (100) percent of the estimated costs derived from the average of two (2) written estimates provided by the applicant from nurseries, including the plant materials, labor and any other costs associated with the plantings. Approval for tree replacement fund contribution in lieu of on-site replanting shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total trees required for replanting. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, XV, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 2011-02, § V, 1-18-11) 
Sec. 9-16-5-18. - List of generally appropriate trees. 
Table 9-16-5-4 provides a list of trees generally appropriate for planting within the city. 
TABLE 9-16-5-4  LIST OF GENERALLY APPROPRIATE TREES 
Large Trees 

 
Street Trees 

 
Small Trees 

 
Parking Lot Trees 

 
Screening/Buffer Trees 

 
(*) Indicates Native Species 
(^) Indicates Species Used as Either Frontage/Street Tree or Parking Lot Tree 
( # ) Indicates Flowering Tree Species that may be counted toward site density factor 
Source: "Treescape: A Citizen's Guide for Urban Tree Planting" (a resource published by the Cooperative Extension Service, University of Georgia College of Agriculture). 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, XVI, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 9-16-5-19. - Maintenance and inspection requirements. 
Trees, which are planted to meet the density requirements, shall be maintained for one growing season after the date of final inspection and a certificate of occupancy is issued. After one growing season a maintenance inspection shall be performed by the planning and development staff to determine if the project is still in compliance as required by this chapter. Any trees planted to meet the required density requirements which are dead, dying or diseased must be replaced. Additionally, trees protected to meet the density requirements which are dead, dying, diseased or have been removed at the time of inspection must be replaced if there is evidence that the demise of such trees was due to an act or omission that caused the tree to deteriorate. 
Trees required to be replaced shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper at time of planting and shall be planted within thirty (30) days of receipt of notification by the city. Additionally, unless exempt from this chapter, the subject property shall continually meet the buffers, landscaping and tree protection standards set forth in article 9-16. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ VII, XVI, 1-20-09) 
Article 9-17 - ACCESS, PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), adopted June 21, 2016, repealed Art. 9-17 and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. 9-17, Chs. 9-17-1—9-17-6, pertained to access, parking and loading requirements and derived from Ord. No. 2009-47, §§ XXVIII and XXX—XXXIII, adopted Dec. 15, 2009. 

CHAPTER 9-17-1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-17-1-1. - Findings. 
(a)  Need for parking. Space for the parking of motor vehicles is needed to serve every property that contains a principal use, for the safety and convenience of the people who live or work on the property, shop or do business on the property, or otherwise visit the property in the normal course of activity of the principal use. 
(b)  Need for loading and unloading spaces. Space for the loading and unloading of equipment, supplies, and products is needed to serve properties engaging in such loading and unloading operations. If not required, adequate and proper loading spaces in acceptable locations tend not to be provided. 
(c)  Environment. Poor design of parking lots can lead to damage to the environment and may require the community to subsidize the interests of a private property owner at the expense of the community's environment. It is reasonable to ensure the good design of parking lots. Possible negative effects of parking and loading areas include changes to microclimate, isolation of pedestrians, increased stormwater runoff, and reduced stormwater infiltration into the ground. Large parking lots can create heat islands where pavement absorbs solar radiation during the day and remains warm well into the night. When heat islands exist, cooling costs are higher than normal. 
(d)  Stormwater management. Parking lots surfaces such as asphalt contribute to the degradation of local water quality. Parking lots can be more compatible environmentally if protection measures are incorporated into design standards and regulations. Porous pavement and grass pavers reduce runoff by allowing it to pass through the paved surface and infiltrate back into the soil and groundwater. Porous pavement designs and grass pavers are appropriate in some instances. Other types of stormwater management facilities are environmentally compatible, such as vegetative swales and bioretention. 
(e)  Pedestrian mobility. Areas of paving are necessary to accommodate automobiles, but they can be unfriendly to pedestrians without specific regulations requiring that designers accommodate pedestrians. Large, open parking areas are conducive to high speeds and random maneuvers which can endanger pedestrians. Wide driveway aisles and access roads also increase speeds and discourage pedestrian travel. Street and parking lot design can balance the needs to accommodate automobile-centered standards with approaches that take into account the needs of pedestrians. 
(f)  Overbuilding of parking lots. Off-street parking requirements, as conventionally implemented, have resulted in excess, unnecessary parking around shopping centers and malls because it remains unused for most of the year. Parking lot construction is a considerable factor in the cost of development. Reducing parking areas reduces development costs. Therefore, reductions in the size of paved parking and flexibility in the types of pavement and parking designs are beneficial to all concerned. 
(g)  Connectivity. Abutting properties which do not provide interconnecting access to one another make it difficult, dangerous, and inefficient if not impossible, for motorists to travel between those properties. Between compatible uses, provisions requiring inter-parcel access meet substantial public purposes of convenience and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-1-2. - Purposes. 
The multiple purposes of this article include but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Establish requirements for multi-modal access to development sites, including vehicular, truck service, and pedestrian, as appropriate; 
(b)  Establish on-site circulation patterns conducive to safe pedestrian as well as vehicular and truck access; 
(c)  Reduce congestion in the streets and ensure that uses and functions of street rights-of-way are not interrupted; 
(d)  Establish certain maximum as well as minimum requirements for parking spaces to reduce development costs and ensure that excess impervious surfaces are not constructed, while providing for exceeding maximums when a demonstrated need exists. Parking requirements should be based on actual average parking demands, rather than to accommodate the highest hourly parking at a site as in conventional parking requirements; 
(e)  Provide in certain conditions for the use of alternative pavement materials in parking lots, such as porous materials which have higher degrees of water quality effectiveness than conventional asphalt and pervious concrete; 
(f)  Promote flexible approaches to the provision of off-street parking, including in some cases, as appropriate, use of on-street parking and shared parking arrangements; and 
(g)  Establish design and improvement specifications for the development of parking lots, loading areas, access aisles, and connections of parking lots to streets. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-1-3. - Definitions. 
Access: A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
Curb break or curb cut: Any interruption or break in the line of a street curb for the purpose of connecting a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
Deceleration lane: An added roadway lane, of a specified distance and width and which may include a taper, which permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
Driveway: A constructed vehicular access serving one (1) or more properties and connecting to a public or private street. 
Floor area: The sum of all square footages (areas) of each floor of a building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings. The following areas are excluded from the measurement of floor area: unfinished attics, attached garages or spaces used for off-street parking and loading, breezeways, and enclosed or unenclosed decks and porches. 
Frontage or street frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where its front lot line abuts the right-of-way of any street from which access may be directly gained. 
Handicapped parking space: A space laid out and designated by signage in accordance with the requirements of the federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Impervious surface: A man-made structure or surface, which prevents the infiltration of water into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, structures, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Parking aisle: The traveled way, which is not the public right-of-way, by which cars enter and depart parking spaces and maneuver within a designated parking lot. 
Parking bay: Three (3) or more parking spaces adjacent to one another and aligned side-by-side. 
Parking lot: Any public or private area at grade used for the express purpose of temporarily parking automobiles and other vehicles otherwise in operation for personal or business use. 
Parking space: A space meeting required dimensions for width and length and identified and set aside for the temporary parking of an automobile or other motor vehicle. 
Porous materials: Porous asphalt, porous concrete, permeable pavers, or turf block or other porous materials approved by the department of water resources director or designee. Turf block consists of interlocking concrete or plastic cells filled with soil and planted with turf grass or a low-maintenance groundcover. 
Right-of-way: Land reserved for and immediately available for public use as a street or other purpose. 
Sidewalk: A hard-surfaced pedestrian access area adjacent to or within the right-of-way of a street. 
Sight visibility triangle easement: The areas at the corners of an intersection, or at the intersection of a street and driveway, which may vary based on type of street, that are to be kept free of shrubs, ground covers, berms, fences, structures, or other materials or items over two and one-half (2½) and twelve (12) feet in height as measured from the ground. 

Street: An improved way for the conveyance of motor driven, rubber-tired vehicles, such as automobiles and trucks. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-1-4. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all development; provided however, that within this article certain exceptions are made to specific sections or paragraphs. 
(b)  Before any development permit or building permit is issued for a given development or building, the parking lot layout and area must be found by the community development director to be in compliance with all applicable requirements of this article and site design review as required by article 9-9 of this Code is accomplished. The community development director may exempt from the permit and site design review requirements of this Code any improvement project resulting in four (4) or less parking spaces, or the addition of four (4) or less parking spaces to an existing parking lot. Such exemption shall not relieve the developer of compliance with other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(c)  The building official shall not authorize occupancy or use of a building until advised by the community development director or designee that parking facilities meet the applicable requirements of this article. 
(d)  Prior to the city's issuance of a business registration, compliance with the requirements of this article shall be demonstrated. 
(e)  This article shall not be construed as requiring compliance of parking lots which lawfully existed on the effective date of this article; provided, however, that the community development director shall ensure parking lots that do not comply with this article meet the requirements of this article or substantially comply when there is a change in use, and when a new development permit is required or a building permit is required to add additional building space on the site. If substantial redesign of the parking lot is required to comply with this article in such cases of new development or building additions, the community development director may accept substantial rather than complete compliance when the strict application of a requirement of this article would pose substantial practical difficulty. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-17-2. - ACCESS 

Sec. 9-17-2-1. - Access. 
(a)  Every development and every lot shall have access via an approved roadway or driveway to a public street or private street (if approved) which connects to the public street system. 
(b)  Ingress and egress to parking areas shall be by means of a driveway from the abutting street meeting the minimum requirements of this article. 
(c)  The community development director shall not authorize access of development in a nonresidential zoning district through any residential zoning district; exceptions may be made for mixed-use developments. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-2-2. - Access control on state routes. 
(a)  Access onto a U.S. or state highway shall meet Georgia Department of Transportation requirements. Specifically, for subdivisions or land developments accessing state routes, the Georgia Department of Transportation requires a driveway permit and may require the installation of deceleration lanes and/or other improvements per its Regulations for Driveways and Encroachment Control , as most recently revised. Such state approval and driveway permit shall be a precondition of development permit approval. A copy of the Georgia Department of Transportation permit, if required, shall be submitted to the community development director before plans can be approved. 
(b)  For driveways accessing U.S. or state highways, the requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation shall apply whenever more restrictive than the standards in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-2-3. - Safe maneuvering and prevention of obstructions. 
(a)  Except for single-family dwellings, duplexes, residential condominiums, and townhouses, off-street parking spaces shall have access so that their use will not require backing movements or other maneuvering within a street right-of-way. 
(b)  There shall be no obstruction of a public sidewalk, including that portion of the sidewalk within a driveway apron, due to parking, loading, or other activity. The director of public works may require that construction contractors make special provisions for maintaining safe passage along public sidewalks during construction. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-2-4. - Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities or service windows. 
Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through facility or areas having drop-off and pick-up areas in accordance with this section. 
(a)  Stacking spaces shall begin at the window or communication/mechanical device (e.g., order board) first encountered by the vehicle user. Financial institutions with drive-through windows, car washes (automated or staffed facilities), drive-through coffee sales facilities, and any other uses with drive-through facilities shall provide three (3) stacking spaces for each window or drive-through service facility. Restaurants with drive-through facilities shall at least provide five (5) stacking spaces for each window or drive-through service facility. 
(b)  Stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through stations shall not impede on and off site traffic movements and shall not create a potentially unsafe condition where crossed by pedestrian access to a public entrance of a building. 
(c)  Drive-through lanes shall be separated by striping or curbing from off-street parking areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked, or otherwise distinctly delineated. 
(d)  All drive-through facilities shall be provided with a bypass lane with a minimum width of nine (9) feet, aside the drive-through lane. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-17-3. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 9-17-3-1. - Permit required. 
(a)  A permit shall be required for construction, including driveways and utilities, in any public right-of-way. Permits will not be issued until such time that plans have been submitted and approved by the public works director or designee and, if a surfacing other than asphalt or concrete is used, the department of water resources director or designee. 
(b)  No curbs or medians on public streets or rights-of-way shall be cut or altered for access, and no driveway connection to a public or private street shall be made or altered, without a permit issued by the public works department and/or other applicable jurisdictions (e.g., GDOT, Hall County). 
(c)  Deceleration lanes may be required at all entrances to subdivisions and industrial and commercial developments that front on arterial and collector streets. Deceleration lanes shall be twelve (12) feet in width plus curb and gutter for a minimum distance of two hundred (200) feet measured from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, or as may be otherwise required by the Georgia Department of Transportation (on state routes) or the public works director for a local street. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-3-2. - Driveway width requirements. 
(a)  Vehicular access from properties to streets shall comply with the following minimum dimensional requirements, measured at the right-of-way line. 
TABLE 9-17-3-1  DRIVEWAY WIDTH REQUIREMENTS 

 
(b)  When a property containing a single-family residence is converted to a use that requires a wider driveway, the public works director may reduce the driveway width required by this section if access via a narrower driveway will not be impeded. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-3-3. - Number of driveways limited. 
(a)  Along state or U.S. highways, no more than one (1) driveway access from a property shall be permitted for each three hundred (300) feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof. 
(b)  Along all streets other than state or U.S. highways, one (1) driveway that meets the driveway width requirements described within table 9-17-3-1 of this chapter shall be permitted for every two hundred (200) feet of road frontage not to exceed a total of three (3) driveways within residential zoned districts and not to exceed a total of five (5) driveways within commercial or industrial zoned districts as described in table 9-17-3-2 of this chapter. The public works director shall have the ability to administratively vary this requirement for good cause. Written application must be made to the public works director stating the reason for the administrative variance, and identifying the reason(s) for such request. 
TABLE 9-17-3-2  NUMBER OF DRIVEWAYS PERMITTED 

 
(c)  The public works director shall determine whether the driveways may be unrestricted or will have to be designed for right-in, right-out traffic flow. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-3-4. - Location limitations. 
(a)  No driveway shall be allowed within thirty-five (35) feet of the right-of-way line of any street intersections for single-family and two-family residential lots and within fifty (50) feet for multi-family and nonresidential properties. The public works director shall have the ability to administratively vary this requirement for good cause. Written application must be made to the public works director stating the reason for the administrative variance, and identifying the reason(s) for such request. 
(b)  Corner lot access shall be located at the points farthest from the intersection to eliminate turning movement accidents and to promote proper storage of through traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-3-5. - Minimum driveway construction specifications. 
Driveway connections shall be provided between the edge of pavement or back of curb to the right-of-way line. No property may be afforded access from a public street except as follows: 
(a)  Curb and gutter streets shall be provided with a driveway apron constructed of 3000 psi concrete at least six (6) inches thick. Sidewalks, where provided, shall be warped to the driveway apron and are to be identified across the driveway apron by construction joints or control joints. 
(b)  Swale ditch section streets shall be provided with a driveway apron constructed of 3000 psi concrete at least six (6) inches thick, or asphaltic concrete of the same thickness and type as the paving course(s) for the street. 
(c)  For streets that have been overlaid, driveway aprons shall tie into the existing curb and gutter. Asphalt may be added to the apron for smoother access. 
(d)  All driveway aprons shall have a radius connecting the driveway to the curb line or pavement edge as follows: 
TABLE 9-17-3-3  DRIVEWAY APRON RADII 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-3-6. - Driveway surfacing. 
(a)  Driveways shall be paved with asphalt or concrete unless the department of water resources director or designee permits porous materials due to environmental impacts or to meet the stormwater management and water quality objectives of this Code. Porous materials shall not be installed at commercial/industrial sites where, in the opinion of the water resources director or designee, the potential for spills and groundwater contamination exists. 
(b)  In the case of land development within the Historic Preservation overlay zone, the community development director or designee may recommend and the historic preservation commission shall be authorized to review and approve the use of alternative pavement surfaces or permit driveways to be unpaved if appropriate to the character of the historic district or landmark. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-3-7. - Common access easements for shared driveways. 
Shared driveways between two (2) parcels along the common property line may be required by the public works director. In such cases, each property owner shall grant an access easement to facilitate the movement of motor vehicles across the site. 

(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-17-4. - SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLE EASEMENTS 

Sec. 9-17-4-1. - Site visibility triangle easement established. 
A sight visibility triangle easement, as defined in this article, is hereby established at every public or private street intersection with another street or a private driveway, which shall meet the dimensions specified in table 9-17-4-1. Required sight visibility triangle easements shall be required to be delineated on all plans and plats. 
TABLE 9-17-4-1  SITE VISIBILITY TRIANGLE EASEMENT REQUIREMENTS  (see diagram) 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-4-2. - Delineation at street intersections. 
At public street intersections, the sight visibility triangle easement is delineated by the two (2) intersecting street right-of-way lines and a line connecting the right-of-way lines at the points indicated table 9-17-4-1. The connecting points shall be measured from the right-of-way lines extended to their point of intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-4-3. - Delineation at driveway intersections. 
At driveway intersections with public streets, the edge of the driveway's pavement or back of curb will be used for the sight visibility triangle easement measurements along the driveway. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-4-4. - Restrictions within sight visibility easements. 
Within the sight visibility triangle easement, the planting of trees or other vegetation or the location of structures over two and one-half (2½) feet in height that would obstruct the clear sight across the area of the easement shall be prohibited. The easement shall provide right of entry to the city for the purpose of removing any object or vegetation that obstructs the clear sight. The public works director may authorize structures or vegetation at a greater height within a sight visibility triangle easement if it is determined that sight visibility will not be compromised. Any proposed structures or vegetation exceeding this height shall be indicated on plans. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-17-5. - PARKING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 9-17-5-1. - Off-street parking required. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, at the time of the establishment of any use, or erection of any building, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area, there shall be provided permanent off-street parking spaces in a number and in accordance with the design specifications required by this chapter. 
(b)  No existing or future off-street parking area shall be reduced in capacity to less than the minimum required number of spaces, or increased to more than the maximum permitted number of spaces, or altered in design or function to less than the minimum standards, unless specifically provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-2. - Parking requirements in the C-B, central business zoning district. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, off-street parking shall not be required for any use within the C-B, central business zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-3. - Surfacing and curbing of parking lots. 
Parking lots shall be improved with an asphalt or concrete surface and curb and gutter as approved by the public works director; provided, however, that: 
(a)  Parking lots shall be paved with asphalt or concrete, unless the department of water resources director or designee permits porous materials due to environmental impacts or to meet the stormwater management and water quality objectives of this Code. Porous materials shall not be installed at commercial/industrial sites where, in the opinion of the water resources director or designee, the potential for spills and groundwater contamination exists. 
(b)  Curbing shall be installed as required by the department of water resources director when considered necessary for drainage, although water quality effectiveness and character of the zoning district shall be considerations in determining curbing requirements. Toward the end of maximizing infiltration and the promoting the water quality effectiveness of low impact development techniques, the department of water resources director is authorized to vary curb requirements for parking lots. 
(c)  In the case of land development within the Historic Preservation overlay zone, the community development department may recommend and the historic preservation commission shall be authorized to review and approve the use of alternative pavement surfaces or permit parking lots to be unpaved if appropriate to the character of the historic district or landmark. 
(d)  See also section 9-17-5-15 for by-right permissions to use alternative paving surfaces for large parking lots. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-4. - Parking area use limitations. 
(a)  Areas provided to meet the minimum requirements of this article as to handicapped and other parking spaces, along with the aisles and driveways necessary to provide access to those spaces, shall not be used for any purpose other than the temporary parking of vehicles for the present on-site use or uses. Specifically, no such parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies. 
(b)  Upon application, the community development director may approve temporary structures and uses such as tent sales within required parking spaces that are not used on a continuous basis, provided that such uses are moveable from the site upon order by the community development department, subject to the requirements of section 9-10-8-2 of this Code. 
(c)  This section shall not preclude the uses of parking lots as authorized in section 9-10-1-4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-5. - Parking for company-owned vehicles. 
Every business that stores vehicles owned by the business on site overnight (such as a company fleet), or maintains a stock of vehicles as part of its business activities (such as a car sales lot, a salvage and wrecking yard, auto repair, car rental agency, etc.), shall provide for adequate parking or storage for the vehicles such that: 
(a)  No parking occurs in a public right-of-way; 
(b)  Parking does not encroach on off-street parking spaces required by this chapter and may not be parked within the front yard or otherwise positioned for advertising purposes; 
(c)  Any other area that has not been improved as a parking lot or storage yard. Such parking spaces shall be in addition to those required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-6. - Interpretations. 
(a)  Fractions. Where a fractional space results during the calculation of required parking, the required number of parking spaces shall be rounded downward to the next whole number. 
(b)  Parking space requirement not specified. Where the parking requirement for a particular use is not described in this chapter, and where no similar use is listed, the community development director shall determine the number of spaces to be provided based on requirements for similar uses, location of the proposed use, the number of employees on the largest shift, total square footage, potential customer use, and other expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed use. At the discretion of a development applicant, a parking generation study prepared by a qualified professional may be submitted to aid the community development director in making such a determination; if submitted, it shall be considered by the community development director prior to making a determination. 
(c)  Computations for multiple floor uses within a building. In cases where a building contains some combination of office space, retail or wholesale sales area, and/or bulk storage area, the community development director may authorize that combinations of the parking requirements established in this chapter be used which are proportional to the use of floor areas (e.g., warehousing, retail, and/or office) in determining the minimum required off-street parking space requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Related facility parking. The community development director may through the administrative variance process specified in chapter 9-24-3 of this Code, authorize a reduction of the number of required parking spaces when it can be demonstrated to his or her satisfaction that the use provides other areas on the site that are not marked as parking spaces but which serve some of the demand for on-site parking. Such areas may include but are not limited to drive-through stacking lanes, drive-through bays, and gas pump canopy areas, and excess loading zones. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-7. - Off-street parking spaces on same site as use they serve. 
All parking spaces required by this chapter for all uses shall be located on the same lot as the use for which such parking is intended, except as specifically provided otherwise by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-8. - Off-site parking spaces permitted. 
In lieu of parking on the same lot as the use for which such parking is intended, parking spaces required by this chapter for all uses may be provided off-site, provided the following requirements are met: 
(a)  The spaces are within a walking distance of four hundred (400) feet of the main entrance to the building or use they are intended to serve, provided, however, that no required parking spaces may be located across any state or U.S. highway from the use they are intended to serve. In townhouse subdivision developments, each parking space shall be within one hundred (100) feet of the entrance to the dwelling unit that it serves, as measured along the most direct pedestrian route. 
(b)  The property containing the parking spaces not serving a use onsite must be either under the same ownership as the property containing the use to which the parking will serve, or a valid lease agreement must exist between the two (2) property owners for use of the parking area. Lease agreements, as applicable, must be of sufficient duration to serve the use or uses proposed to be partially served by the off-site leased parking, as approved by the public works director. 
(c)  Off-site parking shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the required parking for a building or buildings, except in the C-B zoning district, where one hundred (100) percent is permitted. 
(d)  Safe and convenient pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or path, must exist or be provided at the expense of the property owner from the structure or use to the off-site parking lot. 
(e)  The community development director may in individual cases administratively authorize a reduction, not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the minimum required number of parking spaces for projects that are directly served by on-street parking approved by the public works director. 
(f)  The number of parking spaces required by this chapter for any number of separate uses may be combined and provided in one (1) lot (i.e., off the site of one (1) or more uses), provided that the spaces are within a walking distance of four hundred (400) feet of the main entrance to the building or use they are intended to serve; provided further that the required spaces assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except as follows: 
(1)  One-half (½) of the parking spaces required for a church, theater or assembly hall whose peak attendance will be on weekends and nights that services or activities are held may be assigned to a use that will be closed during those time periods. 
(2)  Parking spaces may be shared by more than one (1) use if the community development director finds that the total number of spaces will be adequate at the peak hours of the uses they serve. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-9. - Requirements for design of parking lots. 
(a)  Site design review. The design of parking lots is of critical importance with regard to functionality, pedestrian access, and aesthetics. Therefore, all parking lots or additions to parking lots consisting of more than four (4) spaces require site design review in accordance with article 9-9 of this Code. Locations of parking spaces and their design may vary based on character area and use, after considering the stormwater management objectives of this Code. 
(b)  Drainage. For any use that will require a parking area of five (5) spaces or more, or a loading area, to be newly constructed, added to, or altered in such a way as to affect drainage either on or off the site, storm water drainage plans, including grading plans, shall be submitted to and approved by the community development director and the department of water resources director, prior to the issuance of a land development permit. 
(c)  Location of spaces in relation to rights-of-way. No parking space shall be provided along an access driveway within the first twenty-five (25) feet of the driveway from any local street. The public works director may require that the parking spaces be located at least fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way of a collector street and one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way of an arterial street. 
(d)  Minimum dimensions of spaces. Every parking space shall provide a useable rectangular area at least nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long, excluding any access aisles; provided, however, that the minimum width of parking spaces may be reduced in accordance sections 9-17-5-14 and 9-17-5-15 of this chapter. 
(e)  Minimum dimensions of access aisles. Access aisles in parking lots with parking at ninety (90) degree angles must be at least twenty-six (26) feet wide for double-loaded parking space designs with two-way traffic, and twenty-four (24) feet wide for single-loaded parking space designs with one-way or two-way traffic (see figures). One-way traffic aisles must be clearly marked with directional arrows on the pavement at each intersection with another aisle. The public works director may authorize a minor reduction in the required minimum width of access aisles for redeveloped areas if sufficient access is provided and the fire marshal agrees that access for fire apparatus is maintained. 


(f)  Demarcation . Every parking space shall be clearly demarcated by lines painted on or otherwise applied to the parking lot surface. One-way traffic aisles must be clearly marked with directional arrows on the pavement at each intersection with another aisle, driveway, or street entrance. The public works director may grant exceptions to the requirement of this paragraph to mark common boundaries between parking spaces in the case of gravel parking lots, if and where permitted, or to authorize traffic directional signs in lieu of one-way pavement markings. 
(g)  Maximum aisle length. Parking aisle lengths shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet without a break for circulation (see figure). 

(h)  Angled parking. Parking spaces with ninety (90) degree designs shall be required, unless sixty (60) degree, or forty-five (45) degree angles to the access aisle are authorized by the community development director, in which case required aisle widths for ninety (90) degree parking may be reduced per standards approved by the director. Parking lots with parking space angles less than forty-five (45) degrees to the access aisle shall not be allowed, except for parking spaces that are parallel to the access aisle. 

(i)  Sight distance at end aisles. The intersection of parking aisles with a ring road or other on-site roadways or driveways shall provide adequate intersection sight distance. Parking aisle end islands shall be curbed unless that requirement is waived for water quality purposes or in a rural/exurban area; painted end islands are ineffective and are generally not permitted. 
(j)  Light pole locations and specifications. Light poles should be located in landscaped planter strips. Where this cannot be accomplished, light poles must be placed on a reinforced concrete pedestal to protect them from damage or being knocked over. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-10. - Minimum number of handicapped parking spaces. 
Handicapped spaces shall be provided in each parking lot according to the requirements of table 9-17-5-1. Such spaces shall be counted in meeting the off-street parking requirements of this chapter, as specified in table 9-17-5-2 of this chapter. 
TABLE 9-17-5-1  MINIMUM NUMBER OF HANDICAPPED SPACES REQUIRED 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-11. - Specifications for handicapped parking spaces. 

(a)  Handicapped parking spaces shall have an adjacent aisle five (5) feet wide, and one (1) in every eight (8) handicapped spaces (but not less than one (1)) shall be adjacent to an aisle eight (8) feet wide and the space shall be signed "van accessible." Handicapped parking space aisles shall be clearly demarcated. 
(b)  All handicapped parking shall comply with the requirements of the federal Americans with Disabilities Act. Accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved by a sign showing the symbol of accessibility, per applicable state law requirements. Such signs shall be located so that they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parked in that space. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-12. - Off-street parking requirements by use. 
Unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, on each lot where a building, structure, or use exists, each site shall be designed to provide and shall provide for off-street parking in the minimum amounts and not to exceed the maximum amounts specified in table 9-17-5-2 (including handicapped parking spaces). Requirements refer to one (1) space per unit of measurement unless otherwise specifically provided. Square footages are measured on the basis of gross square footage unless otherwise specifically provided. 
TABLE 9-17-5-2  MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM NUMBER OF  OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-13. - Administrative variances. 
(a)  The community development director may via administrative variance allow parking at a rate of up to twenty (20) percent above the maximum or twenty (20) percent below the minimum required as specified in table 9-17-5-2, on a case-by-case basis based upon the scale and impacts of the request, for good cause shown, in accordance with chapter 9-24-3 of this Code. 
(b)  The applicant shall make said request in writing which shall include documentation from an acceptable industry publication (e.g., Institute of Transportation Engineers, Urban Land Institute, American Planning Association, etc.) or by a study prepared by a qualified professional that documents parking requirements. 
(c)  In approving administrative variances that reduce the minimum parking requirements established in this chapter, the community development director may as a condition of approval, if applicable, require an area to be reserved or set-aside for additional parking area for future use if needed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-14. - Compact parking spaces. 
Compact parking spaces may be used in parking areas when more than twenty (20) parking spaces are required, provided that the areas for compact parking are clearly marked and not more than twenty (20) percent of the number of parking spaces provided in the entire parking area is designated compact auto parking. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-15. - Reduction of parking stall width and use of porous materials. 
When a parking lot of seventy-five (75) spaces or an area of one (1) acre or more of parking is proposed, the applicant may divide the parking lot into distinct use areas as provided in table 9-17-5-3 and reduce impervious surfaces via reduction of parking stall width and the use of porous materials for improved water quality infiltration techniques. 
TABLE 9-17-5-3  DIVISION OF LARGE PARKING LOTS FOR MINIMUM PARKING SPACE WIDTH REDUCTION AND AUTHORIZATION OF POROUS MATERIALS 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-5-16. - Cross-referenced provisions. 
(a)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses of parking lots and loading areas shall be limited as specified in section 9-10-1-4 of this Code. 
(b)  Street frontage. Parking lots shall meet minimum street frontage requirements as specified in section 9-3-2-5 of this Code. 
(c)  Landscaping. Parking lots shall be landscaped according to the requirements of chapter 9-16-4 of this Code. Also see chapter 9-16-5 for tree plan requirements. 
(d)  Residential zoning districts. Vehicle parking in residential zoning district shall meet the requirements of section 9-10-3-7 of this Code. 
(e)  Home occupations. Home occupations shall meet the parking requirements of section 9-10-4-4 of this Code. 
(f)  Special temporary outdoor events. Parking for special temporary outdoor events shall meet the requirements of section 9-10-8-2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
CHAPTER 9-17-6. - OFF-STREET LOADING 

Sec. 9-17-6-1. - Off-street loading required. 

On the same lot with every building, structure or part thereof, erected or occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, department store, wholesale store, grocery supermarket, hotel, hospital, mortuary, dry cleaning plant, retail business, or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for the standing, loading, and unloading of such materials to avoid undue interference with public use of streets, alleys, and private or public parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-6-2. - Loading area specifications. 
Unless otherwise approved by the community development director, loading spaces shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet wide, forty (40) feet long, with fourteen (14) feet of height clearance. When the development requires loading and unloading by full-size tractor-trailers, loading spaces shall be at least sixty (60) feet long with a total approach zone of at least ninety (90) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-6-3. - Minimum number of off-street loading spaces required. 

One (1) off-street loading space shall be provided for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for light industrial use and one (1) off-street loading space for the first five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for retail or other nonindustrial use for which a loading space is required. One (1) additional space shall be required for each additional twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for light industrial use and for each additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet for retail or other nonindustrial use. 
For example, a one hundred thousand (100,000) square foot building consisting of five thousand (5,000) square feet of office/sales area and ninety-five thousand (95,000) square feet of warehouse would require a total of six (6) off-street loading spaces: one (1) for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet of warehouse space; one (1) for the five thousand (5,000) square feet of office/sales area; and four (4) for the remaining eighty-five thousand (85,000) square feet of warehouse space (eighty-five thousand (85,000) divided by twenty-five thousand (25,000) = three and four-tenths (3.4) spaces, which is rounded upward to four (4) spaces). 
The community development director is authorized to modify the loading area specifications of this chapter and/or reduce or waive off-street loading space requirements for good cause shown, after application for administrative variance as specified in chapter 9-24-3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Sec. 9-17-6-4. - Administrative variance. 
The community development director is authorized to modify the loading area specifications of this chapter and reduce or waive off-street loading space requirements for good cause shown, after application for administrative variance, in accordance with chapter 9-24-3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § XI(Exh. B), 6-21-16) 
Article 9-18 - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 21, 2017, repealed the former Art. 9-18, Chs. 9-18-1—9-18-7, and enacted a new Art. 9-18 as set out herein. The former Art. 9-18 pertained to sign regulations and derived from Ord. No. 2008-43, §§ VI—X, adopted Nov. 18, 2008; Ord. No. 2009-47, §§ XXXIV—XXXVIII, adopted Dec. 15, 2009; and Ord. No. 2013-10, § III, adopted June 13, 2013. 

CHAPTER 9-18-1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-18-1-1. - Findings. 
It is a substantial and compelling governmental interest to control signs and other advertising devices for the following reasons, among others: 
(a)  Beneficial functions. Signs provide a means of communication, a visual, place-based medium by which to express messages. Signs and advertising devices facilitate and aid in the identification and location of business establishments, institutions, and other land uses. Signs can be an effective, easily available, and cost-efficient way to inform people and aid their decision-making. Signs are an investment that brings economic value to businesses. Signs provide a means for attracting consumers who are not otherwise familiar with the geographic area. Signs provide assistance to individuals in making selections from among alternative choices. Signs help certain locations work from a profitability standpoint that otherwise might fail without adequate signage; and 
(b)  Messaging. Signage is a form of advertising. All other advertising mediums are regulated. There is limited federal and state regulation of signs, despite significant intervention by the federal government in the regulation of other forms of communication. Signage is a type of advertising that cannot be turned off or rejected by the consumer, like some other forms of communication. For instance, radio and television advertisements can be avoided by turning off the radio or television. With regard to signs, however, motorists must keep eyes open to drive and cannot block out signs from their peripheral vision; and 
(c)  Distractions. Signs by their very nature are intended to gain the attention of motorists and therefore distract them from the primary purpose of maneuvering a vehicle along a road. Sign controls are needed to promote traffic safety and avoid traffic accidents; and 
(d)  Public safety. Signage, if left unregulated, can cause confusion and delay in responding to emergencies, because unregulated signs can degrade the utility and reduce the visibility and effectiveness of public safety signs; and 
(e)  Public health. Unregulated signage can contribute to clutter and lack of organization in the wayfinding system of a community and thereby negatively influence the stress levels of motorists. Roadside blight can contribute to high stress levels of motorists (source: Meg Maguire, Ray Foote, and Frank Vespe, 1997, "Beauty As Well As Bread," Journal of the American Planning Association 63(3): 317-328). Height, size, placement, and other sign regulations serve substantial public purposes of bringing order to the wayfinding system that may help to avoid undue stress levels of motorists; and 
(f)  Appearance and economy. The appearance of the city is substantially influenced by signs, and it is essential to the city's long-term economic viability to maintain a positive appearance. Signs and advertising, without regulation, can detract from the character, beauty, and visual attractiveness of the city; and 
(g)  Property impacts. The size, height, construction materials, location, condition, and attributes of signs can have an adverse impact on surrounding and nearby land uses and properties if not regulated and properly maintained, including the lowering of property values. Abandoned and antiquated signs and sign structures (e.g., a pole with a blank structure for a sign face) can have a particularly detrimental effect on adjacent properties and contribute to an overall image of blight in the community; and 
(h)  Public investments secured. Sign regulations help to assure that public benefits derived from expenditures of public funds for the improvement and beautification of streets and other public structures and spaces are protected. Unregulated signs can neutralize the value and benefit of public investments in streetscapes; and 
(i)  Benefits to businesses. Sign regulations benefit businesses that seek to advertise. Unregulated commercial signage can be detrimental to individual businesses, because business owners may be compelled to erect larger and costlier signs to outperform neighboring or nearby businesses. Such competition for visibility among business can result in too many signs and excessive sizes and heights, to a point of diminishing returns where individual business signs are no longer adequately visible. If unregulated, the competition for visual recognition can defeat the purpose of the signs, which is to carry a message. If signs are left unregulated, patrons of individual businesses may miss their destinations because they cannot find the particular business of choice in the sea of advertising devices; and 
(j)  Wall and window signs. Signs placed on building walls and in windows can be excessive if not regulated as to the area of the sign face, and it is in the public interest to ensure that building and window signs are proportional to the building wall or window on which the signs are placed; and 
(k)  Placement on objects. It is inappropriate to attach signs to certain objects like rocks and benches, thereby justifying certain prohibitions. It is also inappropriate to allow signs on roofs of buildings, justifying prohibition, since roof signs interrupt the silhouette of the building, overpower the architecture of the building, and can also block views; and 
(l)  Wind-blown devices. Some signs and advertising devices are designed to move in the wind. For instance, a flag, or feather banners (also called "wind blades"), or ribbons on strings, etc. are designed to capture attention due to movement in the wind. Such signs and advertising devices have greater potential for attracting attention to them given their movement. Without regulations and prohibitions on these types of advertising devices, the result would be clutter and degradation of community appearance; and 
(m)  Changeable copy. A change in copy of any sign is not in itself a matter of public concern, except in a few instances. This article does not intend to regulate the actual copy (message) of a sign, but yet the frequency with which it changes is a matter of public concern deserving of regulation. In particular electronic changeable copy signs pose specific issues that need regulation because the change of sign copy can occur instantaneously and therefore become more distracting or better able to attract attention than signs which change copy less frequently; and 
(n)  Electronic changeable copy signs. Electronic multiple message signs, which allow operators to change content from remote locations in a matter of seconds, have been shown to create possible threats to public safety. Such signs are erected for the purpose of trying to hold the attention of motorists, often by changing messages and pictures for short durations using a series of bright, colorful images produced mainly via LED (light emitting diode) technologies; and 
(o)  Illumination. Signs which are lighted at night give the appearance of activity or operation that is not consistent with residential character of certain parts of the city. Signs that are internally illuminated also tend to give the appearance of a business area. It is appropriate to control the lighting of signs and to make distinctions on where signs may need to remain unlit, and also where internally illuminated signs are permitted. Lights that flash or blink, or vary in intensity have greater potential to attract attention but also a greater probability of distracting motorists. It is in the interests of the community to prohibit lighting practices on signs that are likely to distract motorists. The luminance of a sign (a measurable quantity) can also be perceived by humans as too bright or imposing glare, or causing a nuisance, and it is in the interest of the community to control the intensity of lighting. Electronic changeable copy signs pose special issues and deserve individual regulation specific to that type of sign; and 
(p)  Illumination of electronic changeable copy signs. Brightly lit and colorful signs that change messages every few seconds compel motorists to notice them, and they lure the attention of motorists away from what is happening on the road and onto the sign. Such signs pose public safety threats because if they attract a motorist's attention, the motorist will look at the sign and not at the road. Electronic changeable copy signs are also a threat to public safety because of their brightness, making them visible from great distances. Due to their nature of brightness, changing colors, and changing displays, electronic changeable copy signs are more distracting than signs which do not vary the brightness, color or message, or changeable copy signs that are changed by other means at less frequent intervals. Some electronic changeable copy signs could, if unregulated, have the appearance of large, plasma-screen televisions. An electronic LED display contains brightly-lit text and graphics which can be seen from hundreds of feet away, drawing the attention of everyone within view. Unless otherwise regulated, such displays can be extremely bright since they are designed to be visible in bright sunlight and at night. Furthermore, the human eye is drawn to them far more strongly than to traditional illuminated signs. Such electronic LED displays can be seen from as far away as six-tenths (0.6) of a mile, making them distracting. It takes a minimum of six (6) seconds to comprehend the message on an electronic sign, which is three (3) times the safe period for driver distraction. For these reasons, electronic changeable signs deserve specific regulation to prevent or mitigate these adverse impacts; and 
(q)  Regulation by zoning district. The zoning district is an appropriate means of regulating signs, because generally a character is established by each zoning district. The needs for signage differ remarkably among single-family residential zoning districts from zoning districts allowing business, which in turn differ significantly from business parks, low-rise office complexes, and industrial establishments. Lower sign heights and smaller areas are appropriate in residential zoning districts when compared with business and industrial zones; and 
(r)  Maintenance. Signs, if improperly maintained, present an unkempt appearance and may present an image of blight to visitors, residents, and employees. It is in the interest of the city to ensure that signs are properly maintained to avoid the appearance of blight and also to prevent possible detrimental impact on property values that may result from such blight. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-1-2. - Purposes. 
In addition to the general purposes of this Code, the purposes of this article are as follows: 
(a)  To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare; 
(b)  To provide for the expression of speech by citizens and businesses, and to afford adequate opportunity for self-expression through free speech; 
(c)  To balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(d)  To enhance the economy and the business and industry of the city by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs, including the public being able to locate goods, services, and facilities in the city; 
(e)  To maintain and enhance the aesthetics of the city by restricting signs and lights which increase clutter; 
(f)  To enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities in the city without difficulty and confusion; 
(g)  To ensure the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs; 
(h)  To maintain and improve traffic safety by preventing or restricting signs that due to their placement or appearance increase the probability of traffic accidents by obstructing vision or confusing motorists; 
(i)  To promote signs which are compatible with their surroundings and which minimize potential adverse effects of signs on nearby property; 
(j)  To ensure proper maintenance of signs, for safety and structural soundness, as well as the appearance and attractiveness of signs; 
(k)  To maintain the historic image of the city; and 
(l)  To ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-1-3. - Intentions. 
(a)  Time, place, and manner restrictions. It is the intent of this article to regulate the composition, type, location, placement, height, size, quantity, illumination, duration, and manner of signs and advertising devices that may be displayed. The regulation of these aspects of signs and sign structures is a valid and lawful means of achieving the intentions and purposes of this article. These intentions and purposes are valid and lawful governmental interests. 
(b)  Content neutrality. The city intends to adopt and implement regulations which are content-neutral. It is not the intent to regulate the content of messages in any way. It is not the intent of this article to foreclose important and distinct mediums of expression for political, religious, or personal messages, on any sign permitted to be erected by this article. It is the intent of this article to allow political, religious, or personal (non-commercial) messages on any sign permitted to be erected by this article. These regulations shall not be construed as limiting the message content of any sign. 
(c)  Distinctions not made. To accomplish the city's intentions, these regulations do not distinguish between on-site or off-site sign content, nor do they distinguish between commercial and non-commercial content. 
(d)  Extent. The regulations contained in this article are considered no more extensive than necessary to serve the substantial governmental interests identified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-1-4. - General definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are hereby defined. As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them: 

A-frame sign: A sign that typically consists of two (2) faces connected and hinged at the top, intended for view by pedestrians, and which can be moved by a person. 
Accessory ground sign: A sign allowance provided for in this article, for a sign erected on the ground. 
Advertising device: Any structure or device erected or intended for the purpose of displaying advertising situated upon or attached to real property or intended to attract attention by whatever means. For purposes of this article, an advertising device is a "sign." 

Air-blown device: Any device not otherwise specifically defined in this article, that is designed to inform or attract, whether or not such device carries a message, and which all or part of the device is set in motion by mechanically forced air. This definition specifically includes but is not limited to those devices referred to commercially as "air puppets" and "air dancers." For purposes of this article, air-blown devices are advertising devices. 
Animated sign: A sign that emits or utilizes in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing; or any sign that emits smoke, vapor, particles, or odors. 

Awning: A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, walkway, or window from the elements. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame, and may be retracted into the face of the building. 
Awning, back-lit: An awning comprised of covering material exhibiting the characteristic of luminosity obtained by means of a source of illumination contained within its framework. 

Awning sign: An awning that contains letters, numbers, symbols, pictures, logos, or visual display, or other communication, attached, painted on, or made an integral part of an awning. Awning signs are "wall signs" for the purposes of this article. 
Banner: A sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, plastic, or natural or synthetic fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing, whether installed on a building or structure or attached to poles or other supports and freestanding. For purposes of this article, a banner is a "sign." It is characteristic of a banner that, even though tied to a support, there is some movement in the wind (i.e., a wind-blown device). 
Billboard: A freestanding sign that exceeds the maximum allowable area or height, or both, for principal use ground signs authorized in this article, and which is authorized subject to specific limitations. A billboard is typically, though not required to be, erected by the outdoor advertising industry; and a billboard is typically regulated by and requires a permit for outdoor advertising from the state department of transportation. The provisions authorizing a billboard are in addition to other sign allowances of this article. A billboard existing on the effective date of this article may or may not comply with the provisions of this article, and to the extent any such existing billboard does not conform to all requirements of this article it is considered a nonconforming sign. 
Building frontage: The width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular building in which an establishment is located, usually facing a street. Leased building frontage is that portion of the total building frontage containing space owned, leased, or rented to an individual establishment. 


Canopy sign: A sign attached, painted on, or made an integral part of a canopy, whether that canopy is attached to a building or structure or freestanding. An attached canopy is a multi-sided structure or architectural projection supported by attachment to a building on one (1) or more sides and also supported by columns or supports at additional points. Canopy signs, whether attached, painted on, or made an integral part of an attached canopy (including suspension underneath an attached canopy), are wall signs for the purposes of this article. 
Changeable copy sign, electronic: A sign on which the sign copy (words, numbers, images, etc.) changes or can be changed by electronic means. This definition includes any sign which results in the illuminated display of messages or information by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, for example, digital, LED (light emitting diode) or similar or refined display technology, or other electric methods, which allows the message change to be actuated by an electronic control mechanism. It is characteristic of such signs that the sequence of messages and the rate of change can be electronically programmed and modified by electronic processes. Electronic changeable copy signs are also "internally illuminated" signs. 
Changeable copy sign, manual: A sign on which the sign copy (words, numbers, images, etc.) changes or can be changed manually on the sign itself, such as by replacement of letters, or in the case of a chalkboard which can be erased and the message rewritten. 
Changeable copy sign, mechanical: A sign on which the sign copy (words, numbers, images, etc.) changes or can be changed by movement or rotation of panels or slats. 
Derelict sign: A sign that is dilapidated, is in such condition as to create a hazard or nuisance, is unsafe, or fails to comply with the International Building Code adopted by the city in section 9-20-1-1, the National Electrical Code adopted by the city in section 9-20-1-3, or any other code relating to safety. 

Directory sign for multi-tenant development: A sign, distinguished from a project entrance sign, which is allowed on a premise with more than one (1) building or more than one (1) tenant or occupant of a building, It may be freestanding or a building (wall) sign. Such signs are not visible from the public street right-of-way which provides initial access to the property, but rather are located within the development, along a driveway, access way, or parking aisle. This type of sign is not regulated by this article. 
Discontinued sign: A freestanding or building sign that has not been used by a business, establishment, or person, for six (6) months or more. A sign may be deemed discontinued by the community development director when there is clear evidence that a business or activity has vacated the building or grounds for six (6) months or more. A sign permitted by an establishment that still exists on a site where said establishment has not operated for six (6) months or more, as evidenced by a lack of current (annual) business license, shall be considered prima facia evidence of a discontinued sign. 
Erect: To construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or establish. Activities performed as an incident to the change of advertising message or the normal maintenance or repair of a sign structure are excluded from this definition. 

Feather banner: A vertical portable sign, made of lightweight material that is prone to move in the wind, and that contains a harpoon-style pole or staff driven into the ground for support or supported by means of an individual stand. This definition includes such signs of any shape including flutter, bow, teardrop, rectangular, shark, feather, and U-shaped. For purposes of this article, a feather banner is an advertising device and sign. 
Flag: A device made of cloth, plastic, or natural or synthetic fabric, with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to such surface, and which is designed to move in the wind. For purposes of this article, except as specifically authorized, a "flag" is an advertising device and "sign." It is defined separately from wind-blown device. 
Flying sign: A blimp, hot air balloon, or any other device designed to be or capable of being kept aloft, motionless or in motion, at a height of thirty-five (35) feet or more from the ground by mechanical, wind, chemical, or hot air means, and not secured or attached to the ground or building. 
Ground sign: A sign or advertising device which is wholly independent of a building or structure for support (i.e., freestanding). A ground sign may contain more than one (1) sign face, and it is typically double-faced. 
Hand-held sign: A sign or advertising device affixed to, carried by, or physically or electronically controlled by a person. A kite used for advertising devices is a hand-held sign. 
Holiday decoration: Signs or displays including lighting which are a non-permanent installation celebrating national, state, and local holidays, religious or cultural holidays, or other holiday seasons (also known as seasonal decorations). 
Incidental sign: A sign, emblem, decal, or other message, designed and sized to be read only from close range (i.e., five (5) feet or less), attached to or integrated into a device or structure more than twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way of a road, and not readily legible from any public rights-of-way. 
Inflatable sign: Any sign, advertising device, or balloon that is or can be filled with air or gas. This includes any three-dimensional ambient air-filled in the shape of a container, figure, or product. For purposes of this article, inflatable signs and balloons are considered advertising devices. 
Interior sign: Any sign erected within a building, including product displays, more than two (2) feet inside an exterior window within a business or establishment and which is not intended to be seen from outside the business or establishment in which the sign is located. 

Mansard: A roof-like facade comparable to an exterior building wall. 
Mansard sign: A sign painted on, attached to, or hung from a mansard. For purposes of this article, mansard signs are "wall signs." 

Marquee: A roof-like structure attached to and supported by a building wall without vertical supports and that projects in a cantilever fashion from the wall of a building. 
Marquee sign: A sign painted on, attached to, or hung from a marquee. For purposes of this article, marquee signs are "wall signs." 

Monument sign: A ground sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face is in contact with a solid and continuous structure which is attached to the ground and made of brick, stone, or other material architecturally compatible with the principal building on the lot to which it pertains (dimensions shown are illustrative only). Typically, a monument sign has a base at least eighteen (18) inches in height. 
Multi-faced sign: A sign structure that contains two (2) or more sign face surfaces that are located on different sides of the structure and are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than three (3) feet. 
Multi-tenant development: A single office, commercial or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two (2) or more businesses, or a multi-family residential development. 
Mural: A picture or image (including but not limited to painted art) which is painted, constructed, or affixed directly onto a building wall, which may or may not contain text, logos, and/or symbols. 
Nonconforming sign: A sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Code, and which by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this Code. 
Official sign: Any sign placed by a governmental body, governmental agency, or public authority for a public purpose, erected and controlled by such governmental body or on its behalf, whether or not located within a public right-of-way; and signs erected by private individuals per federal, state, or local law requirements. 

Pennant: A small, triangular or rectangular flag or multiples thereof, made of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, individually supported or attached to each other by means of a string, rope, or other material and meant to be stretched across or fastened to buildings, or between poles and/or structures, and which is designed to move in the wind. For purposes of this article, pennants are "advertising devices" and "windblown devices." This term does not include a "banner" or a "flag" as defined and regulated by this article. 

Pole or pylon sign: A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or poles, columns, or similar support such that the bottom of the sign structure is not in contact with the ground along the entire portion of the sign face and there is open area underneath the sign face above the ground. A pole or pylon sign is distinguishable from a monument sign. 
Portable sign: Any sign whether on its own trailer, wheels, or otherwise, which is designed to be transported from one place to another. It is characteristic of a portable sign that the space provided for advertising messages may be changed at will by the replacement of lettering or symbols (i.e., a changeable copy sign). Even if the wheels or supports of such sign are removed and the sign converted and attached, temporarily or permanently, to the ground or other structure, said sign shall remain a portable sign for purposes of this article. An "A-frame" sign, defined separately, shall not be considered a portable sign for purposes of this article. 
Principal use ground sign: A notice or advertisement secured to the ground, which is permitted by this article in conjunction with a principal use or principal building located on the property, For purposes of this article, principal use ground signs are considered permanent signs. 
Project entrance sign: A sign located at a discernible entrance into a particular subdivision, multi-family residential development, or office or industrial park. For purposes of this article, project entrance signs are considered permanent signs. 

Projecting sign: A sign affixed to a wall (i.e., a wall sign) extending more than eighteen (18) inches from the surface of such wall, usually perpendicular to the wall surface. 
Revolving sign: A sign that has the capability to revolve about an axis. 
Road frontage: The distance in linear feet of a parcel where it abuts the right-of-way of any public or private street. 

Roof sign: A sign projecting to a greater height than the front building wall, or any sign supported by or attached to a roof, including a sign painted on or adhered to a roof. A sign placed on the fascia portion of a mansard roof is not a roof sign. 
Scoreboard: A sign contained within an athletic venue and which is directed so as to be visible to the attendees of an athletic event. 
Sign: The term "sign" shall mean any structure, display, or device that is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement, or illumination. The term "sign" shall specifically include but not be limited to "banners," "balloons," "flags," "pennants," "streamers," "windblown devices," and "advertising devices." Furthermore, the term "sign" includes the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments, or other features used to draw the attention of the observers. 

Sign face: That portion of the surface of a sign structure (area) where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two (2) or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. The area of the sign face plus the area of the sign structure equals the total sign area. 
For signs that have no identifiable frame or border, the smallest rectangle that includes all of the sign's words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements intended to convey the sign's message shall establish the area of the sign's face. 

Sign height: The height of a sign shall be equal to the vertical distance from the average grade at the base of the sign, or from the crown of the roadway of the nearest street within fifty (50) feet of any portion of the sign, to the highest point of any portion of the sign, whichever results in the greater sign height. Any earthen berms and elevated foundations supporting signs, signposts or other sign supports shall be included in the height of the sign. 
Sign in need of maintenance: Any sign or advertising device that includes any of the following or similar conditions as identified by the city: lettering or other elements of the sign have become detached or have fallen off the sign or become misaligned; painted surfaces on the sign or sign structure have begun to peel, flake over a significant portion of the sign, or have faded or oxidized to an extent that the sign no longer displays the message as originally intended; a significant number of the bricks, stones, or other materials on the structural base of a sign have become detached or have fallen off, or have become misaligned; or one (1) or more illumination devices are not working and have not been replaced. 
Sign structure: All elements of a freestanding sign, including the sign face, background or decorative elements related to the presentation of the sign's message, and the structural supports. 

Streamer: A long, narrow strip of fabric or other material. A streamer is a "wind-blown device." 

Suspended sign: A sign attached to the underside of a canopy, awning or the cover of a walkway or beneath a support extending from a building. A suspended sign is distinguishable from an animated sign even if the sign copy area is attached to a building or structure in a way that can be set in motion with wind pressure. This term does not include any freestanding signs. 
Temporary ground sign: A sign of a nonpermanent nature and erected for a limited duration. This term includes signs constructed from cardboard, coated paperboard, or corrugated plastic and which are either attached to a wooden post or stake in the ground, or set with a wire metal frame in the ground. 
Tenant: One who possesses or occupies land or buildings by title, under a lease, or through payment of rent; an occupant, inhabitant, or dweller of a place. 
Traffic control sign: A sign erected by or under the regulation of the city or state, on private or public property, and which meets the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the Federal Highway Administration. 
Uniform sign plan: Coordinated drawings and specifications that establish a unified design concept with regard to the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all signs to be placed on a property or development. 
Vehicular sign: Any sign placed, mounted, painted on or affixed to a motor vehicle, freight, flatbed or storage trailer or other conveyance when same are placed or parked in such a manner that can be viewed from the public right(s)-of-way; provided, however, that this definition shall not apply when (1) such conveyances are actively being used to transport persons, goods or services in the normal course of business; or (2) such conveyances are actively being used for storage of construction materials for, and on the same parcel where a construction project for which building is underway and required permits have been issued. Even if the wheels or supports of such sign are removed and the sign converted and attached, temporarily or permanently, to the ground or other structure, said sign shall remain a vehicular sign for purposes of this article. 
Visible: Capable of being seen (whether or not legible) without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity. 

Wall sign: A single-sided sign with one (1) visible face applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, in a parallel fashion, and which does not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the outside wall of such building or structure. 
Wind-blown device: Any device, whether or not specifically defined in this article, that is designed to inform or attract, whether or not such device carries a message, and which all or part of the device is set in motion by wind. Such devices include banners (except as may be specifically authorized), pennants, streamers, ribbons, or long narrow strips of fabric, plastic, or other pliable material designed to move in the wind. A "flag" is defined separately and is not considered a "windblown device" for purposes of this article. See also "air-blown device," which is defined separately. 
Window sign: A sign that is placed on or behind a windowpane or a glass door or a sign installed within two (2) feet of an exterior window or door and intended to be visible from the exterior of the building. Displays which show products or depict services sold on the premises and which are more than two (2) feet from an exterior window or door (i.e., "interior signs") shall not be classified as or considered window signs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-1-5. - Applicability. 
(a)  The regulations and requirements of this article apply in the city to all signs and advertising devices that are or are intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way or from outdoor areas of public property. 
(b)  Such signs and advertising devices are allowed only in conformance with this article. 
(c)  No sign or advertising device may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, moved, or maintained except in conformance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-1-6. - Compliance with other laws. 
All signs and advertising devices shall comply with all applicable federal, state, county, and city laws and ordinances. Compliance with the terms of this article shall not relieve any individual, corporation, or other entity of any other duty imposed by law. Where state sign law and/or regulations apply, and there is conflict or overlap with this article, the more restrictive requirements shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
CHAPTER 9-18-2. - EXEMPTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 9-18-2-1. - Exemptions. 
The following signs and devices are exempt from regulation by this article: 
(a)  Beacons. 
(b)  Building markers and decorative or architectural features integral to buildings. 
(c)  Cemetery stones and markings of individual graves or burial plots. 
(d)  Holiday decorations, provided that they are removed within fifteen (15) days following the holiday to which they pertain. 
(e)  Incidental signs. 
(f)  Interior signs. 
(g)  Murals on building walls erected with permission of the governing body of the city. 
(h)  Official signs. 
(i)  Scoreboards that are part of a public or private recreational facility. 
(j)  Traffic control signs and devices, when installed within the right-of-way of a public street under the authority of the state or a local government or a private street, or traffic control signs and devices installed along driveways and in off-street parking lots, per the requirements of the city and consistent with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-2-2. - Display of property addresses. 
The display of street addresses is permitted without compliance with this article. Building identification numbers on multi-tenant buildings which are essential to the location of such buildings are also permitted without compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-2-3. - Prohibited signs and advertising devices. 
The following signs and advertising devices shall be prohibited within the city, unless otherwise specifically provided in this article: 
(a)  Air-blown devices. 
(b)  Animated signs. 
(c)  Banners. 
(d)  Derelict signs. 
(e)  Discontinued signs. 
(f)  Feather banners. 
(g)  Flying signs. 
(h)  Hand-held signs. 
(i)  Inflatable signs. 
(j)  Pole or pylon signs, except as provided otherwise in section 9-18-7-2 of this article. 
(k)  Portable signs. 
(l)  Revolving signs. 
(m)  Roof signs. 
(n)  Signs erected within a state or city right-of-way without the permission of the owner. 
(o)  Signs erected without the permission of the property owner. 
(p)  Signs with a color and/or shape that imitates, or could be mistaken for, an official traffic control sign, such as a red, octagonal sign or a yellow, triangular sign. 
(q)  Signs that obstruct any fire escape, window, door, or opening usable for fire prevention or suppression, or that prevent the free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. 
(r)  Signs containing reflective elements that sparkle in the sunlight or otherwise simulate illumination during daylight hours or that contain luminous paint that glows in the dark. 
(s)  Signs lit with neon, neon or LED lights, and the outlining with any sort of lighting of windows, doors, or other parts of a building or structure with lighting, and any other sign, advertising device, or lighting practice that is inconsistent with chapter 9-18-4 of this article. 
(t)  Signs attached to freestanding walls (including retaining walls) or fences or poles. 
(u)  Umbrellas used for advertising or with sign copy. 
(v)  Vehicular signs. 
(w)  Wind-blown devices, including but not limited to pennants and streamers. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
CHAPTER 9-18-3. - LOCATION AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 9-18-3-1. - Generally. 
No sign or advertising device shall be located, moved, placed, or maintained in any manner inconsistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-3-2. - Right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful to affix or attach any material to a utility pole or light pole in a public right-of-way. No part of any sign shall be located in, over, or project into a local or state public right-of-way, except for the following: 
(a)  Wall or attached canopy signs otherwise complying with this article, within the C-B zoning district. 
(b)  A-frame signs otherwise complying with this article, on a public sidewalk in the C-B zoning district. 
(c)  Banners attached to light or utility poles in a city right-of-way if authorized the governing body of the city. 
(d)  Any other sign specifically authorized by the governing body of the city, which may include wayfinding and sign kiosk programs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-3-3. - Setback for ground signs. 
There shall be a minimum of five (5) feet between any street right-of-way/front property line and the nearest edge of a ground sign; provided, however, that the community development director may reduce or waive the setback requirement when issuing a sign permit, for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-3-4. - Obstruction of sight visibility. 
(a)  No sign shall be erected, placed, moved, or maintained where, by reason of its placement, it obstructs, obscures, impairs, or interferes with the view of motorists or pedestrians entering or exiting public and private access ways and driveways. 
(b)  The placement of ground signs will be examined during the permitting process, if applicable, to ensure that ground signs are located outside of any sight visibility triangle required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-3-5. - Obstruction of visibility of traffic or public sign. 
No sign shall be placed so as to obscure or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of a traffic sign, signal, or device or official sign. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-3-6. - Obstruction of building access. 
No sign shall be erected, located, or maintained in such a manner as to interfere with safe and free ingress and egress to any door, window, or emergency exit of any building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-3-7. - Obstruction of utilities. 
(a)  No sign shall interfere with utilities, such as water mains and hydrants, sanitary sewerage, gas, electricity, and communications equipment or lines, nor interfere with natural or manmade storm water drainage facilities. 
(b)  No permanent or temporary ground sign shall be placed in a utility easement unless specifically authorized by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-3-8. - Vertical clearance. 
Projecting signs and suspended signs, where authorized by this article, shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of nine (9) feet from any public sidewalk or private walkway and eight (8) feet of clearance from ground level to the bottom of the sign in any other location. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Cross reference— Section 9-18-6-9. 
Sec. 9-18-3-9. - Obstruction of tree critical root zone. 
No ground sign, whether permanent or temporary, shall be installed on the ground within the critical root zone of an existing tree. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-3-10. - Signs on natural objects. 
No sign or advertising device shall be painted on or attached to trees, rocks, or any other natural features; provided however, that on property within R-I-A, R-I, and N-C zoning districts, a sign otherwise authorized by this article and with an area of one (1) square foot or less may be attached to a tree, rock, or other natural feature on private property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-3-11. - Signs on benches or bus shelters. 
No sign or advertising device shall be painted on or attached to a bench or bus shelter, unless specifically authorized by the governing body of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-3-12. - Signs attached to light poles. 
No sign or advertising device shall be attached to a light pole on private property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-3-13. - Signs on fences or freestanding walls. 
No sign or advertising device shall be attached to a fence or freestanding wall, except for the following: 
(a)  One (1) identification plate not exceeding one-quarter (0.25) square foot of area may be affixed to any fence. 
(b)  This section does not prevent project entrance signs as authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
CHAPTER 9-18-4. - ILLUMINATION 

Sec. 9-18-4-1. - Definitions related to illumination. 
Beacon: A stationary or revolving light which flashes or projects illumination, single color or multi-colored, which is required or necessary under the safety regulations promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration or similar agencies. 
Candela: The basic unit of measurement of light in SI (metric) units. 
Candela per square meter (cd/m 2 ): The SI (metric) unit used to describe the luminance of a light source or of an illuminated surface that reflects light. Also referred to as Nits. 
Candle or candlepower: Synonymous with Candela, but in English, not SI, terms. 
Dissolve: A mode of message transition on an electronic changeable copy sign accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the subsequent message. 
Externally illuminated sign: Any sign that is partially or completely illuminated at any time by an artificial light source that directly or indirectly illuminates the face of the sign from outside the sign structure. 
Fade: A mode of message transition on an electronic changeable copy sign accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility. 
Flashing: Any condition where artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity. 
Fluorescent color: A color that is intense, brilliantly colored and apparently giving off light, such as but not limited to day glow (day-glo) colors. 
Foot candle: An English unit of measurement of the amount of light falling upon a surface (illuminance). One (1) foot candle is equal to one (1) lumen per square foot. Can be measured by means of an illuminance meter. 
Illuminance: The amount of light falling upon a real or imaginary surface, commonly called "light level" or "illumination." Measured in foot candles (lumens/square foot) in the English system, and lux (lumens/square meter) in the SI (metric) system. 
Illuminated sign: A sign characterized by the use of artificial light, either projecting through its surface(s) (i.e., internally illuminated); or reflecting off its surface(s) (i.e., externally illuminated). 
Internally illuminated sign: A sign illuminated by an internal light source which is viewed through a transparent or translucent panel. An electronic changeable copy sign is an internally illuminated sign. 
LED sign. Any sign or portion thereof that uses light emitting diode (LED) technology or other similar semi-conductor technology to produce an illuminated image, picture, or message of any kind whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. This includes any sign that uses LED technology of any kind, whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light emitting diodes (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL), or any other similar technology. An LED sign is a changeable copy electronic sign. 
Lux: The SI (metric) unit for illuminance. One (1) lux equals 0.093 foot candles. 
Neon lighting or outlining: A sign, display, or installation outlining windows, doors, or other portions of the building which is composed of one (1) or more discharge lamps in which the gas contains a large proportion of neon, giving it a fluorescent or extremely bright color. 
Nit: A standard unit of luminance; a measurement of direct light (i.e., looking directly at the light source), used to describe displays. A "nit" is an amount of emanating light equal to one (1) candela per square meter (cd/m2). 
Scroll: A mode of message transition on an electronic changeable copy sign in which the message appears to move vertically across the display surface. 
Transition: A visual effect used on an electronic changeable copy sign to change from one message to another. 
Travel: A mode of message transition on an electronic changeable copy sign, in which the message appears to move horizontally across the display surface. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-4-2. - Compliance with electrical code. 
(a)  No sign shall have exposed electrical wires. 
(b)  All electrical service to a sign shall be in compliance with the National Electrical Code adopted by city Code section 9-20-1-3 and any other city code sections related to the regulation of electricity. 
(c)  An electrical permit shall be required for first-time electrical connections to signs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-4-3. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  The outline-lighting of windows and doors with strings of light bulbs, neon lights, LED lights or any form of lighting shall not be permitted, except as part of holiday decorations. 
Cross reference— Sec. 9-9-3-14(g)3. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to utilize strobe, laser, and search lights except for emergency or public safety operations. 
(c)  No sign shall be illuminated if it is located on a lot used exclusively for a single-family dwelling (including manufactured home), two-family dwelling (duplex), an agricultural use, or combination of agricultural and residential use. 
(d)  No temporary sign shall be illuminated. 
(e)  No incidental sign shall be illuminated. 
(f)  No sign in an R-I-A, R-I, N-C, R-II, O-I, or N-B zoning district shall be internally illuminated (note: this requirement by definition prohibits electronic changeable copy signs in these zoning districts). 
(g)  A flag may be externally illuminated only if it is flown from a freestanding pole. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-4-4. - Maximum luminance. 
(a)  Night-time. Signs that are authorized to be externally illuminated shall not exceed a maximum luminance level of 500 cd/m 2 or nits, regardless of the method of illumination, from apparent sunset until apparent sunrise, as determined by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), U.S. Department of Commerce, for the specific geographic location and date. 
(b)  Daytime. Signs that are authorized to be externally illuminated shall not exceed a maximum luminance level of 5,000 cd/m 2 or nits, regardless of the method of illumination, from apparent sunrise to apparent sunset, as determined by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), U.S. Department of Commerce, for the specific geographic location and date. 
(c)  Dimmer control. Electronic changeable copy signs, where permitted, must have an automatic phased proportional dimmer control, photocell or other light sensing device, or a scheduled dimming timer, or another approved device, which produces a distinct illumination change that reduces nighttime brightness levels compared to daytime brightness levels. The applicant for any such electronic changeable copy sign shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed the levels specified in this chapter; end-user manipulation of pre-set levels shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-4-5. - Restrictions on changeable copy. 
The following restrictions shall apply to all signs with changeable copy: 
(a)  Light color. Lighting of changeable copy signs shall be limited to amber or white color only. 
(b)  Duration of message. Each message shall remain fixed for at least ten (10) seconds. 
(c)  Transition time. There shall be a transition time of no more than two (2) seconds between different messages for electronic changeable copy signs and no more than three (3) seconds for mechanical changeable copy signs. Messages that dissolve or fade during transition time shall be permitted. 
(d)  Manner of display. Messages shall not consist of video, and messages shall not flash, blink, vary in light intensity, or travel, scroll, or behave in any other way which constitutes or implies motion or movement, except as specifically provided in this section during transition time. 
(e)  Freeze at malfunction. Changeable copy electronic signs shall include a default designed to freeze a display in one (1) still position if a malfunction occurs. 
(f)  Size. Changeable copy electronic signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-4-6. - Lighting of awnings. 
Internally lit (including backlit) awnings are prohibited, except as may be specifically authorized by the community development director as part of a uniform sign plan (see section 9-18-7-4 of this article) pertaining to property in a commercial zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-4-7. - External illumination standard. 
Externally illuminated signs shall be lighted by a white, steady stationary light of reasonable intensity, shielded and directed solely at the sign, so as not to cause glare or spill light into the road right-of-way or up into the sky. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
CHAPTER 9-18-5. - BASIC SIGN PERMISSIONS 

Sec. 9-18-5-1. - Principal use ground sign, single-use. 
One (1) principal use ground sign per property frontage is authorized for each developed property (i.e., excluding vacant properties) for a single use, except for single-family detached residences, two-family residences, and agricultural land uses, not to exceed the following sign face area, sign structure area (includes sign face area), and height limitations for the zoning district in which the lot is located: 

 
* These sign allowances (principal use ground sign—individual use) are for non-single-family residential uses that are permitted outright or as a special use in these residential zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-5-2. - Principal use ground sign, more than one use. 
Principal use ground signs are authorized for each property developed (i.e., excluding vacant properties) for more than one (1) use or tenant, not to exceed the following requirements by zoning district: 

 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-5-3. - Accessory ground sign. 
(a)  One (1) accessory ground sign per property frontage shall be permitted for each lot used for commercial, industrial, institutional, residential dwelling, agricultural land use, and for each vacant property, not to exceed the following area and height limitations: 

 
(b)  The community development director may permit increases in area or height of one (1) or more accessory ground signs as part of an approved uniform sign plan (see section 9-18-7-4 of this article). 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-5-4. - Wall sign. 
Wall signage is authorized in accordance with this section. 
(a)  Wall signage is permitted in accordance with this section for two (2) building walls only, unless otherwise authorized via a uniform sign plan (section 9-18-7-4). 
(b)  For a building with only one (1) tenant or owner, wall sign authorization shall be calculated on the basis of the entire building frontage (see definition in chapter 9-18-2). 
(c)  For a building containing more than one (1) business, establishment, or leasable space, wall signage allowances for each such business, establishment, or leasable space shall be calculated individually for each tenant space based on the amount of building frontage leased by that business or establishment and shall be the leased portion of the total building frontage. 
(d)  Wall signs shall not exceed the maximum number, maximum sign area, or maximum height provisions as follows for a single wall sign allowance: 

 
(e)  When an establishment has two (2) or more building frontages, wall signage on the second (non-primary) building wall shall be limited to one-half (0.5) square feet for each linear foot of leased building frontage (see illustration below). 

(f)  In addition to the sign area allowance of this section, one (1) additional square foot for each linear foot of leased building frontage of sign area is permitted if the wall sign is located on a building that is setback on the lot a distance of four (4) times the distance of the required building setback. 
(g)  The community development director may authorize more than one (1) wall sign per leased building frontage, and/or an increase in sign area, as part of approval of a uniform sign plan (see section 9-18-7-4 of this article). 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-5-5. - Window signs. 
Signs within windows and doors, except incidental signs exempt from the requirements of this article, shall be permitted in nonresidential zoning districts, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of any individual window and fifty (50) percent of glass panes of any doors. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-5-6. - Project entrance sign. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall not apply to a lot which is authorized to have a principal use ground sign. This section shall apply to lots at the intersection of a public right of way and a public or private street or driveway serving any of the following: a subdivision of detached, single-family homes; an office condominium project, and a commercial or industrial subdivision. 
(b)  One two-sided project entrance sign allowance. Any residential subdivision office condominium project, or commercial or industrial subdivision shall be permitted one (1) ground sign (which may be two-sided) at each entrance to the subdivision or complex, not exceeding the following area and height limitations: 

 
(c)  Two one-sided project entrance sign allowance. In lieu of a single project entrance sign allowed per this section, any residential subdivision, office condominium project, or commercial or industrial subdivision shall be permitted two (2) one-sided ground signs at each entrance, integrated into an entrance monument wall, one (1) on each side of said entrance, to the subdivision or complex, provided that the signs together do not exceed the area allowances for a single project entrance sign area limitations of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
CHAPTER 9-18-6. - SUPPLEMENTAL SIGNAGE ALLOWANCES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 9-18-6-1. - Sign during sale or construction. 
This section authorizes temporary signage during the time a lot, building, or tenant space is for sale, lease, rent, or under construction, as follows, subject to the area and other limitations of this section. Such signs authorized in this section may be placed on a site as specified until the property or premises is sold, leased, or rented, in which case the sign is no longer authorized. 
(a)  Vacant lot. During the time a vacant lot is for sale, lease, rent, or under construction, one (1) ground sign per property frontage shall be authorized on the lot. 
(b)  Building. During the time a building on a lot is for sale, lease, rent, or under construction, one (1) ground sign per property frontage, or one (1) wall sign per building frontage, or one (1) window sign shall be authorized. 
(c)  Multiple buildings or tenant spaces. During the time a development with more than one (1) building, and/or a development with more than one (1) leasable space within one (1) or more buildings, has tenant spaces for sale, lease, rent, or under construction, one (1) ground sign shall be authorized on the lot. In addition, either one (1) wall sign shall be authorized on the building with tenant space available, or one (1) window sign shall be authorized within the building window of the tenant space available. 

 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-6-2. - A-frame sign. 
(a)  An institution or establishment is authorized to display, during the institution or establishment's hours of operations, one (1) A-frame sign, not exceeding three (3) feet in height or six (6) square feet in area in the following locations: on a public sidewalk in the C-B zoning district; and in commercial zoning districts which have (on) a private sidewalk or private walkway in front of the building located at least forty (40) feet from a public right-of-way. Any other location is prohibited. 
(b)  No such A-frame sign shall obstruct pedestrian or handicapped accessibility movements. 
(c)  Any sign authorized by this section shall be removed from the sidewalk or walkway when the institution or establishment is not open. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-6-3. - Banner, temporary. 
(a)  Interim for an establishment. The occupant or prospective occupant of a building or leased space may erect a temporary banner not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, provided that the occupant or prospective occupant has applied for a sign permit for permanent wall sign (or if permitted, permanent ground sign) for the building or leased space. The temporary banner may be affixed to a building wall, or if properly secured be affixed to an existing sign or to the ground. The temporary banner shall not remain in place for more than sixty (60) days and must be removed once the permanent wall sign is erected. 
(b)  Temporary for residential subdivision. On any lot at the entrance to a subdivision of detached, single-family lots which has a lawful project entrance sign, one (1) temporary banner not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet may be attached to the face of the project entrance sign or secured to the ground, during a time period of forty (40) days before and forty (40) days after the official date of a public high school graduation in the locality. 
(c)  General restrictions. Banners shall not be hung as under-canopy signs, flown as flags, or attached to or used as any other form of sign unless specifically provided otherwise in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-6-4. - Billboards. 
A billboard, as defined, is allowed subject to compliance with the following requirements: 
(a)  The sign must be located in G-B, L-I, or H-I zoning districts within three hundred (300) feet of a state, U.S. or interstate numbered highway. 
(b)  In the G-B district, the area of the sign face shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet. In the L-I and H-I districts, the area of the sign face shall not exceed two hundred forty (240) square feet. In each of the districts, the height of the sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
(c)  All portions of the billboard shall be located in accordance with the principal building setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(d)  The billboard shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other billboard or within five hundred (500) feet of a residential zoning district. Distance measurements shall be made horizontally in all directions from the nearest edge of the sign face. 
(e)  The billboard may not be located on or over any building. 
(f)  Billboards located near expressway interchanges shall be limited as follows: 
1.  No more than one (1) billboard may be located in each quadrant of the interchange. 
2.  Such billboards shall be restricted to an area in each quadrant one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet long beginning five hundred (500) feet from the road that crosses the expressway or five hundred (500) feet beyond the point where the pavement begins to widen on the main travelway of the expressway to accommodate an exit or entrance ramp, whichever is farther from the interchange. 
(g)  All billboards visible from or within six hundred (660) feet of a U.S. or state-numbered highway shall comply with all requirements of the state. 
A site plan prepared by a registered land surveyor, architect or engineer shall be submitted with all billboard applications. The site plan shall include a boundary survey of the property, the exact location of the proposed billboard, and certification that all dimensional and distance requirements of this chapter are met. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-6-5. - Canopy or awning signs. 
(a)  Freestanding canopies covering accessory uses or structures on a commercial or industrial lot shall be permitted one (1) attached sign on each side of the freestanding canopy facing a street, not to exceed one-quarter (0.25) square foot per linear frontage of canopy per individual canopy sign. 
(b)  Signs on awnings attached to a building face shall be regulated as wall signs, except that an additional awning sign may be authorized per design review in the C-B zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-6-6. - Changeable copy. 
(a)  No more than one (1) changeable copy electronic sign shall be permitted for any single lot. 
(b)  Changeable copy, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area, shall be authorized to be incorporated into a principal use, monument (ground) sign. 
(c)  Changeable copy electronic signs are authorized only if in compliance with chapter 9-18-4 of this article with regard to illumination and electronic changeable copy signs. 
(d)  Changeable copy shall not be incorporated into an existing billboard. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-6-7. - Drive-through lane sign. 
Drive-through lanes serving a restaurant may have a maximum of two (2) display boards, each not exceeding six (6) feet in height or thirty-six (36) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-6-8. - Flag. 
Any residence, establishment, or institution may display as many as three (3) flags, per lot, when displayed in accordance with the placement, height, and area requirements of this section. Flags may be displayed on a freestanding pole, projecting from a building or door or placed in a window as provided in this section. Flags shall not be ground-mounted or affixed to utility poles, light poles, or vehicles. 
(a)  Pole flags. A flag may be displayed from a purpose-built, professionally fabricated, freestanding pole not to exceed a height of thirty (30) feet. An individual flag flown from such a pole shall not exceed an area of forty (40) square feet. 
(b)  Projecting flags. Flags may be flown from a metal or wooden pole attached to a bracket projecting from the side of a building or doorframe. The pole projecting from a building shall not exceed six (6) feet in length. The flag flying from such pole shall not exceed an area of fifteen (15) square feet. 
(c)  Window flags. Flags may be hung in the window of any non-residential property. The area of the flag is subject to the area limitations for window signage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-6-9. - Special temporary event advertising. 
(a)  Findings and intentions. Certain advertising devices, such as banners or inflatable signs, are not normally appropriate given the objectives of the city to maintain aesthetics and to prevent clutter resulting from competition among establishments for attention. While it is appropriate to disallow the general use of banners, temporary ground signs, inflatable signs, and certain other advertising devices it is considered appropriate in the city to permit businesses and establishments to use certain advertising devices occasionally, for a limited duration. 
(b)  Permit. Special temporary event signage shall be authorized upon issuance of a permit for special temporary outdoor event pursuant to chapter 9-10-8-2 of this Code, subject to compliance with this section. 
(c)  Permissions. Notwithstanding the prohibitions specified in this article, at the discretion of the applicant, any one (1) of the following signs and advertising devices may be applied for as part of a special temporary event and approved by the community development department: 
1.  One (1) banner, not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area nor twelve (12) feet in height. 
2.  No more than two (2) additional, temporary ground signs not exceeding eight (8) square feet each nor a height of four (4) feet (excludes feather banners). 
3.  One (1) or more inflatable signs, or balloons, not to exceed a total of thirty-two (32) cubic feet in volume. (Note: a standard balloon with an inflated diameter of eleven (11) inches has a capacity of approximately one-half (0.5) cubic feet). The community development director may authorize the placement of an inflatable sign on the roof of a building, notwithstanding the general prohibition in this article of roof signs, but not to exceed the maximum building height allowance for the zoning district in which the sign is located. 
4.  A combination of these permissions approved by the community development department that is the functional equivalent in terms of advertising area. 
(d)  Duration. Signage shall be limited to a total of sixty (60) days a calendar year for the same business or organization. 
(e)  Illumination. Signage permitted pursuant to this section shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-6-10. - Suspended or projecting sign. 
(a)  One (1) suspended or projecting sign per leased building frontage is permitted in C-B zoning districts, if projecting or suspended from a building wall or canopy, not to exceed six (6) square feet in area, and subject to the vertical clearance requirements of section 9-18-3-8 of this article (i.e., nine (9) feet from any public sidewalk or private walkway and eight (8) feet of clearance from the ground level to the bottom of the sign in any other location). 
(b)  The community development director may authorize the use of suspended or projecting signs in commercial shopping centers in other commercial zoning districts, as a part of approving a uniform sign plan (see section 9-18-7-4 of this article), limited to one (1) such suspended sign per establishment with an area not to exceed six (6) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
CHAPTER 9-18-7. - INTERPRETATIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND VARIANCES 

Sec. 9-18-7-1. - Computation of sign face and sign structure areas. 
The area of a sign face and sign structure shall be computed as follows: 

(a)  The area of a "sign face" shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of a sign face, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign face module, together with any material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
  

(b)  The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the structure, supports or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those portions contained within the rectangle that delimits the sign face or a sign face module. 
(c)  Any sign on which the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements routinely change or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the freestanding structure or building face upon which it is placed. 

(d)  The area of a sign structure of a ground sign shall be computed as the area within the sign face plus all portions of the sign structure and all open or solid areas within the total area of the sign structure (i.e., tallest height x widest width). 
(e)  For multi-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel (back-to-back), or where the interior angle formed by the faces is forty-five (45) degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs, the area of the sign shall be the total area on all sides that can be viewed at one (1) time from any angle. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-7-2. - Modification of monument signage requirement. 
The community development director, during design review of a sign application, is authorized to modify the strict terms of this article as they pertain to monument-style signs. For good cause shown (including but not limited to equal or better aesthetics and compatibility with the building architecture or the character of the district in which the sign is located), the community development director may authorize a pylon or pole sign (see definition in chapter 9-18-2). 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-7-3. - Signs in planned unit development (PUD) zoning districts. 
For signs in the PUD zoning district, each development shall conform to the sign regulations established as part of the zoning approval for the planned development (including previously established P-R-D, P-O-D, P-C-D and P-I-D planned development districts). If no such regulations exist, each portion of a planned development existing on the effective date of this Code shall conform to the regulations of this article for the zoning district most comparable to that portion of the planned development, as determined by the director of community development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-7-4. - Uniform sign plans. 
A uniform sign plan is required for any multi-tenant nonresidential development, such as a shopping center, before any building signs or freestanding signs for the development or the development's tenants may be erected on the property. The intent of this section is to provide for compatibility of all signs within a particular multi-building or multi-tenant development so that they conform to certain physical characteristics such as color, font, design of sign face, sign face module, sign structure, etc. 
Modifications to the restrictions on signage for a specific property or development may be requested for administrative approval by submitting to the community development department a uniform sign plan for review and processing. The uniform sign plan shall not be considered or used as an alternative to the strict regulations of this article, except that building sign requirements may be modified pursuant to a uniform sign plan for good cause shown and greater visual coherence and coordination within the development. 
Uniform sign plans shall at minimum consist of the following: 
(a)  Drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all and every sign to be placed as freestanding and building signs within the development. 
(b)  Design standards such that signs of a similar type and function within the development shall have a consistency of size, lettering style, color scheme, and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
Following approval by the community development department, a uniform sign plan shall be binding on the owner, and any lessees, subtenants, purchasers, or other occupants, until or unless the uniform sign plan is replaced with another approved uniform sign plan or the uniform sign plan is repealed (and in such cases the strict terms of this article shall apply). 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-7-5. - Variances. 
(a)  A property owner or sign owner may apply for a variance from the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by an elevation drawing and/or plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed sign. An inventory of signs and sign areas and heights existing on the property shall also be submitted. The department of community development may require other information about the variance requested and its relationship to the surrounding properties. Variance applications shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the governing body of the city. 
(c)  Applications to vary the sign regulations in this article shall be filed, considered and decided subject to the procedures and notice requirements of chapter 9-22-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
CHAPTER 9-18-8. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS 

Sec. 9-18-8-1. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  A wall or ground sign that lawfully existed on the effective date of this Code may continue to be used, except that the nonconforming sign: shall not be moved to another location on the site; replaced by another nonconforming sign; or enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity or that adds value to said sign. 
(b)  A nonconforming ground or wall sign shall not be reused for a new business or establishment. This includes, a prohibition against the replacement of a sign face module for a new business on a sign or sign structure that exceeds the maximum area or height requirements established by this article, or otherwise does not conform with the requirements of this article. This paragraph does not apply to nonconforming billboards. 
(c)  The addition of changeable copy to any nonconforming freestanding sign is prohibited. 
(d)  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted; provided, however, that no change in the shape or size of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article. In no case shall a nonconforming sign be repaired, rebuilt, replaced, moved, or altered after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of the value of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-8-2. - Sign limitations when nonconforming sign exists. 
No sign or advertising device shall be erected for the same establishment on the same lot with an existing nonconforming sign until the nonconforming sign has been removed or made to conform to the provisions of this article. Existing, nonconforming billboards are not subject to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
CHAPTER 9-18-9. - MAINTENANCE, ENFORCEMENT, AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 9-18-9-1. - Sign maintenance. 
All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in good repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or noncorrosive metal, shall be given a protective coating as necessary to maintain a clean appearance and safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-9-2. - Situations where maintenance is required. 
Upon discovery of a sign in need of maintenance, the director of community development, his or her designee, city marshal or, or other administrative official responsible for administration shall give written notice to the owner of the sign or the owner of the property on which the sign is located if the owner of the sign itself cannot be determined. Said notice shall state the item or items requiring repair or maintenance. The owner shall have thirty (30) days in which to repair or maintain the sign before a citation is issued. If the owner has failed to make repairs or the necessary maintenance within that time, the enforcement officer shall initiate enforcement proceedings as required to cure violation of this article. Situations constituting the need for maintenance include but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Lettering or other elements of the sign have become detached or have fallen off the sign or become misaligned. 
(b)  Painted surfaces on the sign or sign structure have begun to peel, flake over a significant portion of the sign, or have faded or oxidized to an extent that the sign no longer displays the message as originally intended. 
(c)  A significant number of the bricks, stones, or other materials on the structural base of a sign have become detached or have fallen off, or have become misaligned. 
(d)  Other similar conditions of disrepair or lack of maintenance as determined by the community development director. 
(e)  For lighted signs, one (1) or more illumination devices are not working and have not been replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-9-3. - Removal of certain signs. 
(a)  Signs in right of way. As authorized in O.C.G.A. 32-6-51, any sign, signal, device, or other structure erected, placed, or maintained on the dedicated right-of-way of any public road in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, and the officials having jurisdiction of the public road affected may remove or direct the removal of the same. 
(b)  Unlawful temporary signs. Temporary signs erected in violation of this article may constitute a safety hazard and are subject to being removed without notice and being destroyed. Additionally, if such signs are erected unlawfully, or in improper areas, or beyond the permissible time frame, they are subject to being taken down and destroyed by the city's director of community development, or his or her designee, city marshal, or other enforcement officer, without notice. 
(c)  Unlawful signs of a more permanent nature. Except as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, if any sign is installed, erected, or constructed in violation of this article, the owner or person or firm maintaining the sign shall, upon notice either written or verbal from the director of community development, his or her designee, city marshal, or other enforcement officer, remove prohibited signs immediately. Any such sign not removed within the time period allotted from the written notice, may be removed by the city, and the city shall have the right to place a lien on the property in accordance with Section 106.3 of the International Property Maintenance Code adopted in city Code section 9-20-1-1. 
(d)  Derelict signs. Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the director of community development, building official, city marshal, or other code enforcement officer, the owner or person or firm maintaining the sign shall, upon written notice from said enforcement officer, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within ten (10) days, remove such sign or secure it in a manner approved by the enforcement officer. Any such sign not removed or secured within ten (10) days from the written notice may be removed by the city, and the city shall have the right to place a lien on the property in accordance with Section 106.3 of the International Property Maintenance Code adopted in city Code section 9-20-1-1. 
(e)  Nonconforming signs that cannot be made to conform to this article. A nonconforming freestanding or building sign shall be removed within ninety (90) days after the business or establishment to which the sign initially pertained ceases to operate at the subject location. This paragraph does not apply to billboards. 
(f)  New signage proposed where a discontinued sign exists. No new sign shall be permitted to be erected on the same property until the discontinued sign or nonconforming sign, including its supports, has been removed or is converted to a lawfully conforming sign, except as otherwise provided by this section. This paragraph does not apply to billboards. 
(g)  Change or removal of discontinued signs. When a property owner has a lawful and conforming freestanding or building sign that no longer is used by a business or establishment, and the owner desires to retain said sign, this section shall apply in order to retain said ground sign as a lawful sign and to avoid it being deemed a discontinued sign. If a principal use which permitted a ground or wall sign no longer exists on the site of said sign, and said sign contains a sign face that is in the form of a removable sign face module, the removable sign face module containing advertising shall be removed and replaced with a panel of like or similar appearance without advertising until another use is lawfully established and principal use or wall sign is lawfully erected. If the subject sign face contains a sign copy area that is not removable, then the said sign shall be removed or the copy area shall be painted over to conceal the advertising. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
CHAPTER 9-18-11. - CONSTRUCTION, PERMISSIONS AND PERMITS 

Sec. 9-18-11-1. - Building permit and conformance to codes. 
Whether or not required by the building code, a building permit shall be required and must be obtained from the building department prior to installation or placement of all the following: 
(a)  Permanent ground signs. 
(b)  Projecting signs. 
(c)  Suspended signs. 
(d)  Wall signs. 
(e)  Billboards. 
Prior to permit approval, design review in accordance with article 9-9 of this Code shall be required to be accomplished. If plans are required for issuance of a building permit for a sign, the plans shall be certified as to conformance with all structural and wind-load resistive standards of the building code adopted by city Code section 9-20-1-1 by a structural engineer registered in the state, or be prepared using standard drawings prepared by a structural engineer or other qualified professional meeting or exceeding all requirements of the building code adopted by city Code section 9-20-1-1. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-11-2. - Composition and construction materials. 
(a)  All permanent principal use ground signs and project entrance signs shall be required to be monument signs, except as may be authorized otherwise by the community development director per section 9-18-7-2 of this article. 
(b)  Temporary signs shall be made of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard, or some other durable and waterproof material. No such sign shall be made of paper. 
(c)  The composition of any sign in the historic preservation overlay zone may be restricted or regulated by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-11-3. - Sign approval in historic preservation overlay zone. 
Signs are external environmental features that can detract from historic character if not considered in the proper context. Signs located in the historic preservation overlay zone established by this Code require a certificate of appropriateness to be issued pursuant to chapter 9-23-3 of this Code. Within the historic preservation overlay zone (i.e., historic districts and properties designated in chapter 9-8-8 of this Code, no freestanding or building sign shall be erected or installed unless sign has been approved by the historic preservation commission, except as specifically provided otherwise in this section. 
In acting on applications involving sign approvals, the historic preservation commission shall consider the criteria established for the issuance of certificates of appropriateness, and adopted design guidelines for signs, if any. In addition, the historic preservation commission may consider the following, which shall not be limiting, in issuing certificates of appropriateness for signs and may use these criteria in determining whether to approve, deny, or modify said signs: 
(a)  The sign with its overall design makes a positive contribution to the general appearance of the street and area in which it is located. 
(b)  The scale, size, and shape of the sign are proportional to the building on which they are placed or to which it pertains and the area in which it is located. To this end, the historic preservation commission may find that a sign is out of character with the area or not proportional to the building, activity or use and may work with the applicant to reduce the scale, size or shape or placement of the sign or signs. 

(c)  The sign does not obscure architectural features of the building, and the design of the sign is integrated with the design of the building. 
(d)  The sign is designed for and directed toward pedestrians rather than to vehicular traffic so that it can be easily and comfortably read standing adjacent to the business, activity, or use. 

(e)  The proposed sign is composed of materials that are compatible with the materials of the face of the building facade where it is placed or to which it pertains. 
(f)  Signage, particularly freestanding principal signs, shall be simple in design and draw upon the architectural elements of the principal building. 
1.  If the sign proposed is a building sign, it must establish an appropriate rhythm to the facade. 
2.  The proposed sign shall be composed of materials that are compatible with the materials of the face of the building facade where it is placed or to which it pertains. 
3.  Design, lettering, and composition of the sign must be compatible with the building. 
4.  Lighting shall be indirect only, unless otherwise approved as part of a certificate of appropriateness granted by the historic preservation commission. 
The historic preservation commission may approve design guidelines and examples of appropriate signs. All such approved design guidelines and examples of appropriate signs shall be maintained on file with the director of planning and development and be made available to applicants for signs in the historic preservation overlay zone. If such guidelines are examples are adopted, and a sign within the historic preservation overlay zone is found by the director of planning and development to be consistent with said guidelines or examples of appropriate signs, the director may issue approval of a certificate of appropriateness as a minor work project without the need for review and approval by the historic preservation commission. In acting on applications involving sign approvals, the director of planning and development shall consider the criteria established for the issuance of certificates of appropriateness, adopted design guidelines for signs, and the criteria established in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 9-18-11-4. - Sign compliance verification letter. 
Except for signs that require a building permit or a certificate of appropriateness under the terms of this chapter, no additional approval shall be required to erect a sign. However, property owners who want to ensure compliance with the terms of this article may apply for and subject to a reasonable fee as may be established from time to time by the governing body and the community development department may issue a written sign compliance verification letter. The department shall have ten (10) calendar days from the date a complete request was received to issue a sign compliance verification letter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § I(Exh. A), 2-21-2017) 
Article 9-19 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 

 
CHAPTER 9-19-1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-19-1-1. - Legislative findings. 
The city council has considered the feasibility of imposing development impact fees and finds, determines, and declares that: 
(a)  The Georgia Legislature, through the enactment of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, Georgia Code Titles 36-71-1 through 36-71-13, has authorized the city to enact development impact fees; 
(b)  The city established a development impact fee advisory committee pursuant to the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, Georgia Code Title 36-71-5, and that committee has served in an advisory capacity and assisted and advised the city with regard to the development and adoption of this title; 
(c)  The city comprehensive plan contains within it land use assumptions, a capital improvement element for public safety and parks and recreation impact fees, and the establishment of a level of service standard for public safety and park and recreation capital facilities for the planning horizon to 2026; and the city comprehensive plan, including the amendment to include a capital improvement element for public safety and parks and recreation impact fees, has been submitted to the Georgia Mountains Regional Development Center and determined by the state department of community affairs to be in compliance with the rules of the state department of community affairs, chapter 110-12-2, development impact fee compliance requirements; 
(d)  The city must expand its public safety and parks and recreation capital facilities in order to maintain the current level of service established in the city comprehensive plan if new development is to be accommodated without decreasing its adopted level of service standards. This must be done in order to promote and protect the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and the general welfare of the city; 
(e)  The imposition of development impact fees is a preferred method of ensuring the availability of capital facilities necessary to accommodate new development; 
(f)  Each of the types of land development described in this Article will create a need for the construction, equipping, or expansion of the city's public safety and park and recreation capital facilities; 
(g)  The fees established by this article are derived from, are based upon, and do not exceed a proportionate share of the costs of providing additional public safety and parks and recreation facilities necessitated by the new land developments for which the fees are levied; 
(h)  The report entitled "A Report on Public Safety and Park & Recreational Development Impact Fees Prepared for Gainesville, Georgia," dated March 1, 2006, and revised June 4, 2006, sets forth a reasonable methodology and analysis for the determination of the development impact of new development on the need for and costs for additional public safety and parks and recreation improvements in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-2. - Short title and applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be known and may be cited as the City of Gainesville Development Impact Fee Ordinance. 
(b)  This article shall apply throughout the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-3. - Intents and purposes. 
(a)  This article is intended to assist in the implementation of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and development of land so as to assure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide public safety and parks and recreation in the city. 
(c)  This article is intended to comply fully with each and every relevant provision of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, Georgia Code Titles 36-71-1 through 36-71-13, and shall be interpreted and implemented to so comply. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-4. - Rules of construction. 
The following provisions regarding interpretation are hereby adopted and shall be applied to this article. Where the provisions of this section conflict with interpretations specified in chapter 9-2-1, the rules of construction of this Section shall control, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose to promote and protect the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and the general welfare of the city; 
(b)  For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
(1)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(4)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for", "maintained for", or "occupied for." 
(5)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(6)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and", "or" or "either...or", the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(7)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-5. - Definitions. 
The following definitions are hereby adopted and shall be applied to this article. Where the definitions of this section conflict with terms defined in chapter 9-2-2, the definitions of this section shall control, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Applicant: A person applying for the issuance of a building permit. 
Building permit: The approval issued by the city that authorizes the construction or permanent placement of a building, dwelling or other structure on a site. 
Capital equipment: Buildings, vehicles, weapons, and communications equipment, all with an expected use life of ten (10) years or more. 
Capital improvement: An improvement with a useful life of ten (10) years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
Developer: Any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
Development: Any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land, any of which creates additional demand and need for public safety facilities and parks and recreation facilities. 
Development approval: Any written authorization from the city which authorizes the commencement of construction. 
Development impact fee: A payment of money imposed upon development as a condition of development approval to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of public improvements needed to serve new growth and development. 
Encumber: To legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of the city. 
Floor area: Floor area shall have the same meaning as in the building code of the city. 
Impact fee administrator: the city director of planning and development or his/her designee. 
Present value: The current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money. 
Project: A particular development on an identified parcel of land. 
Project improvements: Site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project and are not system improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or system improvement and the physical location of the improvement on site or off site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement. If an improvement or facility provides or will provide more than incidental service or facilities capacity to persons other than users or occupants of a particular project, the improvement or facility is a system improvement and shall not be considered a project improvement. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities approved by the governing body of the municipality or county shall be considered a project improvement. 
Proportionate share: That portion of the cost of system improvements which is reasonably related to the service demands and needs of the project. 
Service area: A geographic area defined by the city in which a defined set of public facilities provide service to development within the area. Service areas shall be designated on the basis of sound planning or engineering principles or both. 
System improvement costs: Costs incurred to provide additional public facilities capacity needed to serve growth and development for planning, design and construction, land acquisition, land improvement, design and engineering related thereto, including the cost of constructing or reconstructing system improvements or facility expansions, including but not limited to the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvement element, and administrative costs, if so authorized in this article, provided that such administrative costs shall not exceed three (3) percent of the total amount of development impact fee receipts. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the development impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the municipality or county to finance the capital improvements element but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements: Capital improvements that are public facilities and are designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to "project improvements." 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-6. - Individual fee calculation study. 
If an applicant opts not to have the development impact fee determined according section 9-19-2-2 for public safety facilities or section 9-19-3-2 for park and recreation facilities, then the applicant shall prepare and submit to the impact fee administrator an independent fee calculation study for the land development activity for which a building permit is sought. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made. The impact fee administrator shall consider the documentation submitted by the applicant but is not required to accept such documentation as he/she shall reasonably deem to be inaccurate or not reliable and may, in the alternative, require the applicant to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. If an acceptable independent fee calculation study is not presented, the applicant shall pay the development impact fees based upon the schedule shown in section 9-19-2-2 and section 9-19-3-2, as applicable. If an acceptable independent fee calculation study is presented, the impact fee administrator may adjust the fee to that appropriate to the particular development. Determinations made by the impact fee administrator pursuant to this paragraph may be appealed to the mayor and city council in accordance with section 9-19-1-14. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-7. - Certification of fee schedule or fee. 
On the request of an applicant, the impact fee administrator shall certify the development impact fee schedules or development impact fees resulting from an individual assessment, whichever is applicable, and said certification shall establish the applicable development impact fees for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-8. - Payment of fee. 
The applicant shall pay the development impact fee(s) required by this article to the impact fee administrator or his/her designee prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-9. - Administrative fee. 
An administrative fee of three (3) percent shall be levied against the total development impact fee due prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-10. - Deposit of fees in appropriate account. 
(a)  All public safety impact fee funds collected shall be properly identified by and promptly transferred for deposit in the public safety development impact fee trust funds of the city, which shall be interest bearing accounts, to be held in separate accounts as established in section 9-19-2-4 and used solely for the purposes specified in this article. 
(b)  All parks and recreation impact fee funds collected shall be properly identified by and promptly transferred for deposit in the park and recreation development impact fee trust fund of the city, as established in section 9-19-3-4 which shall be an interest bearing account, and used solely for the purposes specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-11. - Report by administrator. 
At least once each fiscal period the impact fee administrator shall present to the city council a report describing the amount of development impact fees collected, encumbered and used, and a proposed capital improvement program for public safety and parks and recreation, assigning funds, including any accrued interest, from the public safety development impact fee trust funds to specific police facility and fire protection facility improvement projects and related expenses, and from the park and recreation impact fee trust funds to specific park and recreation facility improvement projects and related expenses. Monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the respective impact fee trust fund until the next fiscal period except as provided by the refund provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-12. - Refund of fees paid. 
(a)  If a building permit expires without commencement of construction, then the feepayer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the development impact fee paid as a condition for its issuance except that the city shall retain three (3) percent of the fee, if so authorized and collected, to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund. The feepayer must submit an application for such a refund to the impact fee administrator within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the permit. 
(b)  In the event that development impact fees have not been expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following six (6) years from the date the development impact fee was paid, the impact fee administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to feepayers or their successors with interest. 
(c)  If funds are not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following six (6) years from the date the development impact fee was paid, upon application of the then current landowner, they must be returned to such feepayer with interest that is a pro rata share of the interest earned by the fund. A feepayer must submit an application for a refund to the impact fee administrator within one year of the expiration of the six-year period or the publication of the notice of entitlement, whichever is later. Refunds shall be made to the feepayer within sixty (60) days after it is determined that a sufficient proof of claim for a refund has been made. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-13. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempted from payment of development impact fees: 
(1)  Alterations or expansion of an existing building where use and size are not changed. 
(2)  Additions to an existing dwelling unit. 
(3)  The construction of accessory buildings or structures. 
(4)  The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use. 
Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-14. - Credits generally. 
(a)  This section shall apply when a credit is considered or approved by the impact fee administrator pursuant to sections 9-19-2-6 and 9-19-3-6. 
(b)  Credit for the dedication of land shall be valued at one hundred fifteen (115) percent of the most recent assessed value by the property appraiser, or by fair market value established by private appraisers acceptable to the city. Credit for the dedication of land for facilities shall be provided when the property has been conveyed at no charge to, and accepted by, the city in a manner satisfactory to the impact fee administrator. 
(c)  Applicants for credit for construction of improvements shall submit acceptable engineering drawings and specifications, and construction cost estimates to the impact fee administrator. The impact fee administrator shall determine credit for construction based upon either these cost estimates or upon alternative engineering criteria and construction cost estimates if the impact fee administrator determines that such estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. The impact fee administrator shall provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating his/her agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate and return such signed document to the impact fee administrator before credit will be given. The failure of the applicant to sign, date, and return such document within sixty (60) days shall nullify the credit. 
(d)  Except as provided in subsection (e), credit against development impact fees otherwise due will not be provided until: the construction is completed and accepted by the city, the county, or the state, whichever is applicable; and a suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and approved by the impact fee administrator, when applicable. 
(e)  Credit may be provided before completion of specified improvements if adequate assurances are given by the applicant that the standards set out above will be met and if the applicant posts security as provided below for the costs of such construction. Security in the form of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement shall be posted with and approved by the impact fee administrator in an amount determined by the impact fee administrator. If the public facility construction project will not be constructed within one year of the acceptance of the offer by the impact fee administrator, the amount of the security shall be increased by ten (10) percent compounded, for each year of the life of the security. 
(1)  Any claim for credit must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
(2)  Credits shall not be transferable from one project or development to another unless so provided in a development impact fee credit agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-15. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any applicant or feepayer aggrieved by a decision of the impact fee administrator made pursuant to this article shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and city council. Prior to any such appeal the aggrieved applicant or feepayer shall file a request for reconsideration with the impact fee administrator who shall act upon such request within fifteen (15) days. 
(b)  All appeals shall be taken within fifteen (15) days of the impact fee administrator's decision on the request for reconsideration by filing with the impact fee administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefore. The impact fee administrator shall forthwith transmit to the mayor and city council all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. The mayor and city council shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time for a hearing on the appeal, give due notice thereof, and decide the same within a reasonable period of time following the hearing. Any applicant or feepayer making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing, to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. 
(c)  An applicant may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a building permit and by making such payment shall not be stopped from; 
(1)  Exercising the right of appeal provided for in this section, or 
(2)  Receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been illegally collected. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-16. - Review and automatic update of fee schedules. 
(a)  The development fee schedules contained in this article shall be reviewed by the city council at least once every two (2) years. 
(b)  Unless otherwise resolved by the city council, the development impact fee schedules established in this article shall be adjusted by the impact fee administrator in March of each calendar year based on the methodology described in subsection (c). Any adjustments to the impact fee schedules, made pursuant to this section, shall be effective the following first day of May. 
(c)  The base for computing any adjustment is the January Construction Cost Index for the United States, published by McGraw-Hill. For the purpose of this section the initial index to be referenced is January of the last year when the impact fees were updated with cost or demographic data. 
(d)  If the index is changed so that the base year is different, the index shall be converted in accordance with the conversion factor published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. If the construction cost index is discontinued or revised, the consumer price index or such other index or computation with which it is replaced shall be used in order to obtain substantially the same result as would be obtained if the construction cost index had not been discontinued or revised. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-17. - Penalty provision. 
A violation of this article shall be prosecuted in the same manner as specified in chapter 9-24-2 and upon conviction, the violator shall be punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution the city shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-18. - Severability. 
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-1-19. - Repealer. 
Any ordinances covering the subject matter contained in this article are hereby repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
CHAPTER 9-19-2. - PUBLIC SAFETY DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 9-19-2-1. - Imposition of public safety development impact fee. 
(a)  Any person, who, after the effective date of this article, seeks to develop land within the city, by applying for a building permit, is hereby required to pay a public safety development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(b)  No new building permit for any activity requiring payment of a development impact fee pursuant to section 9-19-2-2 shall be issued unless and until the public safety development impact fee hereby required has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-2-2. - Computation of the amount of public safety development impact fee. 
At the option of the applicant, the amount of the public safety development impact fee may be determined by adding together the applicable police facility impact fee and the applicable fire protection facility impact fee from the following schedules. 

 
1.  If a building permit is requested for mixed uses, then the fee shall be determined through using the above schedules by apportioning the space committed to uses specified on the schedules. 
2.  If the type of development activity that a building permit is applied for is not specified on the above fee schedules, the impact fee administrator shall use the fee applicable to the most nearly comparable type of land use on the above fee schedules. 
The impact fee administrator shall be guided in the selection of a comparable type by the city comprehensive plan, supporting documents of the city comprehensive plan, and this Code. If the impact fee administrator determines that there is no comparable type of land use provided in the above fee schedules, then the impact fee administrator shall determine the appropriate fee by considering demographic or other documentation which is available from the city planning and development department, and state and regional authorities. 
3.  In the case of change of use, redevelopment, or expansion or modification of an existing use which requires the issuance of a building permit, the development impact fee shall be based upon the net positive increase in the development impact fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. The Impact fee administrator shall be guided in this determination by the sources listed in subsection (2). 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-2-3. - Public safety service area established. 
There is hereby established one public safety service area which shall be the entirety of the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-2-4. - Public safety development impact fee trust funds established. 
(a)  There is hereby established one police facility development impact fee trust fund and one fire protection facility development impact fee trust fund, which shall be an interest bearing account, for the public safety service area established in section 9-19-2-3. 
(b)  All public safety development impact fees collected shall be promptly deposited in the appropriate public safety development impact fee trust funds, i.e., the police facility development impact fee trust fund and the fire protection facility development impact fee trust fund and maintained there, including interest thereon, until withdrawn pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Funds withdrawn from these accounts must be used in accordance with the provisions of section 9-19-2-5. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-2-5. - Use of funds. 
(a)  Funds deposited in the police facility development impact fee trust fund shall be used solely for the purpose of acquiring, equipping, and/or making capital improvements to police protection facilities under the jurisdiction of the city, Hall County, or the state, and related expenses as permitted by the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, and shall not be used for maintenance or operations. 
(b)  Funds deposited in the fire protection facility development impact fee trust fund shall be used solely for the purpose of acquiring, equipping, and/or making capital improvements to fire protection facilities under the jurisdiction of the city, Hall County, or the state, and related expenses as permitted by the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, and shall not be used for maintenance or operations. 
(c)  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of capital facilities for which public safety development impact fees may be expended, development impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type described in subsections (a) and (b). 
(d)  In the event a developer enters into an agreement with the city to construct, fund or contribute system improvements such that the amount of the credit created by such construction, funding or contribution is in excess of the development impact fee otherwise due, the developer shall be reimbursed for such excess construction funding or contribution from development impact fees paid by other development located in the service area which is benefited by such improvements. 
(e)  Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in section 9-19-1-12. 
(f)  Funds shall be considered expended on a first in, first out basis. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-2-6. - Credits. 
Public safety land and/or capital improvements may be offered by the applicant as total or partial payment of the required development impact fee. The applicant must request a public safety development impact fee credit. If the impact fee administrator accepts such an offer, the credit shall be determined and provided in the manner described in section 9-19-1-14. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
CHAPTER 9-19-3 - PARK AND RECREATION DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 9-19-3-1. - Imposition of park and recreation development impact fee. 
(a)  Any person who, after the effective date of this article, seeks to develop land within the city, by applying for a residential building permit is hereby required to pay a park and recreation development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(b)  No building permit for any activity requiring payment of a development impact fee pursuant to section 9-19-3-2 shall be issued unless and until the park and recreation development impact fee hereby required has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-3-2. - Computation of the amount of park and recreation development impact fee. 
At the option of the applicant, the amount of the park and recreation development impact fee may be determined by the following fee schedule. 

 
If a building permit is requested for mixed uses, then the fee shall be determined through using the above schedule by apportioning the space committed to uses specified on the schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-3-3. - Park and recreation service area established. 
There is hereby established one park and recreation development impact fee service area, which shall be the entire incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-3-4. - Park and recreation development impact fee trust fund established. 
(a)  There is hereby established one park and recreation development impact fee trust fund, which shall be an interest bearing account, for the park and recreation development impact fee service area established by section 9-19-3-3. 
(b)  All park and recreation development impact fees collected shall be promptly deposited in the park and recreation development impact fee trust fund and maintained there, including interest thereon, until withdrawn pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Funds withdrawn from this account must be used in accordance with the provisions of section 9-19-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-3-5. - Use of funds. 
(a)  Funds collected from park and recreation development impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of acquiring and/or making capital improvements to park and recreation facilities under the jurisdiction of the city, Hall County, or the state, and related expenses as permitted by the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, and shall not be used for maintenance or operations. 
(b)  Funds shall be used exclusively for acquisitions, expansions, or capital improvements within the park and recreation development impact fee service area from which the funds were collected. 
(c)  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of capital facilities for which park and recreation development impact fees may be expended, development impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type described in subsections (a) and (b). 
(d)  In the event a developer enters into an agreement with the city to construct, fund or contribute system improvements such that the amount of the credit created by such construction, funding or contribution is in excess of the development impact fee otherwise due, the developer shall be reimbursed for such excess construction funding or contribution from development impact fees paid by other development located in the service area which is benefited by such improvements. 
(e)  Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in section 9-19-1-12. 
(f)  Funds shall be considered expended on a first in, first out basis. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-19-3-6. - Credits. 
(a)  Park and recreation land and/or capital improvements may be offered by the applicant as partial payment of the required development impact fee. The applicant must request a park and recreation development impact fee credit. If the impact fee administrator accepts such an offer, the credit shall be determined and provided in the manner described in section 9-19-1-14. 
(b)  An applicant may apply for credit against park and recreation development impact fees otherwise due for private park and/or recreation facilities. In no circumstance shall credit for private park and/or recreation facilities exceed fifty (50) percent of the park and recreation development impact fees otherwise due. An applicant requesting credit must show that: 
(1)  The private park and/or recreation facility for which credit is sought serves a public recreational need; 
(2)  The private park and/or recreation facility for which credit is sought is consistent with the park and recreation capital improvement element of the city's comprehensive plan; and 
(3)  The request complies with the security provisions set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § I, 8-1-06) 
Article 9-20 - BUILDING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS[1] 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-16, § 1, adopted Aug. 7, 2018, changed the title of article 9-20 from "Building regulations" to "Building and property maintenance regulations." 

CHAPTER 9-20-1. - CODES ADOPTED 

Sec. 9-20-1-1. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
The edition that is currently adopted and in force of the International Property Maintenance Code, published by the International Code Council, as hereinafter modified, is hereby adopted as the housing code of the city and is hereby made a part of this Code. A copy of such edition of the International Property Maintenance Code is filed with the city clerk. 
Sec. 9-20-1-2. - International Building Code adopted. 
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, as published by the International Code Council and is hereby adopted as the [building] code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of buildings and structures in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Building Code, current edition adopted by the board of community affairs of the state, with state amendments, published by the International Code Council on file in the office of the city clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-1-3. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the National Electrical Code, current edition, as adopted by the board of community affairs of the state, as published by the National Fire Prevention Association is hereby adopted as the [electrical] code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the building envelope, mechanical, lighting and power systems in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such National Electrical Code, current edition, with state amendments, published by the National Fire Prevention Association, on file in the Office of the city clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-1-4. - International Fire Code adopted. 
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, current edition adopted by the board of community affairs of the state, with state amendments, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the [fire] code of the city for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion, hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the city and providing for the issuance of permits or hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such fire code on file in the Office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-1-5. - International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, current edition, adopted by the board of community affairs of the state with state amendments, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted and [as] the fuel gas code of the city; for the control of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fuel gas code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-1-6. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, with state amendments, current edition adopted by the board of community affairs of the state, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the [mechanical] code of the city, for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Mechanical Code current edition, with state amendments, published by the International Code Council on file of the Office of the city clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-1-7. - International Plumbing Code adopted. 
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code current edition, with state amendments, adopted by the board of community affairs of the state, as published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted as the [plumbing] code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Plumbing Code, current edition, with state amendments, published by the International Code Council on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-1-8. - International Residential Code adopted. 
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code, current edition, with state amendments, adopted by the board of community affairs of the state, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the [residential] code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three (3) stories in height in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Residential Code, current edition, with state amendments, published by the International Code Council on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-1-9. - International Energy Conservation Code adopted. 
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Energy Conservation Code, current edition, with state amendments, adopted by the board of community affairs of the state, as published by the International Code Council, with state amendments, is hereby adopted as the [energy conservation] code of the city, regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the building envelope, mechanical, lighting and power systems in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Energy Conservation Code, current edition, with state amendments, published by the International Code Council on file in the office of the city clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-1-10. - Swimming Pool Code adopted. 
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the "Standard Swimming Code," with state amendments, current edition adopted by the board of community affairs of the state as published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama, is hereby adopted as the [swimming pool] code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the swimming pools in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such Standard Swimming Pool Code, current edition adopted by the board of community affairs of the state of state with state amendments, published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama, on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code. 
(a)  Previously existing pools. Nothing contained herein shall apply to any pool in existence or under construction as of the effective date of this article, provided, however, that all swimming pools in the city shall comply with Section 315 (Required Enclosure) on or before September 31, 1992. 
(b)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. Should any requirement or design standard of the Standard Swimming Pool Code conflict in any manner with any other law, rule or regulation of any local, state of federal regulation, applicable to the city then the stricter law, rule or regulation shall be applied. It is not intended by this article to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where these articles imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or premises than is imposed or required by other resolutions, rules and regulations, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
Sec. 9-20-1-11. - Life Safety Code adopted. 
The edition of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code that is currently adopted and in force is adopted, save and except such portions as hereinafter deleted, modified or amended of which a copy has been and is now filed in the office of the clerk of the city council, and same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. The Life Safety Code shall only apply to and govern those buildings and structures listed in the O.C.G.A, Sections 25-2-13 (a) and (b), as amended. The provisions of this article shall govern all other buildings and structures. 
Sec. 9-20-1-12. - Continuation of existing structures. 
The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this article or its predecessor article shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in this article, the international Property Maintenance Code or the International Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
CHAPTER 9-20-2. - FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 9-20-2-1. - Fire limits established. 
All that portion of the city bounded by the following named streets, alleys, avenues and lanes as hereinafter set forth, is hereby defined and shall hereafter be known as and constitute the fire limits of the city and which is also shown on the fire limits map which is hereby made a part of this chapter: 
Beginning at the intersection of Academy and E.E. Butler Parkway; thence following the southern right-of-way of Academy Street in a southwesterly direction to its intersection with Jesse Jewell Parkway; thence following the right-of-way line of Jesse Jewell Parkway to its intersection with the right-of-way of the Seaboard Railroad; thence running south along the right-of-way of the Seaboard Railroad to its intersection with Parker Street; thence in an easterly direction along the right-of-way of Parker Street to its intersection with Grove Street; thence in a southerly direction along the right-of-way of Grove Street to its intersection with Banks Street; thence in an easterly direction along the right-of-way of Banks Street to its intersection with Main Street; thence in a northerly direction along the right-of-way of Main Street to its intersection with College Avenue; thence along the right-of-way of College Avenue in an easterly direction to its intersection with E.E. Butler Parkway; thence following the center line of E. E. Butler Parkway including the new alignment of E. E. Butler Parkway in a northerly direction to its intersection with Academy Street and the point of beginning. 
All matters pertaining to structural conditions of buildings within the fire limits shall be in compliance with appendix D of the International Building Code, current edition, adopted by the department of community affairs of the state, and which is on file in the office of the city clerk, and hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code. 
  
 Official Fire Limits 
Sec. 9-20-2-2. - Penalties for violating the fire code. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made there under, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved there under, or any certificate or permit issued there under, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of the City Code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
Sec. 9-20-2-3. - Bureau of fire prevention established; duties; enforcement of code. 
(a)  The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  The chief of fire prevention (fire marshal) in charge of the bureau of fire shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department may detail and appoint such members of the fire department as inspectors and technical inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(d)  A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the fire chief of the city; it shall contain all proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein; the chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to the code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
Sec. 9-20-2-4. - Chief of bureau of fire prevention; modification of code. 
The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
Sec. 9-20-2-5. - New materials, processes or occupancies, which may require permits. 
The city manager, the chief of the fire department and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code adopted by this article. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
Sec. 9-20-2-6. - Smoking in bed in hotels prohibited; operator to post notice of section provisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person while he is an occupant of a hotel, rooming house, tourist court or other commercial establishment where rooming accommodations are furnished for hire, to smoke any cigarette, cigar, pipe or other device used for the burning of tobacco or other substances while such person is in bed. 
(b)  Each operator or owner of any hotel, rooming house, tourist court or other commercial establishment where rooming accommodations are furnished for hire shall post a notice containing the provisions of this section in each room of such establishment. 
Sec. 9-20-2-7. - Smoking in theaters. 
(a)  The smoking of cigarettes, cigars and pipes by patrons of motion picture theaters in the city in areas within such theaters which have been designated "no smoking" by the chief of the fire department of the city is prohibited. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of the City Code. 
Sec. 9-20-2-8. - Fire inspection. 
The chief of fire prevention of the fire department of the city is authorized to inspect any building or premises within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of ascertaining the condition thereof with reference to the presence, arrangement or deposit of any articles, materials, goods, wares and merchandise which may be combustible or inflammable, or endanger any occupant of or person upon the premises, building or structure, and for the purpose of examining the size, arrangement and efficiency of any and all appliances for protection against fire in or upon such premises, building or structure. 
Sec. 9-20-2-9. - Removal of hazard. 
If the chief of fire prevention, upon inspection of any premises, building or structure, shall find any rubbish, debris, waste or inflammable materials therein or thereon, in violation of this article or shall find articles, materials, substances, goods, wares or merchandise so arranged as to increase the risk of fire or to prevent proper access to or exit from premises, building or structure, either for the occupants of the premises or for the members of the fire department, he may order, in writing, which order shall be directed to the owner or occupant of such premises, and it is hereby made the duty of the owner or person in control of the premises to comply with such order with all reasonable dispatch, the removal of such rubbish, debris, inflammable or combustible materials from such premises, building or structure, or the arrangement and disposition of such goods, wares or merchandise so as to make the premises accessible for firefighting and for exit of persons. 
Sec. 9-20-2-10. - Firefighting equipment. 
If the chief of fire prevention shall, upon inspection, determine that the firefighting equipment provided on the premises is inadequate or insufficient, or if he shall find that the equipment for firefighting in the building, premises or structure is not in good working condition, he shall by an order in writing, direct the owner or person in control of the premises to comply with such order to procure such equipment as he may designate, or to put the equipment in working condition with all reasonable dispatch. 
Sec. 9-20-2-11. - Straw, hay, lumber, etc.; stacking. 
No hay, grain, straw, rubbish, lumber or other combustible material shall be stacked, piled or placed within the fire limits of the city, except that the same be placed in a building provided for the storage of same and a permit secured therefore from the chief of fire prevention or his representative. 
Sec. 9-20-2-12. - Gasoline and oil storage. 
No person shall store or keep in any building or structure within the fire limits of the city any gasoline, benzene or inflammable fluid in excess of fifty (50) gallons unless the same is stored or kept within such fire limits when contained in steel barrels tightly closed, and in cans, bottles or containers designed for the sale or for the service of motor vehicles. 
Sec. 9-20-2-13. - Notice for building or combustible materials declared a nuisance. 
Any building erected or combustible materials piled contrary to provisions of this article are declared to be a nuisance; and any hay, grain, straw, rubbish, lumber or other combustible material that may be piled, placed or stacked within said fire limits contrary to this article, shall be and is hereby declared a nuisance, and the chief of fire prevention shall upon information thereof give twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the owner, builder or person in control of the premises of such nuisance, such notice to be in writing, and upon failure of any such persons to comply with such notice, the city shall direct the removal or tearing down of such buildings or structures or piles of hay, grain, straw, rubbish or other combustible materials, and the city shall forthwith execute such order and shall report the cost and expense thereof. Such cost may be collected from the owner, building or person in control of such nuisance by suit in the name of the city, before any court having jurisdiction. The same may be assessed against the premises upon which such nuisance was located and collected in due course as a special assessment. 
CHAPTER 9-20-3. - EXCAVATION AND GRADING 

Sec. 9-20-3-1. - Purposes. 
Soil erosion and sediment deposition onto lands and into waters in the city are occurring as a result of land clearing, excavation, filling, grading, and construction activities. Such erosion and sediment deposition results in pollution of county waters and damage to domestic agricultural, recreational, fish and wildlife, and other resource uses. This chapter establishes uniform rules and regulations for excavation, filling, and grading activities for all sites with the city and provides for administration and enforcement of such rules and regulations. 
Sec. 9-20-3-2. - Reference to regulations. 
The rules and regulations for excavation, filling, and grading activities shall in addition to this chapter include articles 9-13 and 9-14. 
Sec. 9-20-3-3. - Debris from construction sites. 
A permit issued by the city for excavation, grading, or land development, as required by chapter 9-13-7, shall require the owner of the property or his representative to prevent the scattering of earth, rock, vegetation and other debris upon public streets, drainage systems, or private property is restricted or disrupted from normal use or operation or in any way damaged, made unsightly or unsafe by the collection or deposit of mud earth, rock, vegetation or other debris originating at or dislodged by clearing, grading, or construction activities at the construction site. 
Sec. 9-20-3-4. - Daily clearing of debris; performance bond. 
Land development permits shall further require the property owner or his representative to completely clear, unclog and clean any public street or drainage system so affected by clearing, grading or construction activities at the end of each work day and at such other times as so required by the public works department. The property owner or his representative shall be held responsible for violations of this section for a period of not less than two (2) years after the permit is issued; or, after two (2) years, until such time as the property is returned to a stable condition as determined by the public works department. A certificate of completion shall be issued to the applicant after the official makes the determination. Each applicant will provide a performance bond, letter of escrow, irrevocable letter of credit, or other satisfactory security on a form approved by the city manager to ensure that authorized work is accomplished in accordance with the approved permits. The amount is to be determined by the public works department. 
Sec. 9-20-3-5. - Geologic report. 
Unique sites including extreme cuts/fills, rock blasting, faulting, unstable soils, or other similar geotechnical problems may be required to submit a geologic report certified by a professional engineer registered in the state. Such report shall address monitoring during construction phrase, if required, and shall comply with the latest edition of the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, as amended. 
Sec. 9-20-3-6. - License required. 
Contractors or builders conducting excavation, grading, and filling projects in the city that are not exempted under the provisions of this Code shall comply with chapter 6-2 of the City Code. 
CHAPTER 9-20-4. - STRUCTURES DANGEROUS TO PUBLIC HEALTH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-02, § I, adopted February 19, 2008, amended chapter 9-20-4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 9-20-4 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from original codification and Ord. No. 2006-18, §§ I—VIII, adopted June 20, 2006. 

Sec. 9-20-4-1. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city finds and declares that within the city limits there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this section shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-20-4-2. - Definitions. 
Applicable codes: 
(a)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(b)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and 
(c)  Any building codes adopted by the city prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 of Title 8 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
City means the City of Gainesville, Georgia. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act, which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this chapter, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the city council of the City of Gainesville. 
Interested parties means: 
(a)  Owner; 
(b)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(c)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(d)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(e)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter or any agent or designee of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes of the city and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the city on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-20-4-3. - Maintenance duties. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-20-4-4. - Appointment of public officer. 
The city council appoints and designates the chief building inspector, the city fire marshal, the city fire chief, the city police chief, the city marshal, and his or her designees as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter; 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-20-4-5. - Procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(b)  If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause a summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(c)  The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days or more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. The income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 43, of the O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the city. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within two hundred seventy (270) days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the two hundred seventy (270) days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city tax collector and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(h)  (1)  The city tax collector, shall have the power to attach a lien provided for in this section to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court of Hall County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (c) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Hall County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(2)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this chapter shall transmit to the city tax collector a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within ninety (90) days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. The city tax collector shall collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. Chapter 4 of Title 48; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing tax foreclosure shall not apply. The city tax collector shall remit the amount collected to the finance department of the city. 
(3)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to the chapter may be initiated at any time following receipt by the city tax collector of the final determination of costs in accordance with this chapter. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. 
(4)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this code section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the city tax collector in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(i)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(j)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order of the municipal court of the city requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(k)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this section. 
(l)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-20-4-6. - Officer determination of nuisance. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards, which may from time to time by adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-20-4-7. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this chapter are authorized to exercise such power as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of sections 9-20-4-1—9-20-4-6, this section, and sections 9-20-4-8—9-20-4-10, including the following powers in addition to others granted in sections 9-20-4-1—9-20-4-6 and sections 9-20-4-8—9-20-4-10: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this section; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this chapter to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-20-4-8. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served in the following manner. 
(1)  At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. 
(2)  Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three (3) business days of filing the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appears in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of Hall County at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-20-4-9. - Use of other ordinances as nuisance abatement procedures. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any charter provision or ordinance or regulation, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07) 
Sec. 9-20-4-10. - Injunctions. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provision of the order and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within fifteen (15) days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be had by the court on petitions within twenty (20) days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-53, § I, 11-20-07; Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 3-5-13) 
Sec. 9-20-4-11. - Taking of unfit buildings or structures by eminent domain; police power. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing the owner or owners of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state nor as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § II, 3-5-13) 
Sec. 9-20-4-12. - Authority to use revenues, grants, and donations to repair, close, or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
The city is authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of ordinances adopted in connection with the exercise of the powers granted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § III, 3-5-13) 
CHAPTER 9-20-5. - THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 9-20-5-1. - Enforcement and interpretation. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this article and all of the codes adopted in this article. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this article and the codes adopted in this article and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this article. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-5-2. - Applications and permits. 
The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection and alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this article and the codes adopted in this article. 
Sec. 9-20-5-3. - Notices and orders. 
The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this article and the codes adopted in this article. 
Sec. 9-20-5-4. - Inspections. 
Inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be made by the building official or his duly appointed assistant. The building official may accept reports of inspectors and recognized inspection services after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. Any such reports of inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority. No certificate called for by any provision of the building code shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible inspector or such service. 
Sec. 9-20-5-5. - Identification. 
The building official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-5-6. - Right of entry. 
Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises were unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
Sec. 9-20-5-7. - Department records. 
The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records. 
Sec. 9-20-5-8. - Duties. 
The building official shall devote his whole time to the duties of this office. He shall receive applications required by this code, issue permits, and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. He shall enforce all provisions of the building code and other codes adopted in this article. He shall, when required by the proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in the building code and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. 
Sec. 9-20-5-9. - Other state law authorization. 
The city building official is authorized to do any act or take any action, which is authorized by the State Construction Industry Licensing Board Act. 
Sec. 9-20-5-10. - Cooperation of other officials. 
The building official may request and shall receive so far as may be necessary, in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the city. 
Sec. 9-20-5-11. - Appointment. 
The building official shall be appointed by the city manager. 
Sec. 9-20-5-12. - Creation of enforcement agency. 
The department of building safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. 
Sec. 9-20-5-13. - Deputies. 
In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the city manager, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official. For the maintenance of existing properties, see the International Property Maintenance Code. 
Sec. 9-20-5-14. - Approved materials and equipment. 
Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. The use of used materials, which meet the requirements of this Code for new materials, is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official. 
Sec. 9-20-5-15. - Modifications. 
Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this Code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner's representative, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this Code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this Code and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of building safety. 
Sec. 9-20-5-16. - Alternative materials and construction methods. 
The provisions of this article and the codes adopted in this article are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this article or a code adopted here under, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this article and the intent of the applicable code adopted by this article, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
Sec. 9-20-5-17. - Tests. 
Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this article, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this article or the codes adopted here under, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this article or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. The building official shall retain reports of such tests for the period required for retention of public records. 
CHAPTER 9-20-6. - PERMITS AND EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 9-20-6-1. - Permits required. 
Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by a code adopted in this article, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. 
Sec. 9-20-6-2. - Permit exemptions generally. 
Exemptions from permit requirements of this article and codes adopted in this article shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this article, codes adopted hereunder, or any other laws or ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 9-20-6-3. - Exemptions from building permit. 
Building permits shall not be required for the following: 
(a)  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
(b)  Fences not over six (6) feet (one thousand eight hundred twenty-nine (1,829) mm) high. 
(c)  Oil derricks. 
(d)  Retaining walls which are not over four (4) feet (one thousand two hundred nineteen (1,219) mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding class I, II or III-A liquids. 
(e)  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons (eighteen thousand nine hundred twenty-seven (18,927) L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two (2) to one. 
(f)  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
(g)  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
(h)  Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a group R-3 occupancy, as applicable in Section 101.2 which are less than twenty-four (24) inches (six hundred ten (610) mm) deep, do not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons (nineteen thousand (19,000) L) and are installed entirely above ground. 
(i)  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems. 
(j)  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one-and two-family dwellings. 
(k)  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of group R-3 as applicable in Section 101.2, and Group U occupancies. 
(l)  Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five (5) feet nine (9) inches (one thousand seven hundred fifty-three (1,753) mm) in height. 
Sec. 9-20-6-4. - Exemptions from electrical permit. 
Electrical permits shall not be required for the following: 
(a)  Repairs and maintenance. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
(b)  Radio and television transmitting stations. The provisions of this Code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but does apply to equipment and wiring for power supply, the installations of towers and antennas. 
(c)  Temporary testing systems. A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
Sec. 9-20-6-5. - Exemption from gas code. 
Replacement of any minor part of a portable heating appliance that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe is exempt from a gas code permit. 
Sec. 9-20-6-6. - Exemptions from mechanical permit. 
Where equipment and appliance replacements or repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted with the next working business day of the department of mechanical inspection. 
Mechanical permits shall not be required for the following: 
(a)  Portable heating appliances; 
(b)  Portable ventilation appliances and equipment; 
(c)  Portable cooling units; 
(d)  Steam, hot water or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment or appliance regulated by this Code; 
(e)  The replacement of any minor part that does not alter the approval of equipment or an appliance or make such equipment or appliance unsafe; 
(f)  Portable evaporative coolers; and 
(g)  Self-contained refrigeration systems that contain ten (10) pounds (4.5kg) or less of refrigerant, or that are actuated by motors of one horsepower (0.75kW) or less. 
Exemption from the permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for work to be done in violation of the provisions of this Code or other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
Sec. 9-20-6-7. - Exemptions from plumbing permit. 
Plumbing permits shall not be required for the following: 
(a)  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this Code. 
(b)  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
Sec. 9-20-6-8. - Permit application requirements. 
To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished by the department of building safety for that purpose. Such application shall: 
(a)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application if made. 
(b)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
(c)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
(d)  Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required by the building official. 
(e)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(f)  Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(g)  Give such other data and information as required by the building official. 
(h)  Include payment of a development impact fee is required by article 9-19. No building permit shall be issued until of unless the Impact Fee Administrator, as established in article 9-19, has found the building permit application to be in compliance with said article 9-19 and has authorized the issuance of said building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § IV, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-20-6-9. - Action on permit application. 
The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefore. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this Code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefore as soon as practicable. 
Sec. 9-20-6-10. - Time limitation of application. 
An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding ninety (90) days each. The extension shall be required in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
Sec. 9-20-6-11. - Validity of permit. 
The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other date. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of this Code or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
Sec. 9-20-6-12. - Expiration. 
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
Sec. 9-20-6-13. - Suspension or revocation. 
The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this Code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-6-14. - Placement of permit. 
The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project. 
CHAPTER 9-20-7. - CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 9-20-7-1. - Submittal documents. 
Construction documents, special inspection and structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. 
Sec. 9-20-7-2. - Exception. 
The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-7-3. - Information on construction documents. 
Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official. 
(a)  Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this Code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in this Chapter. 
(b)  Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this Code. In other than occupancies in groups R-2 and R-3 as applicable in Section 101.2 of the International Building Code, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces. 
(c)  Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this Code. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves, or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane, and details around openings. 
The construction documents shall include manufacturing installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system, which was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used. 
Sec. 9-20-7-4. - Site plan. 
The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted. 
Sec. 9-20-7-5. - Examination of documents. 
The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this article and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
Sec. 9-20-7-6. - Approval of construction documents. 
When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as "Reviewed for Code Compliance." The building official shall retain one set of construction documents so reviewed. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work, and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
Sec. 9-20-7-7. - Previous approvals. 
This article shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this Code and has not been abandoned. 
Sec. 9-20-7-8. - Phased approved. 
The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this Code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. 
Sec. 9-20-7-9. - Design professional in responsible charge. 
(a)  When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. 
(b)  The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. 
(c)  Where structural observation is required by Section 1709 of the International Building Code, as amended, the inspection program shall name the individual or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur. See also duties specified in Section 1704 of the International Building Code, as amended. 
Sec. 9-20-7-10. - Deferred submittals. 
For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period. 
Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building official. 
Submittal documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge that shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and that they have been found to be in general conformance with the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until their design and submittal documents have been approved by the building official. 
Sec. 9-20-7-11. - Amended construction documents. 
Work shall be installed in accordance with the reviewed construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as am amended set of construction documents. 
Sec. 9-20-7-12. - Retention of construction documents. 
The building official shall retain one set of approved construction documents for a period of not less than one hundred eighty (180) days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws. 
CHAPTER 9-20-8. - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES. 

Sec. 9-20-8-1. - Generally. 
The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause. 
Sec. 9-20-8-2. - Conformance. 
Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary equipments of this Code as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Sec. 9-20-8-3. - Temporary power. 
The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the NEC Electrical Code. 
Sec. 9-20-8-4. - Termination of approval. 
The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued. 
CHAPTER 9-20-9. - FEES 

Sec. 9-20-9-1. - Payment of fees. 
A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
Sec. 9-20-9-2. - Schedule of permit fees. 
On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the city council. In addition, if required by article 9-19, applicants for building permits shall pay a development impact fee as specified in said article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § V, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-20-9-3. - Building permit valuations. 
The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official. 
Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee established by the building official that shall be in addition to the required permit fees. 
Sec. 9-20-9-4. - Related fees. 
The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
Sec. 9-20-9-5. - Refunds. 
The building official is authorized to establish a refund policy; provided, however, that this shall not authorize the building official to establish refund policies for development impact fees collected pursuant to article 9-19. Refunds of development impact fees shall be authorized only by the impact fee administrator in accordance with applicable provisions of article 9-19. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § III, 8-1-06) 
CHAPTER 9-20-10. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 9-20-10-1. - Generally. 
Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
Sec. 9-20-10-2. - Preliminary inspection. 
Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
Sec. 9-20-10-3. - Required inspections. 
The building official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in Sections 109.3.1 through 109.3.10 of the Building Code. 
(a)  Footing or foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94; the concrete need not be on the job. 
(b)  Concrete slab or under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the sub floor. 
(c)  Lower floor elevation. The elevation certification required in Section 1612.5 of the International Building Code, as amended shall be submitted to the building official. 
(d)  Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved. 
(e)  Lath or gypsum board inspection. Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or before gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished. Exception: Gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistive assembly or a shear assembly. 
(f)  Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. 
(g)  Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this Code and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety. 
(h)  Special inspections. For special inspections, see Chapter 17 of the International Building Code. 
(i)  Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. 
Sec. 9-20-10-4. - Inspection agencies. 
The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
Sec. 9-20-10-5. - Inspection requests. 
It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspection of such work for any inspections that are required by this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-10-6. - Approval required. 
Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this article. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
CHAPTER 9-20-11. - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 9-20-11-1. - Use and occupancy. 
No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
Sec. 9-20-11-2. - Change in use. 
Changes in the character or use of an existing structure shall not be made except as specified in Chapter 34 of the International Building Code, as amended. 
Sec. 9-20-11-3. - Certificate issued. 
After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this Code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that shall contain the following: 
(a)  The building permit number. 
(b)  The address of the structure. 
(c)  The name and address of the owner. 
(d)  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. 
(e)  A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this Code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified. 
(f)  The name of the building official. 
(g)  The edition of the code under which the permit was issued. 
(h)  The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3 of the International Building Code, as amended. 
(i)  The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6 of the International Building Code, as amended. 
(j)  The design occupant load. 
(k)  If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required. 
(l)  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. 
Sec. 9-20-11-4. - Temporary occupancy. 
The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid. 
Sec. 9-20-11-5. - Revocation. 
The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of this Code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-11-6. - Service utilities. 
(a)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this Code for which a permit is required, until released by the building official. 
(b)  Temporary connection. The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this Code and the codes referenced in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
CHAPTER 9-20-12. - BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 9-20-12-1. - Generally. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a building board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. See Appendix "B" of the I.B.C., current edition, with state amendments, adopted by the board of community affairs of the state. 
Sec. 9-20-12-2. - Limitations on authority. 
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted there under have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this Code. 
Sec. 9-20-12-3. - Qualifications. 
The building board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction. 
CHAPTER 9-20-13. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 9-20-13-1. - Violations. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provision of this article or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made there under, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved there under, or any certificate or permit issued there under, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of the City Code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
Sec. 9-20-13-2. - Notices. 
Whenever the building inspection department is satisfied that systems, appliances or equipment, or any work in connection therewith that is covered by this chapter, is being erected, installed, altered or repaired, in violation of the provisions or requirements of this chapter, or in violation of plans or specifications submitted and approved there under, or a permit issued there under, it shall serve a written notice or order upon the person responsible therefore directing discontinuance of such illegal action and the remedying of the condition that is in violation of the provisions or requirements of this article. 
In case such notice or order is not promptly complied with, the building inspection department shall notify the city manager that shall take appropriate action to correct or remove such violation. 
Sec. 9-20-13-3. - Stopping work. 
Whenever work is in progress which is, in the opinion of the building official, by reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision or requirement of this chapter, the building official shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped and may require suspension of all work until the condition in violation has been corrected. 
Sec. 9-20-13-4. - Abatement. 
The imposition of the penalties prescribed in this Chapter shall not preclude the city from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the unlawful erection, installation, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent the use of any systems, appliances or equipment covered by this chapter, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any premises. 
CHAPTER 9-20-14. - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 9-20-14-1. - Building permit required. 
A building permit issued by the building official is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving or alteration of any building or structure where the cost of such construction, erection, moving, or alteration, as estimated by the building official will be in excess of three hundred dollars ($300.00). All buildings and structures shall comply with the requirements of this Code, whether or not a building permit is required. 
Building permits for all buildings, structures and interior finishes shall be required and shall be issued after application and demonstration through building plans that the building, structure, or interior finish will meet all applicable requirements of the Life Safety Code and the various health and building codes of the city and as may be applicable. 
Sec. 9-20-14-2. - Lot of record. 
Building permits shall only be issued on lots of record, as defined in this Code. If an application for building permit is received on a tract or parcel that is not a lot of record, the building permit applicant shall be required to subdivide the land in accordance with article 9-13. 
Sec. 9-20-14-3. - Land development permit. 
Prior to issuance of a building permit, the owner shall have received a land development permit if required by chapter 9-13-7. 
Sec. 9-20-14-4. - Environmental health approval. 
For any building, structure, or land development activity served by an on-site sewage disposal system, a permit shall be required and must be applied for and approved and issued by the Hall County Environmental Health Department prior to issuance of a building permit. Said permit may require a plan showing the location of the sewage disposal system and other on-site improvements, in accordance with said department's regulations. 
Sec. 9-20-14-5. - Water supply approval. 
A building permit shall not be issued prior to issuance of a well permit by the Hall County Environmental Health Department or water meter approved by the city public utilities department. 
Sec. 9-20-14-6. - Application requirements for building permits. 
Application for a building permit shall be made to the building official. Building permit applications shall include all information necessary as determined by the building official for thorough review and approval, and shall specifically include the following: 
(a)  Application form. Application on the form furnished by the building official, requesting issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Fee. Payment of the building permit application and review fee, and payment of development impact fee(s) if required by article 9-19. 
(c)  Plat or plan. For a single-family detached or two-family dwelling, a plat and one set of plans. For a multi-family or nonresidential building, a site plan upon which has been approved by the planning department. 
(d)  Building plans. Four (4) sets of the building architectural plans and three (3) sets of approved civil drawings from the department of planning and development for principal multi-family or non-residential buildings prepared in conformance with this Code and the applicable building codes. Plans shall be prepared by or under the supervision of, or reviewed and approved by, an architect registered in the state, who shall sign and seal each sheet in the original set of drawings. 
(e)  Zoning compliance. Prior to issuing a building permit, the building official shall require that the applicant for a building permit obtain zoning verification from and review for compliance with this Code by the planning department. A copy of conditions of zoning, special use approval, or variance approval, and verification of zoning compliance shall be submitted, if applicable. 
(f)  Address. A street address number as assigned by the city. 
(g)  Septic tank approval by the Hall County Environmental Health Department. Evidence of approval by the Hall County Environmental Health Department if an on-site sewage disposal system has been allowed. 
(h)  Water meter receipt. Water meter receipt issued by the public utilities department, if connection to city water is involved. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § VI, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-20-14-7. - Review of building permit application for completeness. 
The application for building permit shall be checked by the building official for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
Sec. 9-20-14-8. - Review of building permit application. 
Within two (2) weeks following receipt of a complete application, the building plans review officer shall indicate on one copy of the building plans or in writing all comments related to compliance of the building plans with this applicable building codes, and any conditions of zoning, special use, or variance approval, and any other applicable requirements of this Code. The building plans review officer shall seek the review by and approval of the state fire marshal prior to issuing a building permit. If changes are required to building plans, the owner shall be responsible for compliance with this article and all building code requirements, regulations, and for the satisfaction of all of the comments of the building official and other administrative officers responsible for the review of building permits. 
The time frames established by this chapter for the issuance of building permits shall not apply to the extent that compliance with article 9-19 relative to payment of development impact fees has not been accomplished within the time frames established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § VII, 8-1-06) 
Sec. 9-20-14-9. - Building permit approval. 
A building permit shall be issued for the building or structure when the owner has addressed the comments to the satisfaction of building official, state fire marshal, and other administrative officers responsible for the review of building permits, and upon demonstrating that the building or structure conforms with the technical codes adopted and amended by the city under chapter 5-2 of the City Code. 
Sec. 9-20-14-10. - Related permits. 
Plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits shall be issued separately by the building official or separately identified on the building permit. Such permits must be issued prior to commencement of work by each affected trade. 
Sec. 9-20-14-11. - Building inspection. 
Building inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements and procedures of the city. 
Sec. 9-20-14-12. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
A certificate of occupancy shall be required and must be issued by the building official prior to the occupancy or use of any new or newly renovated building or structure, in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter. Specifically, a certificate of occupancy shall be required for the following activities (not exhaustive): 
(a)  Prior to occupancy and use of a building or structure, whether newly constructed or enlarged. 
(b)  Change in use of existing buildings to uses of a different classification. 
(c)  Any change in use of a nonconforming use. 
Sec. 9-20-14-13. - Occupancy without certificate is unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises or parts thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued therefore by the building official stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this Code and other applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the city. 
Sec. 9-20-14-14. - Connection to electric power. 
Permanent electric power shall not be supplied to any building or structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued and the power company provided with evidence of approval by the building official. 
Sec. 9-20-14-15. - Suspension of permits and certificates. 
The building official may withhold, revoke, or suspend a building permit or certificate of occupancy when violations occur. 
CHAPTER 9-20-15. - ADDITIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 9-20-15-1. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, terms not defined in this chapter shall have their meaning as defined in other chapters and articles of this Unified Land Development Code, or in the absence of such definition, words shall have their common dictionary definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the administration, interpretation, and enforcement of this chapter: 
Boarding-up: Erecting, installing, placing, or maintaining boards over the doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure, or otherwise securing such openings by a means other than the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure. 
Code official: The community development director of the city of Gainesville, or any other official charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to the building official or code enforcement officer, or any duly authorized representative of any such official. 

Community donation box: A receptacle for receiving donations such as clothes, shoes, household goods and furniture. Small receptacles specifically designed for the donation of books or food are exempt from the regulations of this chapter. 
Let for occupancy or let: To permit, provide, or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement or contract for the sale of land. 
Maintenance: The act of keeping property, premises, buildings, structures, equipment, or vegetation in a proper condition so as to prevent their decline, failure, or uncontrolled growth. 
Multi-family: For the purposes of this chapter, multi-family is a building, or collection of buildings on the same property, under single ownership that is designed for or occupied exclusively by six (6) or more families with separate household facilities for each family. This term includes attached residential condominiums, row houses and apartments. 
Occupant: Any individual living or sleeping in a building or having possession of a space within a building. 
Operator: Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. A real estate broker or salesperson licensed pursuant to Chapter 40 of Title 43 of the O.C.G.A. is not an operator for the purpose of this chapter unless such broker or salesperson is under contract to provide property management services to the owner of such structure or premises. 
Owner: Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including but not limited to the guardian, executor, or administrator of the estate of any such person. 
Person: An individual, corporation, partnership or any other legally recognized entity. 
Premises: A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon. 
Property: Any unimproved or improved residential or non-residential real property, or portion thereof, situated in the City of Gainesville, including the buildings, structures and improvements located on the real property, regardless of condition. 
Registered agent: A person who resides in Hall County, Georgia, or has a brick and mortar business address in Hall County, who is assigned by an owner of a multi-family residential property, as defined in this chapter, to be available seven (7) days a week to accept notices of violation regarding any provision of the Gainesville City Code of Ordinances or Unified Land Development Code, who has the authority and ability to grant access to the building or property by city personnel upon request, and who is registered with the city in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
Structure: That which is built or constructed, or a portion thereof. 
Tenant: A person, corporation, partnership, group, or other legally recognized entity, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § II, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 9-20-15-2. - Responsibility. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, property or premises within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, property or premises in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, including but not limited to this chapter, the Unified Land Development Code, and the Code of Ordinances of the City of Gainesville. 
(b)  Both the occupant and the owner of the premises shall be liable for compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and shall be responsible for violations thereof. Any Let of property of an owner which purports to transfer responsibility for this provision shall be ineffective in shielding the owner for responsibility under this chapter, and such owner shall remain liable, along with the occupant of the premises. 
(c)  The owner and occupant of the premises shall maintain structures and property in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Owners and occupants of property are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the property which they occupy and control. 
(f)  All vacant structures and premises, as well as vacant land, shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided in this chapter so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
(g)  Any property owners or occupants with properties that are not in compliance at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall have no more than sixty (60) days from the date of the adoption of this chapter to bring properties into compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § II, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 9-20-15-3. - Transfer of ownership. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building, structure, property, or premises who has received a notice of violation of this chapter, or other provision within the Unified Land Development Code or Code of Ordinances of the City of Gainesville to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such building, structure, property, or premises until said violation has been remedied, or until such owner shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of the notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility, without condition, for making the corrections or repairs required by the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § II, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 9-20-15-4. - Registered agents. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a business occupation tax certificate for any multi-family residential property, or during the first thirty (30) calendar days of each year, whichever occurs earlier, the owner and each occupation tax certificate holder for any multi-family residential property must annually designate the name, Hall County address, and twenty-four (24) hour phone number of a registered agent for the multi-family residential property. 
(b)  The registered agent must meet all criteria of a registered agent as established by definition in this chapter. 
(c)  The designation required by this section shall be submitted to the city's business tax and licensing division. Such designation shall be confirmed at the time of each annual designation of the registered agent. 
(d)  In the event that the holder of an occupational tax certificate or the owner of the property desires to change the name or contact information of the registered agent, the occupational tax certificate holder and/or owner shall supply written notice to the city's business tax and licensing division. No change in registered agent shall be effective until written notice thereof is received by the city's business tax and licensing division. 
(e)  The registered agent shall give consent to enter multi-family residential property and buildings thereon to a code official upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § II, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 9-20-15-5. - Defacement of property. 
(a)  No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any interior or exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner of real property to permit graffiti to remain on a structure located thereon for a continuous period of more than seventy-two (72) hours. For purposes of this section, the term "graffiti" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § II, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 9-20-15-6. - Outdoor furniture. 
(a)  Only furniture which is fabricated with materials appropriate to be maintained outside of a dwelling or structure shall be permitted to be placed on a porch of a dwelling, building, or structure, or placed in any other exterior area of a property. 
(b)  No furniture (e.g., couches, chairs covered with fabric, recliners, etc.) which is fabricated with materials intended only to be used, kept, or maintained on the interior of a dwelling building, or structure, or which will rot, decompose or degrade in outdoor conditions, shall be kept, stored, or maintained on a porch of a dwelling, building, or structure, or placed in any other exterior area of a property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § II, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 9-20-15-7. - Plastic or impervious covers. 
(a)  Except for those covers specifically designed for the purpose of covering conventional outdoor equipment, such as a gas grill, patio furniture, lawnmower, etc., it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or utilize any plastic or nylon tarp or other impervious covering, on any porch of a dwelling, building, or structure, or in any exterior area of a property. 
(b)  The pitching of a camping tent, or a temporary movable structure, shall not violate this section, provided it is erected for no more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours on the property. 
(c)  The covering of firewood with a clear plastic or brown tarp shall not violate this section, provided such firewood is stored in a side or rear yard of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § II, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 9-20-15-8. - Vacant structures. 
Vacant structures shall be maintained in good repair and be in compliance with all applicable laws, codes, and ordinances. Any vacant structure shall at a minimum: 
(a)  Have all doors, windows, and other openings weather-tight and secured against entry by the general public as well as animals and pests. The vacant structures shall be secured using the conventional methods used in the original construction. 
(b)  All roof and roof flashings shall be sound and tight such that no rain will penetrate the structure and must allow for appropriate drainage so as to prevent deterioration of the interior walls or other interior portions of the structure. 
(c)  The structure must be maintained in good repair and must be structurally sound and free from rubbish, garbage and other debris. 
(d)  Supporting parts of the structure shall be capable of bearing all loads making up the parts of and contents of the structure, and the foundation walls likewise shall be capable of supporting such loads. 
(e)  The exterior of the structure shall be free of loose or rotten materials, as well as holes. Any exposed metal, wood or other surface shall be protected from the elements by appropriate weather coating materials such as paint or similar treatment. 
(f)  All balconies, canopies, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes or other overhanging extensions shall be in good repair and appropriately anchored. The exposed metal and wood surface of such overhanging extensions shall also be protected from the elements against rust or decay by appropriate application of paint or similar weather coating. 
(g)  Any accessories or appurtenant structures, including but not limited to garages, sheds or other storage facilities shall meet the standards set forth in this section. 
(h)  Retaining walls, drainage systems, or other structures must be maintained in good repair and be structurally sound. Any existing fence shall be maintained in good repair and be structurally sound. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § II, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 9-20-15-9. - Boarding-up structures. 
(a)  Boarding-up permit. No person shall erect, install, place, or maintain boards over the doors, windows or other opening of any building or structure or otherwise secure such opening by a means other than the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure without first obtaining a boarding-up permit in accordance with this section. Any properties with such boards existing at the time of the adoption of this section shall have sixty (60) days from the date of adoption of this section to submit an application to the community development department for a permit to continue to board-up the building or structure. 
(b)  Permit application requirements. The community development department may issue a boarding-up permit only upon satisfaction of the following conditions: 
(1)  Submission of a written application including such information as specified by the department on a boarding-up permit application made available to the public; and 
(2)  Submission of a written statement specifying the length of time the owner expects the boarding-up to take place or continue, a plan to secure or board up the structure including manner and materials, and a proposed maintenance plan for monitoring and maintenance of the structure and premises in conformance with this chapter. The community development department may conduct an inspection of the subject property at any time to ensure that the structure is boarded up in accordance with the plan approved by the department. 
(c)  Duration of permit and renewal. A boarding-up permit issued pursuant to this section shall authorize the boarding-up or other securing of a building or structure for a period of no longer than six (6) months. An owner of a property desiring to continue to board-up property beyond a six-month term must submit a renewal application to renew the boarding-up permit and continue to meet the requirements for the issuance of a renewal boarding-up permit. Only one (1) six-month renewal boarding-up permit will be issued for each property. Application for a renewal boarding-up permit must be made within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the original boarding-up permit. 
(d)  Temporary emergency. No boarding-up permit shall be required to board-up a building for up to thirty (30) days in the event of a temporary emergency situation, including but not limited to damage caused by vandalism, theft, fire, or weather. In the event an emergency situation requires a building or structure to be boarded-up for more than thirty (30) days, the owner of the building or structure or the owner's authorized representative must obtain a valid building permit for repair or a valid boarding-up permit in accordance with this section. 
(e)  Boarding specifications. The boarding of doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure or any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, shall be according to the specifications approved under the boarding-up permit. All boarded openings shall be painted with a minimum of two (2) coats of exterior paint, which shall be of a color compatible with the exterior color of the building or structure. 
(f)  Any structure which is boarded-up shall be posted with the name, permit information, and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § II, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 9-20-15-10. - Burned structures. 
(a)  Whenever any building or structure is partially burned, or burned to such an extent that it is rendered incapable of being repaired, the owner shall, within sixty (60) days after completion of the scene investigation by the fire department and/or insurer of the property, remove from the premises all refuse, debris, and all charred and partially burned lumber and materials. 
(b)  If such building or structure is burned to such an extent that it is incapable of being repaired, the remaining portion of the building or structure shall be removed from the property within sixty (60) days after completion of the scene investigation by the fire department and/or insurer of the property. 
(c)  If the building or structure is to be repaired, a permit shall be obtained and work shall begin within sixty (60) days after completion of the scene investigation by the fire department and/or insurer of the property and shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date a permit is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § II, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 9-20-15-11. - Community donation boxes. 
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain community donation boxes in an exterior property area, unless approved by the community development director in compliance with one (1) of the following criteria: 
(a)  It is located in a Light Industrial (L-I) or Heavy Industrial (H-I) zoning district; or 
(b)  It is located on the same property as a business or organization with a 501(c)(3) designation. 
Where approved, community donation boxes shall be located flush against a building wall and shall be maintained on a regular basis in compliance with the Unified Land Development Code and Code of Ordinances of the City of Gainesville. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § II, 8-7-18) 
Sec. 9-20-15-12. - Inoperable accessory items. 
Inoperable accessory items such as telephone booths, satellite dishes, electrical wires, lighting, poles, magazine stands, coolers, heating/cooling equipment or other similar items are not permitted and shall be removed and appropriately stored so as not to be visible from the right-of-way or adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § II, 8-7-18) 
Article 9-21 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

 
CHAPTER 9-21-1. - PLANNING AND APPEALS BOARD 

Sec. 9-21-1-1. - Establishment and continuation. 
The planning and appeals board, as it existed on the effective date of this Code, shall continue in its present form and function. The planning and appeals board shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be residents of the city. 
Sec. 9-21-1-2. - Appointments, terms of office and vacancies. 
Members, including the chairperson, shall be appointed by the governing body to two-year terms, beginning on December 1 st of the calendar year or as otherwise appointed. Members of the board serving on the board on the effective date of this Code shall continue to serve until their term expires and their successors are appointed. When a position becomes vacant before the end of a term, the governing body shall appoint a new member for the duration of the term remaining. A member of the planning and appeals board may be appointed to successive terms and shall continue to serve if their time expires until a successor is appointed. 
Sec. 9-21-1-3. - Removal. 
A member may be removed from the planning and appeals board by a majority vote of the governing body for cause, for absenteeism at three (3) successive called or regular meetings or absenteeism at six (6) such meetings in a calendar year, or for other reasons the governing body may deem appropriate. 
Sec. 9-21-1-4. - Qualifications of members. 
In addition to being residents of the city, the governing body in its appointment of members to the planning and appeals board shall be bound by the following: 
(a)  Two (2) members of the planning and appeals board, other than the chairperson, shall have experience or knowledge in the fields of real estate, land development, architectural design, landscape architecture, building construction, planning or a similar profession. 
(b)  Four (4) members of the planning and appeals board, other than the chairperson, shall be recognized community leaders having experience or knowledge in representing the interests of citizens, residential areas or nonprofit organizations dedicated to public purposes. 
(c)  The chairperson shall be a community leader who has demonstrated the ability to conduct meetings, organize debate and to act in the public interest of the city as a whole. 
(d)  Within one year of initial appointment to the planning and appeals board, the new member shall attend the community planning institute or comparable training as determined by the director of planning and development. 
The governing body shall make the sole determination as to the qualifications of any person in meeting the requirements for membership on the planning and appeals board. 
(Ord. No. 2006-24, § I, 7-5-06) 
Sec. 9-21-1-5. - Officers. 
The chairperson, as appointed by the governing body, shall preside over meetings when present. The planning and appeals board shall elect a vice chairperson from among its members, who shall serve for one year or until re-elected or until his or her successor is elected. The vice chairperson shall preside at meetings in the absence of the chairperson. 
Sec. 9-21-1-6. - Bylaws and rules of procedure. 
The planning and appeals board may adopt such by-laws, rules or procedures as appropriate and not in conflict with this Code, the Zoning Procedures Act, or policies adopted by the governing body. 
Sec. 9-21-1-7. - Meetings. 
The planning and appeals board shall meet each month in accordance with the schedule of meeting dates and times approved by the community development department director. Other meetings of the planning and appeals board shall be held at the call of the director if there is business to be brought before it, or at such other times as the planning and appeals board may determine. All meetings of the planning and appeals board shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2018-06, § I, 2-20-18) 
Sec. 9-21-1-8. - Quorum. 
A total of four (4) planning and appeals board members present shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the quorum shall be necessary to approve any decision or recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-23, § V, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 9-21-1-9. - Voting. 
All planning and appeals board members attending a meeting shall vote on each matter placed before it. A member may abstain from voting only in the instance of a conflict of interest, the nature of which must be stated for the record. 
Sec. 9-21-1-10. - Secretary and record of proceedings. 
The director of planning and development or his or her designee shall serve as secretary to the planning and appeals board. The secretary shall cause summary minutes of its proceedings to be kept, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall cause records of its examinations and other official actions to be kept in the form of tape recordings, all of which shall be of public record. 
Sec. 9-21-1-11. - Dissemination and posting of actions. 
The results of each planning and appeals board meeting as to their actions and recommendations shall be forwarded by the director of planning and development or his or her designee to the governing body, and they shall be posted in a public place at the office of the planning department for a period of at least two (2) weeks following the planning and appeals board meeting. 
Sec. 9-21-1-12. - Powers and duties. 
The planning and appeals board shall have without limitation the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Recommendations on comprehensive plan. Review the provisions of the city's comprehensive plan from time to time, and to make such recommendations to the governing body as it deems appropriate concerning its adoption or amendment. 
(b)  Recommendations on annexation, rezoning and special use applications. Conduct a public hearing on each application for annexation, rezoning or special use approval, review the application in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this Code and the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. 36-66-1 et seq.), and make such recommendations to the governing body as it deems appropriate on each application. 
(c)  Recommendations on text amendments. Conduct a public hearing on proposals to amend any portion of articles 9-1 through 9-11, articles 9-16 through 9-18, and articles 9-21 through 9-22 and 9-24 of this Code in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this Code and the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. 36-66-1 et seq.). The board may review any such proposed text review and make such recommendation to the governing body on such text amendments as it deems appropriate. The planning and appeals board shall also consider text amendments to any other articles of this Code, if assigned such role or responsibility by the governing body. 
(d)  Initiation of rezoning applications and text amendments. Initiate on its own motion a zoning change or an amendment to the text of any article of this Code when, in its determination, such changes are appropriate for consideration. Any initiation by the planning and appeals board must go through the normal public notification and application requirements as stated in article 9-22. 
(e)  Decisions on variances. Conduct a public hearing and make a final decision in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this Code on each application for a zoning variance or flood protection variance. 
(f)  Decisions on administrative appeals. Conduct a public hearing and make a final decision in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this Code on each appeal of an administrative decision pursuant to this Code or an interpretation of the provisions of this Code by an administrative officer. In exercising these powers regarding an appeal of an administrative decision, the planning and appeals board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determinations of the administrative official, and to that end shall have the power to direct issuance of a permit. 
(g)  Other powers. The planning and appeals board shall also have such other powers, duties or responsibilities assigned to it by the governing body, explicitly assigned by this Code, or reasonably implied by [this] Code. 
CHAPTER 9-21-2. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 9-21-2-1. - Definitions. 
Commission: The historic preservation commission of the city. 
Designation: A decision by the governing body to designate a district or individual landmark as "historic" and thereafter prohibit all material changes in appearance prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. 
Historic district: A geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, works of art or a combination thereof which exhibit a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the governing body. 
Historic preservation jurisdiction: All properties lying within the municipal limits of the City of Gainesville, Hall County, Georgia. 
Historic landmark: An individual structure, site, or work of art which exhibits a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the governing body. 
Sec. 9-21-2-2. - Establishment and continuation. 
There is hereby created a commission, the title of which shall be "Gainesville Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter referred to as the "historic preservation commission"); which shall be considered a part of the planning functions of the city. The commission as it existed on the effective date of this Code shall continue in full force and function. 
Sec. 9-21-2-3. - Appointments, qualifications, terms, vacancies and compensation. 
(a)  Appointments. The preservation commission shall consist of five (5) voting members appointed by the governing body. The governing body may also appoint a citizen to serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member who serves in an advisory capacity only. 
(b)  Qualifications. All members whether voting or ex-officio shall reside within the city limits, and a majority shall be either persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources; or persons who are among professionals in such related disciplines. 
(c)  Terms of office. Voting members shall serve staggered three-year terms; and may be reappointed. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two (2) members for two (2) years; and two (2) members for three (3) years. Historic preservation commission members shall serve until their terms expire or until re-appointed or until their successors are appointed. Ex-officio, non-voting members shall serve a one-year term, until their term expires, or until re-appointed or until their successors are appointed. 
(d)  Vacancies. Should a vacancy exist in the membership, the historic preservation commission shall continue to act with full authority, unless total commission membership falls below a majority for the five-member board. The governing body shall be notified of the vacancy so that an appointment can be made to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(e)  Compensation. All voting and ex-officio, non-voting members shall serve without compensation. 
(f)  Within one year of initial appointment to the historic preservation commission, the new member shall attend the historic preservation commission training or comparable training as determined by the director of planning and development. 
(Ord. No. 2006-24, § II, 7-5-06) 
Sec. 9-21-2-4. - Disqualification and removal. 
A member may be removed from the historic preservation commission by a majority vote of the governing body for cause, for absenteeism at three (3) successive called or regular meetings or absenteeism at six (6) such meetings in a calendar year, for relocation of his or her permanent residence outside the municipal limits of the city, for violation of the code of conduct of the historic preservation commission in the consideration of an application for a certificate of appropriateness or other responsibility under this Code, or for other reasons the governing body may deem appropriate. 
Sec. 9-21-2-5. - Rules and standards. 
The historic preservation commission, upon holding a public hearing and providing an opportunity for the public to comment, shall adopt rules and standards—including design and construction guidelines—for the transaction of business and for consideration of applications; and the commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards, including design and construction guidelines, without amendment to this Code. 
Sec. 9-21-2-6. - Meetings. 
The historic preservation commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall determine the order of business. 
Sec. 9-21-2-7. - Quorum. 
A quorum shall consist of a majority of the voting members. Should a vacancy exist in the membership, the historic preservation commission shall continue to act with full authority, unless the number of voting members falls below the majority of members or quorum. 
Sec. 9-21-2-8. - Officers. 
The historic preservation commission shall select a chairperson and vice chairperson. 
The chairperson shall be elected by the members of the historic preservation commission from among their membership for a one-year term; elections shall be held annually at the first regularly scheduled meeting in July or at the next regular meeting thereafter. The chairperson shall decide all points of order and procedure, subject to these bylaws and a modified version of the latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order. 
The vice chairperson also shall be elected by the members of the historic preservation commission from among their membership in the same manner as the chairperson and shall be eligible for re-election. The vice chairperson shall serve as acting chairperson in the absence of the chairperson, or when the chairperson shall refrain from participation due to a conflict of interest, and shall have the same powers and duties as the chairperson. Upon resignation or disqualification of the chairperson, the vice chairperson shall assume the chairmanship for the remainder of the unexpired term. The historic preservation commission shall elect a new vice chairperson at its next regular meeting. 
Sec. 9-21-2-9. - Voting. 
All historic preservation commission members attending a meeting shall vote on each matter placed before it. A member may abstain from voting only in the instance of a conflict of interest, the nature of which must be stated for the record following the procedures outlined in section 9-21-2-10. 
Sec. 9-21-2-10. - Conflicts of interest. 
No member shall participate in the consideration of or cast a vote on any issue before the preservation commission which involves an ownership, financial or professional interest of that individual or an organization in which that member has an ownership, financial or professional interest or position, or represents. No member shall participate in the consideration of or cast a vote on any matter which provides or could provide financial or professional benefit to that member. When a conflict of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest arises, the following actions shall be taken: 
(a)  The individual member shall divulge in a brief statement on the public record the existence of and reasons for the potential conflict and abstain from voting. 
(b)  The affected member shall not present, vote or discuss the project other than answer a direct question. 
Sec. 9-21-2-11. - Secretary and records of proceedings. 
A public record shall be kept of the historic preservation commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. The director of planning and development, or his or her designee, shall serve as secretary to the historic preservation commission. The secretary shall cause summary minutes of its proceedings to be kept, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall cause records of its examinations and other official actions to be kept in the form of tape recordings, all of which shall be of public record. 
Sec. 9-21-2-12. - Dissemination and posting of actions. 
The results of each historic preservation commission meeting as to their actions and recommendations shall be forwarded by the director of planning and development or his or her designee to the governing body, and they shall be posted in a public place at the office of the planning department for a period of at least two (2) weeks following the historic preservation commission meeting. 
Sec. 9-21-2-13. - Powers, duties and responsibilities. 
The historic preservation commission shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities enumerated in this section. The planning department may assist the historic preservation commission in fulfilling its powers, duties and responsibilities listed below, and to that end the commission may delegate such powers, duties and responsibilities to the planning department. 
(a)  Work with the planning department staff, and outside consultant if services of one are retained, to prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the historic preservation jurisdiction having the potential for designation as historic; 
(b)  Recommend to the governing body specific areas, sites, structures or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic; 
(c)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny such applications in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9-23-3; 
(d)  Recommend to the governing body that the designation of any area, site, structure or work of art as historic be revoked or removed, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9-23-2; 
(e)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(f)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the "Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act" (O.C.G.A. 44-10-1 et seq.); 
(g)  Assist the planning department staff in conducting educational programs on historic properties located within the historic preservation jurisdiction; 
(h)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts; 
(i)  Upon review, provide a written statement as a commission to the planning department staff concerning the nomination of properties within the city to the National Register of Historic Places; 
(j)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city's historic preservation program; and 
(k)  Monitor the condition of designated historic properties and individual structures, sites or works of art located within a designated historic district to determine if a property is being allowed to deteriorate by neglect, and to fulfill its charges with regard to deterioration by neglect as assigned to it by this Code. 
The following powers, duties, and responsibilities shall be delegated specifically to the planning department staff to perform on behalf of the historic preservation commission: 
(1)  The director of planning and development, upon approval by the governing body and upon recommendation by and on behalf of the historic preservation commission, shall have the authority to accept donations and may expend such finds (and keep records) consistent with historic preservation purposes and objectives, and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds if applicable; 
(2)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts; 
(3)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the historic preservation jurisdiction; 
(4)  Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the governing body concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(5)  Submit to the historic preservation section of the state department of natural resources, or its successor, a list of historic districts and properties designated; 
(6)  Review and make comments, integrating the written statement of the historic preservation commission, to the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; 
(7)  Retain the services of an outside consultant or expert to carry out various functions, duties, or responsibilities of the historic preservation commission; 
(8)  Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property, and to acquire or sell historic properties upon approval of the governing body; and 
(9)  Enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange or otherwise of property upon approval of the governing body. 
Editor's note— To facilitate easy reference, duplicate subsection allocations (a)—(i) have been redesignated as subsections (1)—(9) at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 9-21-2-14. - Limitation on powers. 
The historic preservation commission shall not have the power to obligate the city in any way without the concurrence of the director of planning and development and prior approval of the governing body. 
Article 9-22 - APPLICATIONS AND PROCEDURES 

 
CHAPTER 9-22-1. - DEFINITIONS 
Annexation: Annexation is the process by which a parcel of land is transferred from the jurisdiction of unincorporated Hall County to the jurisdiction of the city. 
Applicant: A property owner or their authorized representative who has petitioned the city for approval of an application under the terms of this article. 
Application: A petition for approval of an application under the terms of this article. 
Concept plan: A document submitted with an application regulated by this article upon which the applicant has shown the intended development and its design. Approval of the application request shall not constitute approval of the concept plan; said plan must be adjusted according to the requirements listed for submittal of civil plans or building plans and reviewed by the appropriate departments for permitting. 
Condition of zoning approval: A requirement adopted by the governing body at the time of approval of a rezoning, special use or zoning of annexed lands; placing greater or additional requirements or restrictions on the property than provided in this Code in order to reduce an adverse impact of the request and to protect the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
Director: The director of the city department of planning and development. 
Presiding official: The person chairing a meeting of the planning and appeals board or the governing body in their official capacity. 
Rezoning: An amendment to the official zoning map, or an amendment to an overlay zone boundary, that changes the zoning district or overlay zone of one or more properties specified in an application. Rezoning also includes applications to change conditions of zoning approval. 
Special use: A use which is not automatically permitted by right, but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific requirements of this Code. 
Text amendment: An amendment to the following articles of this Code: Articles 9-1 through 9-24. 
Variance: A relaxation of the terms of this title where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Code would result in unnecessary and undue hardship, or practical difficulty. 
Zoning change: See definition for "Rezoning." 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XXXIX, 12-15-09) 
CHAPTER 9-22-2. - ZONING CHANGES AND SPECIAL USES 

Sec. 9-22-2-1. - Generally. 
The official zoning map, and overlay zone maps, may be amended from time to time and zoning amendments may be approved for specific properties by the governing body under the procedures in this chapter. In addition, changes in the conditions of approval pertaining to a specific rezoning or special use approval may also be approved by the governing body following the procedures in this chapter. The procedures for special uses, which may be approved for specific properties, shall also be as provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 9-22-2-2. - Initiation. 
An application for a rezoning or special use for any property or properties in the city may be initiated by the governing body, planning and appeals board, owner of the property, or some other person(s) given authorization by property owner to file said application. 
Any applicant wishing to submit an application for rezoning or special use must schedule an appointment with the planning department staff in order to review the application for completeness. No such application shall be accepted for processing by the director unless it meets the requirements of this section. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. The director is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of applications. 
Any applicant wishing to file an application for a zoning change related to a planned unit development zoning district must schedule a conference with the planning department staff at least fifteen (15) days prior to filing an application and shall also submit the additional application materials specified in section 9-22-2-5. 
Sec. 9-22-2-3. - Requirements for submittal. 
All applications for a rezoning or special use shall at a minimum consist of the following: 
(a)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the department of planning and development on the department's application forms. 
(b)  Fee. All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the governing body. A fee shall not be charged if the governing body or the planning and appeals board initiate the application. 
(c)  Plat or boundary survey. A plat or boundary survey of the property or properties involved in the application. Provide one scaled and folded copy, and one 8.5" × 11" or 11" × 17" reproducible size copy. 
(d)  Legal description. A paper copy and an electronic copy in Microsoft Word format of the legal description of the property that corresponds with the property or properties shown on the submitted boundary survey/plat. 
(e)  Written narrative. A written narrative should indicate at a minimum: 
(1)  The purpose of the request, proposed use, economic and environmental impacts as well as overlay zones or protection areas in which the property is located, such as the North Oconee Water Supply Watershed Protection Overlay Zone. 
(2)  Any planned developments shall include a narrative which fully describes the concept plan and must include at a minimum the proposed use, setbacks, right-of-way widths, building heights, signage, whether the applicant wishes the city to maintain the road(s) as well as identify any overlay zones or protection areas such as the North Oconee Water Supply Watershed Protection Overlay Zone that may affect the use. 
(f)  Architectural renderings. Architectural renderings for any proposed new construction or exterior alterations of the existing structure(s), including at a minimum: 
(1)  Roof pitch; 
(2)  Materials to be used on exterior; 
(3)  Basic landscaping proposed; and 
(4)  Building elevations. 
If the architectural rendering is in a color format or is larger than an 11" × 17" size copy, twenty (20) copies of the colored or large-scale rendering must be submitted with the completed application. 
(g)  Concept plan. An application for a rezoning or special use approval related to a residential subdivision, multi-family, or nonresidential use or zoning district shall be accompanied by a concept plan if any new construction is proposed or alteration of the site is required under the site or development design standards of this Code. An as-built survey (rather than a concept plan) indicating the most current development conditions must be submitted with those applications regarding existing developments that are not to be altered. The concept plan must be prepared by a professional engineer, or a registered land surveyor; landscape architect; or architect. The concept plan shall meet the requirements of section 9-22-2-4. The applicant shall submit twenty (20) scaled and folded copies, folded to fit into an 8" × 10" size envelop, and one 11" × 17" reproducible copy. 
(h)  Traffic impact analysis. Any application for a rezoning or special use which can be reasonably expected to generate one thousand (1,000) vehicle trip ends during a single day and/or more than one hundred (100) vehicle trips during the morning or afternoon peak hours shall submit a traffic impact analysis as specified in chapter 9-22-4. 
(i)  Development of regional impact. Any application for a rezoning or special use and development approval that meets or exceeds the thresholds established by the state department of community affairs shall be considered a development of regional impact (DRI), and as such, shall comply with the procedures set forth in chapter 9-22-5. 
The director may request information in addition to that specified in this section when considered necessary for review of the application by the governing body or planning and appeals board. 
Anyone filing an application may be exempt from the above submittal requirements of this section, provided the application is for rezoning to an R-I-A or R-I zoning district, does not involve a subdivision development, and includes the fee, plat or boundary survey, legal description and written narrative. 
Sec. 9-22-2-4. - Concept plan requirements. 
Applications for a rezoning or special use shall include a concept plan drawn to scale on a boundary survey of the tract by a professional architect, a professional engineer, or a registered land surveyor; landscape architect; or architect. The concept plan shall at minimum include thereon the information specified in this section. 
(a)  Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner. 
(b)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(c)  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(d)  Proposed use of the property. 
(e)  Location (land district and land lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
(f)  Location map of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Location maps must be drawn at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to two thousand (2,000) feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide. 
(g)  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
(h)  Natural features within the property, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all water courses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year flood plain, if any, shall be outlined. 
(i)  Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
(j)  The proposed project layout including: 
(1)  For subdivisions, approximate lot lines and street right-of-way lines, along with the front building setback line on each lot. 
(2)  For multi-family and nonresidential development projects, the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas and driveways. 
(k)  The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
(l)  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
(m)  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. 
(n)  The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. 
(o)  Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
Sec. 9-22-2-5. - Special application requirements for planned unit developments. 
Applications for rezoning to the PUD, planned unit development district, or applications for a zoning amendment of an existing PUD; shall in addition to the other requirements specified in this chapter, include the following: 
(a)  Binding concept plan. Unless specifically approved otherwise, the concept plan shall become a condition of zoning approval and must be followed. 
(b)  Architectural elevations. Applications shall include perspective front, side, and rear elevation drawings of representative building types. These drawings shall indicate general architectural characteristics. If the PUD is approved, architectural elevations submitted as part of the application shall be considered binding unless specifically noted otherwise in the approval. 
(c)  Land uses and development summary. The application shall include a list of all land uses proposed to be included in the PUD, the total land area devoted to each of the land uses proposed, the percentage of the total land area within the PUD devoted to each proposed land use, the number of residential units by type, floor area for each type of dwelling unit (typical, or a range as appropriate), density, and the total square footage of buildings devoted to non-residential uses. In addition, the application shall contain a development schedule indicating the approximate dates for beginning and completing the project, or each phase if the development is to be phased, and the extent of development and types of land uses in each phase. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The application shall contain all dimensional requirements that are proposed to apply within the PUD, including minimum lot sizes, minimum lot widths, maximum building coverage, front, side and rear building setbacks, and maximum heights. Such proposed dimensional requirements shall be presented in a table on the development plan or in the written text accompanying the application. The application should indicate dimensional provisions for those items specified in tables 9-5-2 and 9-6-2, to the extent they apply to the uses proposed. 
(e)  Improvement requirements comparison. The application shall contain descriptions of improvements to be constructed within the PUD, such as but not limited to street types, right-of-way widths, pavement widths, sidewalk locations and dimensions, and other improvements. Such proposed improvements shall be presented in a table on the development plan or in the written text accompanying the application that shows the proposed improvements in comparison with improvements that would be required otherwise without approval of a PUD. To the extent they can be shown at the time of development plan approval, environmental quality standards should be incorporated in the development application, particularly as they relate to storm water runoff, stream protection, and tree protection. 
(f)  Private restrictions. PUDs that have commonly owned facilities and space shall have private restrictions and covenants established which shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney and the director. The developer of a PUD involving commonly owned facilities and space shall submit, along with the development plan application, a declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions and articles of incorporation and by-laws for the property owners or home owners association. The declaration shall confer membership to the owner of property subject to assessment by the association, provide for voting rights in the association with suggestions for the division of power between the developer and the property owners, and provide for maintenance assessments, among other things. The director may waive the requirements of this paragraph when, in his or her opinion, an applicant submits a letter that demonstrates his or her intent to comply with these requirements and addresses any particular issues associated with maintenance of common grounds. 
(g)  Community benefit statement. The applicant shall submit a written statement identifying the relative benefits that will accrue to the community as a result of the property being developed under PUD provisions. Benefits to the community include mixed land uses that reduce vehicle trips, open spaces provided and linked to larger open space networks, natural features retained, and quality architectural designs provided. This statement is a developer's opportunity to define why the PUD proposal merits approval and how it will serve the community better than a conventional development. 
Sec. 9-22-2-6. - Notice of public hearing in newspaper. 
Before the governing body may take final action on a proposed rezoning or special use application, the planning and appeals board shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. At least fifteen (15) days but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the public hearing before the planning and appeals board, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The published notice shall be prepared by the planning department and shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, the proposed rezoning or special use requested, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the planning and appeals board. Notice of the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the governing body shall also be provided. 
Sec. 9-22-2-7. - Notice of public hearing by sign on property. 
At least fifteen (15) days but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the public hearing, the city shall post a sign or signs stating the date, time and place of the public hearing before the planning and appeals board, the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning change or the proposed special use. One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the property for which the rezoning or special use has been requested. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. Notice of the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the governing body shall also be provided. 
Sec. 9-22-2-8. - Notice to adjacent property owners. 
At least ten (10) days prior to the planning and appeals board public hearing, the applicant shall cause a notice to be mailed to all persons owning property located abutting or across any street from the property that is the subject matter of the rezoning or special use application. The written notice shall be mailed to the property owners as such names and addresses appear on the county's ad valorem tax records. The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing by the planning and appeals board. Notice of the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the governing body shall also be provided. 
Sec. 9-22-2-9. - Special notice requirements. 
Pursuant to the specific requirements of the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. 36-66-6), when a proposed rezoning or special use application relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, the director shall ensure that the additional public notice requirements of O.C.G.A. 36-66-6 are met. 
Sec. 9-22-2-10. - Investigations and staff recommendation. 
Within a reasonable period of time after acceptance of a complete application, the director may but shall not be required to send the application or notice thereof out for review by internal municipal departments and external agencies as may be appropriate. Any written comments received in a timely manner as a result of such review shall be submitted for consideration to the planning and appeals board and governing body, or summarized in a memorandum. Any such comments shall become public records. 
The director may but shall not be required to investigate and make a recommendation regarding a rezoning or special use application. Any such investigation and recommendation shall if in writing be made available to the applicant and planning and appeals board prior to its public hearing and shall become public records. Copies of the director's findings and recommendations, if provided, shall be available no later than the time of the planning and appeals board's public hearing on the matter. 
Sec. 9-22-2-11. - Planning and appeals board hearing and recommendation. 
The planning and appeals board shall convene a public hearing on the rezoning or special use application as provided in the public notice. The public hearing shall follow policies and procedures which govern calling and conducting public hearings established in chapter 9-22-9. The planning and appeals board shall have sixty-five (65) calendar days from the date of its public hearing within which to submit its recommendation on the rezoning or special use application. The planning and appeals board may submit any additional report it deems appropriate. The recommendations of the planning and appeals board shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the governing body. 
Sec. 9-22-2-12. - Criteria to consider for applications. 
The planning and appeals board and the governing body shall consider the following standards in considering any rezoning, zoning amendment, or special Use application, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(a)  Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
(b)  Will the proposed use adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
(c)  Is the proposed use compatible with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan? 
(d)  Are their substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently zoned? 
(e)  Will the proposed use cause an excessive or burdensome use of public facilities or services, including but not limited to streets, schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection? 
(f)  Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the comprehensive plan or reflected in the existing zoning on the property or surrounding properties? 
(g)  Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and the right to unrestricted use of property? 
Sec. 9-22-2-13. - Additional procedures and criteria for planned unit developments. 
In addition to the requirements for a rezoning or special use specified in section 9-22-2-3, approval proceedings for PUD rezoning/zoning amendment and development approval shall include the following: 
(a)  Preapplication conference. At least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to filing a formal application for a PUD, the applicant is required to confer with the director or representative of the planning and development department in order to review the general character of the plan and to obtain information on the nature and extent of the proposed development. 
(b)  Criteria for approval. In considering and acting upon applications for PUDs, the planning and appeals board and the governing body shall consider and base their recommendation and decision, respectively, on the following criteria (not all inclusive), and any other factors it may consider appropriate in reaching such a decision: 
(1)  Consistency with the comprehensive plan of the city. 
(2)  The extent to which the proposed mix of land uses is appropriate in terms of location and character. 
(3)  The extent to which the development is compatible with surrounding properties. Compatibility can be achieved by ensuring that the overall scale and design of development does not overwhelm or otherwise detract from the established character of the neighborhood or surroundings. The PUD zoning district is not intended to allow for the intrusion of incompatible land uses into single-family neighborhoods that create negative land use impacts. 
(4)  The extent to which the proposed architectural features of buildings within the development are harmonious. 
(5)  The adequacy of open spaces, play areas and recreation facilities that are provided for the needs of the development occupants. 
(c)  Revisions. Amendments to approved planned unit development rezoning and development applications, including those approved prior to the adoption of this chapter, shall be permitted but governed by this chapter. 
(d)  Land development plans. Upon approval of a PUD rezoning and development application by the governing body, the developer may apply for land development permit approval. 
(e)  Permits and certificates. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building, structure, or use, nor shall any excavation, grading, or land disturbance applications be approved, for any planned unit development that has not been approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The director shall authorize the issuance of building permits for buildings and structures in the area covered by the approved development if they are in substantial conformity with the approved development, after improvements are installed in accordance with applicable improvement requirements, and if found to be in conformance with all other applicable regulations. The director shall authorize the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any completed building, structure, or use located in the area covered by the planned unit development approval if it conforms to the requirements of the approved development and all other applicable regulations. After completion of a planned unit development, the use of land and construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings, structures, or uses within the area covered by the planned unit development shall continue to be regulated by the approved development plan. 
Sec. 9-22-2-14. - Additional criteria to consider for special use applications. 
The planning and appeals board and the governing body shall consider the following standards in considering any special use application, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(a)  The type of street providing access to the subject property is adequate to serve the proposed special use. 
(b)  Access into and out of the property adequately provides for traffic and pedestrian safety, the anticipated volume of traffic flow, and access by emergency vehicles. 
(c)  Public facilities such as schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection are adequate to serve the special use. 
(d)  Refuse, service, parking and loading areas on the property are located and screened to protect other properties in the area from such adverse effects as noise, light, glare or odor. 
(e)  The hours and manner of operation of the special use have no adverse effects on other properties in the area. 
(f)  The height, size and location of the buildings or other structures proposed on the property are compatible with the height, size or location of buildings or other structures on neighboring properties. 
Sec. 9-22-2-15. - Withdrawal and waiting period for reapplication. 
A rezoning or special use application may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or entity initiating such a request upon notice to the director, up until the public hearing by the planning and appeals board is closed. 
If the applicant withdraws the application prior to the publication of notice for public hearing before the planning and appeals board, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the director without restriction on the refiling of a proposed zoning change or special use on the property in the future. 
If the applicant withdraws the application after notice has been published or is irretrievably set for publication but the application has not been heard by the planning and appeals board, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the director and an application for rezoning or special use on the property may not be resubmitted for six (6) months from the date of withdrawal. 
If the request for withdrawal is made at the planning and appeals board public hearing on the case, the request may be approved by a majority vote of the board, but an application for a rezoning or special use on the property may not be resubmitted for six (6) months from the date of withdrawal. 
If the request for withdrawal is made by the applicant following the planning and appeals board hearing, the application shall remain on the governing body public hearing agenda and the withdrawal request shall be considered for approval or denial, with or without prejudice, by the governing body. 
If denied, a rezoning or special use request affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of six (6) months from the date of denial. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XLI, 12-15-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-47, § XLI, adopted December 15, 2009, changed the title of section 9-22-2-15 from "Withdrawal of application" to "Withdrawal and waiting period for reapplication." 
Sec. 9-22-2-16. - Notice of public hearing by the governing body. 
The governing body shall hold a public hearing on the rezoning or special use application. If the planning and appeals board makes a recommendation on the rezoning or special use application at the date of its public hearing or within a time frame sufficient for the public hearing by the governing body to be held as scheduled, the governing body shall proceed with the advertised public hearing. 
If the planning and appeals board does not make a recommendation on the rezoning or special use application before the scheduled and advertised public hearing to be held by the governing body, the director shall schedule a new date for the public hearing by the governing body and will provide notice of said rescheduled public hearing at least fifteen (15) days but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the public hearing. Said notice shall be accomplished by notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, posting of a sign on the property, and notice to adjacent property owners just the same as required by this chapter for the initial application. 
Sec. 9-22-2-17. - Revision of concept plan. 
A concept plan that is part of a rezoning or special use application may be revised and resubmitted by the applicant during the process, but in no event shall a revised concept plan resubmitted by an applicant be accepted or considered less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing by the governing body. At its discretion, the governing body may refer an application involving a concept plan revised after its consideration by the planning and appeals board back to the planning and appeals board for additional study and recommendation. 
Sec. 9-22-2-18. - Action by governing body. 
No action shall be taken on a rezoning or special use application by the governing body until it has received a recommendation by the planning and appeals board, or upon the expiration of the 65-day review period of the planning and appeals board. In rendering a decision on a rezoning or special use application, the governing body shall consider all information supplied by the applicant, the director, and the planning and appeals board, any information presented at the public hearing of the planning and appeals board, and information gained at its own public hearing. 
After conducting a public hearing, in taking action on an application, the governing body may: 
(a)  Approve the application as submitted by ordinance. 
(b)  Approve the application with conditions. 
(c)  Deny the proposal. 
(d)  Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting. 
(e)  Refer the application back to the planning and appeals board for further consideration, with notice of public hearings before the planning and appeals board and governing body, the same as required for the initial application. 
(f)  Refer the application back to the planning and appeals board for further consideration, without the requirement to hold a public hearing and provide notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-06, § II, 2-20-18) 
Sec. 9-22-2-19. - Insufficient basis for denial. 
Applications for a rezoning and special use shall not be required to demonstrate compliance with all applicable regulations of this Code for land development permits or building permits. The planning and appeals board shall not base its recommendation to deny a rezoning or special use application, and the governing body shall not base its denial of a rezoning or special use application, on the failure of a rezoning or special use application to demonstrate compliance with land development permitting requirements including but not limited to tree protection, stormwater management, and flood plain regulations. 
Sec. 9-22-2-20. - Decisions involving constitutional challenges. 
In ruling on any rezoning in which the applicant has brought a constitutional challenge to the existing zoning classification, the governing body shall pay particular attention to the following criteria which have been applied by state courts in zoning matters: 
(1)  Existing uses and zoning of the subject and nearby property; 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions; 
(3)  The extent to which the destruction of property values, if any, promotes the healthy, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
(4)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship, if any, imposed upon the individual property owner; 
(5)  The suitability of subject property for zoned purposes; 
(6)  The length of time the property, if vacant, has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the areas and the vicinity of the property. 
The existing zoning classification shall be considered presumptively valid and it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to present evidence that rebuts this presumption. If the governing body determines, from the evidence presented, that the existing zoning classification is unduly burdensome to the applicant and is not offset by the considerations of the public's health, safety, morals and general welfare, and considerations of the integrity of this Code and of the official zoning map, the governing body may impose upon said property any appropriate zoning classification, including conditions, which might be consistent with these considerations and the criteria described in this chapter. 
Sec. 9-22-2-21. - Fast track process. 
The governing body may, in its judgment in cases involving redevelopment or extraordinary economic development, pass a motion in a regular meeting, which provides for an expediting of the procedures for rezoning applications and special uses established in this chapter, including the following: 
(a)  The separate public hearing required by the planning and appeals board may be combined with the public hearing before governing body. 
(b)  Application requirements specified in this chapter may be waived, in order to expedite the review and public hearing process. 
Such a fast track process, if exercised, shall not be inconsistent with the Zoning Procedures Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-66. seq. In opting to use this fast track approval process, the governing body may instruct the director to notify the public and seek input on the matter by other means. 
Sec. 9-22-2-22. - Incorporation clause. 
This chapter is intended to comply with the provisions of the Georgia Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66 et seq., which Act is incorporated by reference in its entirety into this Code. Where any provision of this chapter is in conflict with any provision of the law, the law shall control. Or where this chapter is incomplete in having failed to incorporate a provision necessarily required for the implementation of the law, such provision of the law, so as to meet the mandate of the law, shall be fully complied with, except that where an application to annex property into the city is initiated by the governing body, only those notice requirements and public hearing procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4(d) shall be required for zoning of property to be annexed into the city, notwithstanding any other procedures or requirements set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10, § IV, 6-13-13) 
CHAPTER 9-22-3. - ANNEXATIONS 

Sec. 9-22-3-1. - Generally. 
An area proposed for annexation into the city shall first be considered for zoning prior to its annexation. Consideration of the zoning shall be subject to the same procedures, standards, and requirements for any rezoning or special use as contained in chapter 9-22-2, except as specifically modified by this chapter. 
Sec. 9-22-3-2. - Initiation. 
An application for annexation for any property or properties contiguous to the city may be initiated by the governing body, planning and appeals board, owner of the property, or some other person(s) given authorization by property owner to file said application. Unless initiated by the governing body or the planning and appeals board, all such applications shall be initiated by the owner of a majority interest in the property affected. 
Any applicant wishing to submit an application for annexation must schedule an appointment with the planning department staff in order to review the application for completeness. No such application shall be accepted for processing by the director unless it meets the requirements of this section. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. The director is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of applications. 
Any applicant wishing to file an application for a planned unit development zoning district must schedule a conference with the planning department staff at least fifteen (15) days prior to filing an application and shall submit the additional application materials required for a PUD district as outlined in chapter 9-22-2 for a zoning change application. 
Sec. 9-22-3-3. - Withdrawal and waiting period for reapplication. 
Any applicant wishing to withdraw a proposed annexation request shall comply with the withdrawal procedures as outlined in chapter 9-22-2 for rezoning applications and special use with the exception that there shall be no waiting period for reapplication upon withdrawal or denial of an annexation request. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XLII, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-22-3-4. - Requirements for submittal. 
Applications for annexation shall include the following requirements: 
(a)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the department of planning and development on the department's application forms. 
(b)  Fee. All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the governing body. A fee shall not be charged if the governing body or the planning and appeals board initiate the application. 
(c)  U.S. Department of Justice data. Data as required on a form that is part of the application form provided by the planning department. 
(d)  Letter of cost estimate. A letter of cost estimate must be obtained from the city public utilities department if an applicant wishes to have the city share in the cost of sanitary sewer line extension. 
(e)  Plat or boundary survey. A plat or boundary survey of the property or properties involved in the application. Provide one scaled and folded copy, and one 8.5" × 11" or 11" × 17" reproducible size copy. 
(f)  Legal description. A paper copy and an electronic copy in Microsoft Word format of the legal description of the property that corresponds with the property or properties shown on the submitted boundary survey/plat. 
(g)  Written narrative. A written narrative should indicate at a minimum: 
(1)  The purpose of the request, proposed use, economic and environmental impacts as well as overlay zones or protection areas in which the property is located, such as the North Oconee Water Supply Watershed Protection Overlay Zone. 
(2)  Any planned developments shall include a narrative which fully describes the concept plan and must include at a minimum the proposed use, setbacks, right-of-way widths, building heights, signage, whether the applicant wishes the city to maintain the road(s) as well as identify any overlay zones or protection areas such as the North Oconee Water Supply Watershed Protection Overlay Zone that may affect the use. 
(h)  Architectural renderings. Architectural renderings for any proposed new construction or exterior alterations of the existing structure(s), including at a minimum: 
(1)  Roof pitch; 
(2)  Materials to be used on exterior; 
(3)  Basic landscaping proposed; and 
(4)  Building elevations. 
If the architectural rendering is in a color format or is larger than an 11" × 17" size copy, twenty (20) copies of the colored or large-scale rendering must be submitted with the completed application. 
(i)  Concept plan. An application for annexation approval related to a residential subdivision, multi-family, or nonresidential use or zoning district shall be accompanied by a concept plan if any new construction is proposed or alteration of the site is required under the site or development design standards of this Code. An as-built survey (rather than a concept plan) indicating the most current development conditions must be submitted with those applications regarding existing developments that are not to be altered. The concept plan must be prepared by a professional engineer, or a registered land surveyor; landscape architect; or architect. The concept plan shall meet the requirements of section 9-22-3-5. The applicant shall submit twenty (20) scaled and folded copies, folded to fit into an 8" × 10" size envelop, and one 11" × 17" reproducible copy. 
(j)  Traffic impact analysis. Any annexation application which can be reasonably expected to generate one thousand (1,000) vehicle trip ends during a single day and/or more than one hundred (100) vehicle trips during the morning or afternoon peak hours shall submit a traffic impact analysis as specified in chapter 9-22-4. The cost of conducting the traffic impact analysis as well as any improvements put forth in the recommendations shall be the financial responsibility of the applicant. No application shall be accepted nor advertised for a public hearing by the planning department until such time as the transportation impact study, if required, has been completed and submitted to the planning department. 
(k)  Development of regional impact. Any annexation application that would result in a zoning or development approval that meets or exceeds the thresholds established by the state department of community affairs shall be considered a development of regional impact (DRI), and as such, shall comply with the procedures set forth in chapter 9-22-5. 
The director may request information in addition to that specified in this section when considered necessary for review of the application by the governing body or planning and appeals board. 
Anyone filing an application may be exempt from the above submittal requirements of this section, provided the application is for annexation with a zoning classification of R-I-A or R-I, does not involve a subdivision development, and includes the fee, plat or boundary survey, legal description and written narrative. 
Sec. 9-22-3-5. - Specifications for concept plans. 
The concept plan shall show the following, as appropriate to the annexation requested: 
(a)  Name, address and telephone number of the property owner. 
(b)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(c)  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(d)  Proposed use of the property. 
(e)  Location (land district and land lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
(f)  Location map of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Location maps must be drawn at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to two thousand (2,000) feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide. 
(g)  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
(h)  Natural features within the property, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all water courses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year flood plain, if any, shall be outlined. 
(i)  Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
(j)  The proposed project layout including the following: 
(1)  For subdivisions, approximate lot lines and street right-of-way lines, along with the front building setback line on each lot; 
(2)  For multi-family and non-residential development projects, the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas, and driveways. 
(k)  The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
(l)  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
(m)  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. 
(n)  The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. 
(o)  Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
Sec. 9-22-3-6. - Special application requirements for planned unit developments. 
Applications for annexation with a zoning classification of PUD, planned unit development district shall in addition to the other requirements specified in this chapter include those additional application materials required for a PUD district as outlined in chapter 9-22-2. 
Sec. 9-22-3-7. - Process for annexation. 
In addition to the process and procedures for a rezoning or special use request as outlined in chapter 9-22-2, there are additional steps to be taken when processing applications for annexation. 
(a)  Upon or following the date of notice to the county of the proposed annexation as required under O.C.G.A. 36-36-6, the governing body shall initiate the zoning of the property to be annexed or consider an application for a zoning submitted by or on behalf of the owner of such property under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The planning and appeals board and the governing body shall conduct their public hearings on the zoning prior to the annexation of the land into the city. Notice of such hearing shall be provided under the provisions of chapter 9-22-2 for a rezoning or special use; provided further that the notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
(c)  If the annexation request is denied, any action by the governing body on the zoning shall be null and void. 
(d)  Furthermore, there are mandatory reports required that must be submitted to local, state and federal agencies. Such reports and documents shall be prepared by and submitted by the planning department on behalf of the applicant. 
Sec. 9-22-3-8. - Criteria to consider for annexation. 
The planning and appeals board and the governing body shall consider the following standards in considering any annexation proposal, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal. In addition, any application that proposes a change in the conditions of approval previously established by the governing body through action on an annexation shall be reviewed in light of the standards set forth in this section, as appropriate. 
(a)  Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
(b)  Will the proposed use adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
(c)  Is the proposed use compatible with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan? 
(d)  Are their substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently zoned? 
(e)  Will the proposed use cause an excessive or burdensome use of public facilities or services, including but not limited to streets, schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection? 
(f)  Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the comprehensive plan or reflected in the existing zoning on the property or surrounding properties? 
(g)  Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and the right to unrestricted use of property? 
Sec. 9-22-3-9. - Additional procedures and criteria for planned unit developments. 
In addition to the requirements for annexation applications specified in this chapter, approval proceedings for annexation with PUD zoning/development approval shall comply with the additional procedures and criteria for PUD zoning/development as outlined in chapter 9-22-2 for a zoning change. 
Sec. 9-22-3-10. - Effective date. 
The zoning of property hereafter annexed shall become effective on the day the zoning is approved by the governing body, on the date that the annexation becomes effective, or where a county has interposed an objection pursuant to O.C.G.A. 36-36-11, the date provided for in paragraph (8), subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. Section 36-36-11, whichever is later. 
Sec. 9-22-3-11. - Issuance of permits. 
No application for a land development or building permit shall be filed on newly annexed property until the first of the month following the effective date of the annexation approval. 
Sec. 9-22-3-12. - Existing nonconforming use. 
Any use existing at the time of annexation approval on property annexed by the city which does not comply with the use provisions of the city's zoning district assigned to said annexed property shall be considered a nonconforming use which shall be governed by chapter 9-11-3. 
Sec. 9-22-3-13. - Conformity with this Code. 
Lands hereafter annexed into the city limits shall, upon the effective date of such annexation, be subject to all applicable procedural and substantive requirements of this Code as now or hereafter amended. Any new use of an annexed property after zoning approval shall only be permitted if it conforms to all applicable provisions of this Code. 
CHAPTER 9-22-4. - TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

Sec. 9-22-4-1. - Purpose and intent. 
Understanding the demands placed on the community's transportation network by development is an important dimension of assessing the overall impacts of development proposals. All development generates traffic, and it may generate enough traffic to create congestion and thus require the community to invest more capital funds into the transportation network in the form of new roads, traffic signals, and intersection improvements. Traffic congestion results in a number of problems, including economic costs due to delayed travel times, air pollution and accidents. A traffic impact analysis is a mechanism for the city to foresee the demands a development proposal will place on the transportation network. 
Sec. 9-22-4-2. - Objectives. 
The city finds that requiring a traffic impact analysis for proposed developments that meet certain thresholds will help to achieve the following objectives: 
(a)  Forecast additional traffic associated with new development, based on accepted practices. 
(b)  Determine the improvements that are necessary to accommodate the new development. 
(c)  Allow the city to assess the impacts that a proposed development may have and assist the city in making decisions regarding development proposals. 
(d)  Help to ensure safe and reasonable traffic conditions on streets after the development is complete. 
(e)  Reduce the negative impacts created by developments by helping to ensure that the transportation network can accommodate the development. 
(f)  Protect the substantial public investment in the street system. 
(g)  Provide information relevant to citywide comprehensive planning, transportation planning, transit planning, and the provision of programs and facilities for traffic safety, road improvements, transportation demand management, pedestrian access, and other transportation system considerations. 
Sec. 9-22-4-3. - Definitions. 
Director of public works: The director of the public works department of the city, or his or her designee. 
Discretionary development proposal: Any application for a rezoning, preliminary plat, special use permit, final design plan approval, or certificate of appropriateness. For purposes of this Code, a determination of applicability shall be made at the first discretionary development proposal encountered. 
Horizon year: Unless otherwise specified or approved by the director of public works, the horizon year shall be twenty (20) years into the future from the year during which a traffic impact study is being prepared. 
Internal trips: Trips that are made within a multi-use or mixed-use development, by vehicle or by an alternate mode such as walking. 
Level of service (LOS): A quantitative and qualitative measure of how well traffic flows on a given street or highway. Level of service relates to such factors as highway width, number of lanes, percentage of trucks, total traffic volume, turning movements, lateral clearances, grades, sight distance, capacity in relation to volume, travel speed, and other factors which affect the quality of flow. Level of service is typically summarized by letter grades described as follows: 
Level "A" is a condition with low traffic volumes, high speeds, and free-flow conditions. 
Level "B" is a condition with light traffic volumes, minor speed restrictions, and stable flow. 
Level "C" is a condition with moderate traffic volumes, where speed and maneuvering are restricted to a limited degree by the amount of traffic. 
Level "D" is a condition with heavy traffic operating at tolerable speeds, although temporary slowdowns in flow may occur. 
Level "E" is a condition of very heavy flow and relatively low speeds. Under Level "E" the traffic is unstable and short stoppage may occur. 
Level "F" is a condition of extremely heavy flow, with frequent stoppage and very slow speeds. It is an unstable traffic condition under which traffic often comes to a complete halt. 
New trips: Total vehicle trips, minus pass-by trips, minus internal trips if applicable. 
Pass-by trips: Vehicle trips which are made by traffic already using the adjacent roadway and entering the site as an intermediate stop on the way to another destination. 
Peak hour: 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m., or 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., or the highest four (4) 15-minute increments within such time period for the a.m. peak hour; 4:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., or the highest four (4) 15-minute increments within such a time period for the p.m. peak hour. 
Peak-hour trip generation study: A study by a qualified professional of one or more actual developments of similar land use and development characteristics which provides empirical data on the actual number of trips entering and exiting said development(s) during the a.m. and p.m. peak hour. A peak-hour trip generation study shall consist of a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic counts by direction (entering and exiting) on at least three separate weekdays if the study is based on only one similar development, or at least one a.m. and p.m. traffic count for three different actual developments. The results of actual traffic counts from peak-hour trip generation studies may be adjusted to discount pass-by trips as provided in this chapter. 
Professionally accepted: Published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers; or prepared by a qualified professional under work supervised by the city or Hall County, or prepared by a qualified professional and accepted by the director of public works. 
Qualified professional: For purposes of conducting traffic impact analyses as may be required by this chapter, a qualified professional shall mean a registered professional engineer with experience in traffic engineering. For purposes of conducting peak hour trip generation studies, a qualified professional shall mean a registered professional engineer with experience in traffic engineering, or another professional approved by the director of public works based on education and experience to conduct such trip generation studies. 
Traffic impact analysis: A study, conducted by a qualified professional, which assesses the effects that a discretionary development proposal's traffic will have on the transportation network in a community or portion thereof. Traffic impact studies vary in their range of detail and complexity depending on the type, size, and location of the proposed development. 
Trip: A single or one-directional travel movement with either the origin or destination of the trip inside the study site. 
Trip generation: An estimate of the number of vehicle trips that will be generated due to the new development, which is calculated based on the type and amount of land uses in the proposed development and professionally accepted trip generation rates for each such land use. Trip generation may be expressed on an average daily basis or average peak hour (a.m., p.m.), or both. 
Sec. 9-22-4-4. - Thresholds of applicability. 
A traffic impact study shall be required for any discretionary development proposal which can be reasonably expected to generate one thousand (1,000) vehicle trip ends during a single day and/or more than one hundred (100) vehicle trips during the morning or afternoon peak hours, as determined by professionally acceptable information as provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 9-22-4-5. - Exemptions. 
(a)  A traffic impact analysis is not required if a discretionary development proposal is initiated by the governing body or the planning and appeals board. 
(b)  A discretionary development proposal may be exempted from the traffic impact study requirement by the director of public works if a prior traffic impact study for the subject property has been submitted to the city or is available from Hall County and the proposed development is substantially similar to that for which the prior traffic impact study was conducted. 
Sec. 9-22-4-6. - Trip generation data. 
The source for trip generation rates for the purposes of this Code shall be " Trip Generation " published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), most recent edition, unless otherwise approved by the director of public works. Final determinations of whether this chapter applies shall be made based on application of data from ITE Trip Generation, which may change from time to time, or as otherwise approved by the director of public works. 
Sec. 9-22-4-7. - Determination of applicability. 
At the time a discretionary development proposal is filed, or during any pre-application meeting if possible, the director of planning and development shall determine whether a traffic impact analysis shall be required according to this chapter. The director of planning and development shall calculate the expected trip generation of the proposed development using professionally accepted trip generation rates or other data and compare it to the thresholds specified in this chapter to determine whether a traffic impact analysis is required. The director of public works shall assist in this effort by providing the director of planning and development with any updated information available on trip generation rates. 
Applicants for discretionary development proposals shall provide sufficient information about the development proposal (e.g., number of dwelling units, square footage of buildings, number of employees, land area of the development, etc.) for the director of planning and development to apply professionally accepted trip generation rates to the proposed development. The director of planning and development shall not accept a discretionary development proposal for processing unless it contains the data on the proposed development necessary to apply available trip generation rates. Further, no application for a discretionary development proposal shall be accepted nor advertised for a public hearing until such time as the transportation impact study, if required, has been completed and submitted in accordance with this chapter. 
Sec. 9-22-4-8. - Cases where data are not available. 
In the event that information submitted by the applicant of the discretionary development proposal is sufficient to calculate the trip generation that would be expected to result from the proposed development, but trip generation rates or other data are not available or in sufficient quantity of studies to make a determination of applicability under the terms of this chapter, this section shall apply. 
(a)  The director of planning and development shall first consult with the director of public works to determine if: 
(1)  Professionally acceptable trip generation rates applicable to the subject development exist from other reputable sources, such as the Journal of the Institute of Transportation Engineers ; 
(2)  Other trip generation studies of similar developments are available; or 
(3)  Professionally acceptable trip generation rates for one or more similar land uses can be used in making the determination of applicability. 
If the director of public works is able to provide such information and determines it is professionally reputable, then the director of planning and development shall use said data as may be interpreted by the director of public works to make the determination of applicability. The director of planning and development and director of public works shall have no more than ten (10) working days to comply with the provisions of this section, when it applies. 
(b)  In the event the director of planning and development is unable to make a determination of applicability after consulting with the director of public works pursuant to section, the director shall notify the proposed applicant in writing that professionally accepted trip generation rates are not available for purposes of making a determination of applicability. 
(c)  Upon receipt of notice described in this section, the applicant for a discretionary development proposal shall have thirty (30) days to have a qualified professional prepare and submit a peak-hour trip generation study as defined by this chapter. 
Sec. 9-22-4-9. - Specifications for peak-hour trip generation studies. 
(a)  Discounting of pass-by trips. The peak-hour trip generation study may subtract from the empirical data on actual vehicle trips those trips that are reasonably considered to be "pass-by" trips as defined by this chapter, using professionally accepted assumptions about the percent of pass-by trips approved by the director of public works. 
(b)  Reduction for internal trips in multi-use or mixed use developments. In calculating the new trips generated from a proposed development containing multiple uses or mixed uses, a qualified professional with the approval of the director of public works may apply a percentage reduction to the total vehicle trips shown in any peak hour trip generation study to account for internal trips, as defined in this chapter, so as to account for (discount) the number of internal trips reasonably expected to occur in such multi-use or mixed use development. Said reduction shall not exceed twenty-four (24) percent of total trips generated. 
Sec. 9-22-4-10. - Scoping meeting. 
Once it is determined that a traffic impact analysis is required, a scoping meeting may be held with the developer or his or her consultant and the appropriate representatives of the city public works department and if appropriate, the planning and development department. It will be the responsibility of the developer or his or her consultant to initiate this meeting. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the availability of site-specific information concerning the development, available forecasts of traffic volumes, and to ensure the applicant understands the content requirements for traffic impact analyses. 
Sec. 9-22-4-11. - Required contents of a traffic impact study. 
A traffic impact analysis must evaluate the adequacy of the existing transportation system to serve the proposed development and determine the expected effects of the proposed development on the transportation system. The traffic impact study must provide adequate information for city staff to evaluate the development proposal and, when appropriate, recommend conditions of approval. 
The qualified professional preparing the traffic impact study is encouraged to coordinate preparation with city staff and staff from other jurisdictions, as appropriate, to ensure that all necessary components are included in the traffic impact study and to reduce revision and review time. 
In order to be reviewed, the traffic impact study shall include at least the following minimum components: 
(a)  Title page. A title page listing the name of the proposed development and its location. 
(b)  Table of contents. A table of contents outlining the study shall be provided. 
(c)  Certification. The study shall be signed and stamped by a qualified professional. 
(d)  Executive summary. An executive summary, discussing the development, the major findings of the analysis, and any recommendations made by the qualified professional. 
(e)  Vicinity map. A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed project in relation to the transportation system of the area. 
(f)  Study area map. A map of the traffic impact study area. For purposes of this chapter, the traffic impact analysis area shall be determined according to trip generation rates as follows. In the event there is a difference as a result of applying peak and total trips, the more restrictive requirement (larger study area) shall apply. 
Study Area Size Requirements 

 
(g)  Inventory of transportation facilities in the study area. A description of transportation facilities in the study area, including roadway names, locations and functional classifications, intersection lane configurations and traffic control (including signal timing), existing rights-of-ways, transit routes and stops (if any), pedestrian and bicycle facilities, and planned transportation system improvements. An existing lane configuration sketch shall be submitted for all roadways and intersections within the study area. 
(h)  Concept plan and development data. A complete description of the proposed development, including a concept plan, with the best available information as to the nature and size of each proposed use, and the proposed location and traffic control of all proposed access points, including the distance from all proposed access points to adjacent accesses and/or streets, including those across a street right-of-way from the subject development. 
(i)  Existing traffic volumes. Peak and total daily traffic volumes on all arterial, collector, and local streets within the study area. Traffic counts should, as a rule, not be more than one year old when the report is prepared. Traffic counts between one and three (3) years old may be used if factored to the current year. Traffic counts older than three (3) years will not be accepted. 
(j)  Facility performance. Existing performance of the transportation system, including levels of service (LOS) and volume/capacity ratios (V/C) for all intersections and road segments as appropriate within the study area. 
(k)  Trip generation. Complete trip generation figures for all aspects of the proposed development. The source for trip generation rates shall be " Trip Generation " published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), most recent edition, unless otherwise approved by the director of transportation. For developments expected to generate more than thirty (30) trucks per day, the trip generation data shall include separate figures for trucks. If phased development is proposed, the study shall include projections for the year that each phase of the development is planned to be complete. The traffic impact analysis shall also include trip generation data for any pending and approved developments that would affect the study area. The city shall facilitate the review of applicable files by a qualified professional to determine the names and development characteristics of pending and approved developments in the study area. 
(l)  Trip distribution and assignment. Trip distribution for the proposed development. For developments expected to generate more than thirty (30) truck trips per day, the study shall include separate trip distribution figures for trucks. 
(m)  Forecast traffic volumes without the development. Forecast traffic volumes without the development, on all arterial, collector, and local roads within the study area, in the year that the proposed development is planned to commence, and in the horizon year. Qualified professionals should consult city public works department staff for information to determine the most appropriate sources or methods of determining future traffic volumes. If phased development is proposed, the traffic impact study shall include projections for the year that each phase of the development is planned to be complete. 
(n)  Forecast performance without the development. Forecast performance, including levels of service (LOS) and volume/capacity ratios (V/C) of the transportation system without the development in the year that each phase is planned to be complete and in the horizon year. 
(o)  Forecast traffic volumes with the development. Forecast traffic volumes with the development, on all arterial, collector, and local roads within the study area, in the year that the proposed development is planned to commence, and in the horizon year. 
(p)  Forecast performance with the development. Forecast performance, including levels of service (LOS) and volume/capacity ratios (V/C) of the transportation system with the development in the year that each phase is planned to be complete and in the horizon year. 
(q)  Sight distance. A safety analysis of the site accesses, and an assessment whether adequate sight distances are provided at driveways and streets abutting the development. 
(r)  Operational characteristics. Analysis of prevailing operating speeds, if significantly different than speed limits, right and left turn lane warrants, queue lengths, acceleration and deceleration lanes including lengths and tapers, throat lengths, channelization, and other characteristics of the site accesses, which exist and may be needed, as appropriate. The traffic impact analysis shall address whether driveways and intersections are located and spaced safely and designed to accommodate expected traffic volumes and maneuvers. The operational characteristics analysis shall also evaluate the turning and traveling characteristics of the vehicles that will be using the proposed development and the adequacy of the geometrics of the existing and proposed roadway (public and/or private) configurations to accommodate these characteristics. 
(s)  On-site circulation. The traffic impact analysis shall address whether on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation and parking layouts are safe and efficient. 
(t)  Significant impacts. Analysis as appropriate of any potential adverse or controversial effects of the proposed development on the transportation system in the area. Examples of possible effects include, but are not limited to, infiltration of non-residential traffic into residential neighborhoods, traffic noise, creation of potential for traffic violations, conflicting turning movements with other driveways, any new pedestrian or bicycle transportation needs arising from the development, etc. 
(u)  Mitigation measures. Listing of all intersections and road segments that are forecasted to be level of service "E" and "F" in the horizon year, or if phased, in the years that each phase is planned to be complete, and an identification and description of specific mitigation measures including signal, turn lane, or other warrant analyses as appropriate and necessary to bring these intersections and road segments into compliance with a level of service "D" or other city-adopted level of service for said road segment or intersection. 
(v)  Drawing of improvements. If roadway improvements are needed, the study shall show a drawing at an engineering scale of one inch equals twenty (20) feet for all recommended lane configurations. 
(w)  Signalization. If signalization is warranted by the traffic signal warrants outlined in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), a warrant analysis shall also be conducted as a part of the traffic impact analysis. If a traffic signal is warranted, the warrant package in the study shall show a drawing at an engineering scale of one inch equals twenty (20) feet detailing the signal design and phasing plans. 
(x)  Costs. The estimated costs associated with implementing all such mitigation measures shall be provided in the traffic impact analysis. The traffic impact analysis may take into account any city/county/state approved roadway, traffic signalization, and other improvements in determining mitigation measures and providing recommendations. 
(y)  References. A listing of all technical documents and resources cited or consulted in preparing the traffic impact analysis. 
(z)  Technical appendix. Relevant technical information, including but not limited to: copies of raw traffic count data used in the analysis, calculation sheets and/or computer software output for all LOS and V/C calculations in the analysis, and warrant worksheets for signals, turn lanes, signal phasing, etc. used in the analysis. 
Sec. 9-22-4-12. - Additional technical specifications. 
The director of public works is further authorized to promulgate and require the use of additional technical specifications for conducting traffic impact analysis, which shall be consistent with analysis methods included in the most recent Highway Capacity Manual, Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and/or Traffic Access and Impact Studies for Site Development: A Recommended Practice (Washington, DC: Institute of Transportation Engineers, 1991), as may be amended or republished from time to time. 
Sec. 9-22-4-13. - Costs and fees. 
The city assumes no liability for any costs or time delays (either direct or consequential) associated with the preparation and review of traffic impact analyses. There shall be no application review fee for a traffic impact study. 
Sec. 9-22-4-14. - Submittal and review of study. 
The applicant for the proposed development or the qualified professional shall submit one electronic copy of the traffic impact study and technical appendix, five (5) paper copies of the traffic impact analysis, and one paper copy of the technical appendix to the director of planning and development. The director of planning and development shall transmit the electronic copy, four (4) paper copies of the traffic impact study and the paper copy of the technical appendix to the director of public works, who may at his or her discretion submit copies of the report to applicable review agencies such as the state department of transportation, the metropolitan planning organization, or an adjacent local jurisdiction. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of a traffic impact analysis, the director of public works shall review all calculations and analyses and determine if they are complete, reasonable, understandable, consistent, and fully explained. The conclusions presented in the traffic impact analysis shall be consistent with and supported by the data, calculations, and analyses in the report. Calculations, graphs, tables, data, and/or analysis results that are contrary to good common sense or not consistent with and supported by the data will not be accepted. In such events, the director of public works shall return the traffic impact analysis to the development applicant for correction. 
Sec. 9-22-4-15. - Recommendations for mitigation of impacts. 
Within ten (10) working days of receipt of a completed traffic impact study, the director of public works shall complete his or her review the study and submit to the director of planning and development all recommendations for mitigation measures as stated in the traffic impact study and include any interpretations or recommended conditions of approving the discretionary development proposal that will mitigate traffic impacts of the proposed development. 
Sec. 9-22-4-16. - Determination of project and system improvements. 
Upon receipt of the recommendations of the director of public works with regard to the traffic impacts of the discretionary development proposal, the director of planning and development shall determine which mitigation measures constitute "project" improvements and which mitigation measures constitute "system" improvements within the context of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act of 1990. 
In the event that a particular improvement is called for in the traffic impact study or recommended by the director of public works, and the director of planning and development is unable to uniquely attribute the recommendation as a project or system improvement or finds that such improvement has characteristics of both a project improvement and a system improvement, the director of planning and development with the assistance of the director of public works if necessary shall determine the proportion of the cost of such improvement that can reasonably be attributed to the development as a project improvement, and the portion of such improvement that can reasonably be considered a system improvement. 
Sec. 9-22-4-17. - Conditions of development approval for project improvements. 
Upon the determination of project improvements needed to mitigate the traffic impacts of the discretionary development proposal as provided in this chapter, the director of planning and development shall recommend that the project improvements be completed by the developer as conditions of approval of the discretionary development proposal. 
Sec. 9-22-4-18. - System improvements. 
When the director of public works recommends improvements as a condition of a development proposal that the director determines are wholly or partially "system" improvements, the director of planning and development may include such recommendations in the recommended conditions of approval for the discretionary development application. The development applicant and the city in the case of system improvements shall have the following options: 
(a)  The applicant for a discretionary development proposal may voluntarily agree to pay for the cost of providing the system improvements, or a pro-rated share of the cost of said system improvements that are reasonably attributed to the subject development, as determined by the city. 
(b)  In the case of an application for discretionary development proposal before the governing body, the city may find that the proposed development will provide substantial adverse impacts on the transportation system. The city may find further that the existing transportation system is insufficient to serve the proposed development and that the city is unable to provide adequate transportation facilities within a reasonable amount of time after the impacts of said development would occur. Given such findings, the governing body may reduce the development density or intensity to the degree that the impacts of the development proposal do not degrade transportation facilities below accepted level of service standards, require a phasing of the development in a manner that adequate public facilities will be provided publicly or privately, or in cases where such other alternatives do not address the adverse impacts, deny an application for a discretionary development proposal. 
Sec. 9-22-4-19. - Appeal. 
An applicant for a discretionary development proposal may appeal a decision of the director of public works or the director of planning and development in the administration and interpretation of this chapter to the planning and appeals board as an appeal of an administrative decision as provided in this Code. 
CHAPTER 9-22-5. - DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL IMPACT 

Sec. 9-22-5-1. - Definitions. 
Initial DRI information form: A form intended to identify basic information about a proposed development of regional impact on which a local government is being requested to take action, and which provides information to the Regional Development Center (RDC). This form notifies the RDC of a potential development of regional impact in order for the RDC to meet its responsibilities within the DRI review process. 
DRI review initiation request form: A form intended to provide additional information about the proposed project to the Regional Development Center (RDC), the submission of which serves as an official request that the DRI review process be started by the RDC. 
Regional Development Center: The Georgia Mountains Regional Development Center. 
Sec. 9-22-5-2. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply when an applicant (industry, business, or developer) requests some type of local government action related to a project, such as, but not limited to, a request for a zoning change or special use, zoning variance, permit, hookup to a water or sewer system, master or site plan approval, or entering into a contract, and it appears that the proposed development (or, for multi-phased projects, the complete development) meets the threshold(s) of a development of regional impact, according to "Rules of Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, Developments of Regional Impact, Effective July 1, 2001," as may be amended from time to time. 
Sec. 9-22-5-3. - Jurisdiction. 
If a proposed development project is to be located in more than one jurisdiction and, in total, the proposed development meets or exceeds a DRI threshold, the local government in which the largest portion of the project is to be located is responsible for initiating the DRI review process. 
Sec. 9-22-5-4. - Procedures. 
The application procedures established in chapter 9-22-2 and chapter 9-22-3 will be modified by this chapter in cases where a rezoning or special use application, or an annexation application respectively, fits the definition of a "development of regional impact." Developments of regional impact will be processed according to procedures of the state department of community affairs as described in "Rules of Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, Developments of Regional Impact, effective July 1, 2001," as may be amended from time to time. 
When an application is received for development that meets or exceeds the thresholds established for that development type and thus constitutes a "development of regional impact" according to the aforementioned rules of the state department of community affairs, the city will follow the procedures identified in said administrative rules which are summarized here. 
When an application for a development of regional impact is received, the director on behalf of the city will complete an "initial DRI information" form and a "DRI review initiation request" form. Each of these two (2) forms may be submitted to the Regional Development Center simultaneously, provided the city has all necessary project-related information. 
The city shall not take any official legislative or administrative action to advance or further a DRI project until the review process identified under the DRI review procedure specified in "Rules of Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, Developments of Regional Impact, Effective July 1, 2001," as may be amended from time to time, is completed. The city may undertake preliminary staff administrative functions associated with a proposed DRI including, but not limited to, project evaluation/assessment, site visits, and placing consideration of the application on a future agenda for formal action, if required. The city shall not take any official action related to such a project until the DRI review process is completed and the city has had adequate time to consider the DRI review comments. 
After the DRI review process is completed, the city may proceed with whatever action it deems appropriate regarding the proposed project, although it is encouraged to take the public finding and additional comments into consideration as it makes its decision. 
If the project receives a negative public finding from the Regional Development Center and the city approves said project or takes action to advance said project, the city shall notify the Regional Development Center and the state department of community affairs of its action and identify all local requirements it has placed on the development that could mitigate any negative findings identified in the DRI review process. 
CHAPTER 9-22-6. - ZONING VARIANCES 

Sec. 9-22-6-1. - Generally. 
Persons may seek relief from compliance with the zoning-related requirements of this Code pursuant to this chapter when the strict application would create a particular and unique hardship, by filing an application for variance with the director of planning and development for consideration by the planning and appeals board in accordance with this chapter. Such relief may be granted only to the extent necessary to alleviate such unnecessary hardship and not as a convenience neither to the applicant nor to gain any advantage or interest over similarly zoned properties. 
Sec. 9-22-6-2. - Initiation. 
An application for a zoning variance for any property or properties in the city may be initiated by the governing body, planning and appeals board, owner of the property, or some other person(s) given authorization by property owner to file said application. 
Any applicant wishing to submit an application for a zoning variance request must schedule an appointment with the planning department staff in order to review the application for completeness. No such application shall be accepted for processing by the director unless it meets the requirements of this section. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. The director is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of applications. 
Sec. 9-22-6-3. - Waiting period for reapplication. 
If denied, a variance request affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the planning and appeals board may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. A request to reduce the waiting period must be asked for and acted upon by the planning and appeals board during the public hearing at which the request was first considered. 
Sec. 9-22-6-4. - Requirements for submittal. 
Applications for zoning variance shall include the following: 
(a)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the department of planning and development on the department's application forms. 
(b)  Fee. All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the governing body. A fee shall not be charged if the governing body or the planning and appeals board initiate the application. 
(c)  Plat or boundary survey. A plat or boundary survey of the property or properties involved in the application. Provide one scaled and folded copy, and one 8.5" × 11" or 11" × 17" reproducible size copy. 
(d)  Statement of hardship. Form with various questions to be answered by an applicant in a manner describing how each situation applies to the application. The applicant may complete the questions on the form provided with the application, or the applicant can type the answers on a separate sheet of paper as part of the written narrative, identifying each component as such. 
(e)  Written narrative. A written narrative should indicate at a minimum: the purpose of the request, proposed use, economic and environmental impacts as well as overlay zones or protection areas in which the property is located, such as the North Oconee Water Supply Watershed Protection Overlay Zone. 
(f)  Architectural renderings. Architectural renderings for any proposed new construction or exterior alterations of the existing structure(s), including at a minimum: 
(1)  Roof pitch; 
(2)  Materials to be used on exterior; 
(3)  Basic landscaping proposed; and 
(4)  Building elevations. 
If the architectural rendering is in a color format or is larger than an 11" × 17" size copy, nine (9) copies of the colored or large-scale rendering must be submitted with the completed application. 
(g)  Concept plan. An application for a zoning variance approval related to a residential subdivision, multi-family, or non-residential use or zoning district shall be accompanied by a concept plan if any new construction is proposed or alteration of the site is required under the site or development design standards of this Code. An as-built survey (rather than a concept plan) indicating the most current development conditions must be submitted with those applications regarding existing developments that are not to be altered. The concept plan must be prepared by a professional engineer, or a registered land surveyor; landscape architect; or architect. The concept plan shall meet the requirements of section 9-22-6-5. The applicant shall submit nine (9) scaled and folded copies, folded to fit into an 8" × 10" size envelop, and one 11" × 17" reproducible copy. 
The director may request information in addition to that specified in this section when considered necessary for review of the application by the governing body or planning and appeals board. 
Sec. 9-22-6-5. - Specifications for concept plans. 
The concept plan shall show the following, as appropriate to the variance requested: 
(a)  Name, address and telephone number of the property owner. 
(b)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(c)  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(d)  Proposed use of the property. 
(e)  Location (land district and land lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
(f)  Location map of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Location maps must be drawn at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to two thousand (2,000) feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide. 
(g)  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
(h)  Natural features within the property, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all water courses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year flood plain, if any, shall be outlined. 
(i)  Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
(j)  The proposed project layout including: 
(1)  For residential development projects, approximate lot lines and street right-of-way lines, along with the building setback lines. 
(2)  For multi-family and non-residential development projects, the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas, and driveways. 
(k)  The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
(l)  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
(m)  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. 
(n)  The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. 
(o)  Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
Sec. 9-22-6-6. - Notice of public hearing in newspaper. 
Before the planning and appeals board may take final action on a proposed variance application, the planning and appeals board shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. At least fifteen (15) days but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the public hearing before the planning and appeals board, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The published notice shall be prepared by the planning department and shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, the variance requested, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the planning and appeals board. 
Sec. 9-22-6-7. - Notice of public hearing by sign on property. 
At least fifteen (15) days but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the public hearing, the city shall post a sign or signs stating the date, time and place of the public hearing before the planning and appeals board, the present zoning classification and the proposed variance. One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the property for which the variance has been requested. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. 
Sec. 9-22-6-8. - Notice to adjacent property owners. 
At least ten (10) days prior to the planning and appeals board public hearing, the applicant shall cause a notice to be mailed to all persons owning property located abutting or across any street from the property that is the subject matter of the variance application. The written notice shall be mailed to the property owners as such names and addresses appear on the county's ad valorem tax records. The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing by the planning and appeals board. 
Sec. 9-22-6-9. - Investigations and staff recommendation. 
Within a reasonable period of time after acceptance of a complete application, the director may but shall not be required to send the application or notice thereof out for review by internal municipal departments and external agencies as may be appropriate. Any written comments received in a timely manner as a result of such review shall be submitted for consideration to the planning and appeals board and governing body, or summarized in a memorandum. Any such comments shall become public records. 
The director may but shall not be required to investigate and make a recommendation regarding the variance application. Any such investigation and recommendation if in writing be made available to the applicant and planning and appeals board prior to its public hearing and shall become public records. copies of the director's findings and recommendations, if provided, shall be available no later than the time of the planning and appeals board's public hearing on the matter. 
Sec. 9-22-6-10. - Planning and appeals board hearing and action. 
The planning and appeals board shall convene a public hearing on the variance application as provided in the public notice. The public hearing shall follow policies and procedures which govern calling and conducting public hearings established in chapter 9-22-9. The planning and appeals board shall have sixty-five (65) calendar days from the date of its public hearing within which to take final action on the variance application. 
In rendering a decision on a variance application, the planning and appeals board shall consider all information supplied by the applicant, the director, and any information presented at the public hearing of the planning and appeals board. After conducting a public hearing, in taking action on an application, the planning and appeals board may: 
(a)  Approve the application as submitted. 
(b)  Approve the application with conditions. 
(c)  Deny the proposal. 
(d)  Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting, provided that it acts within its allotted 65-day review period. 
The action of the planning and appeals board on the variance application shall be final; provided, however, that any person adversely affected by any determination made by the planning and appeals board relative to the approval or denial of a variance application may appeal such determination to a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by law. 
Sec. 9-22-6-11. - Criteria to consider for variance applications. 
The planning and appeals board shall consider the following standards in considering any variance application, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(a)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
(b)  The application of this Code to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
(c)  There are conditions that are peculiar to the property which adversely affect its reasonable use or usability as currently zoned. 
(d)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this Code. 
(e)  There must be a proved hardship by showing beyond a doubt the inability to make a reasonable use of the land if the zoning ordinance were applied literally. 
(f)  The hardship cannot be self-created; e.g., as in a case where the lot was purchased with the knowledge of an existing restriction. 
Sec. 9-22-6-12. - Withdrawal of application. 
A variance application may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or entity initiating such a request upon notice to the director, up until the public hearing by the planning and appeals board is closed. 
If the applicant withdraws the application prior to the publication of notice for public hearing before the planning and appeals board, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the director without restriction on the refiling of a proposed variance on the property in the future. 
If the applicant withdraws the application after notice has been published or is irretrievably set for publication but the application has not been heard by the planning and appeals board, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the director and an application for variance on the property may not be resubmitted for six (6) months from the date of withdrawal. 
If the request for withdrawal is made at the planning and appeals board public hearing on the case, the request may be approved by a majority vote of the board, but an application for a variance on the property may not be resubmitted for twelve (12) months from the date of withdrawal. However, that the planning and appeals board may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. A request to reduce the waiting period must be asked for and acted upon by the planning and appeals board during the public hearing at which the request was first considered. 
Sec. 9-22-6-13. - Provisions that cannot be varied. 
In no case shall a variance be granted for any of the following: 
(a)  A condition created by the applicant, including the result of an unwise investment decision or real estate transaction. 
(b)  A change in the conditions of approval imposed through a rezoning application approved by the governing body. 
(c)  Reduction of a minimum lot size required by a zoning district. 
(d)  Use of land or buildings or structures that is not permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
(e)  Any increase in the number of dwelling units or nonresidential building floor area otherwise permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
Sec. 9-22-6-14. - Duration of validity. 
Approval of a zoning variance on a property located within the city shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the planning and appeals board and shall be effective for a period of twelve (12) months. If no action is taken by the applicant to implement the purpose of the application within twelve (12) months from the date of approval, said approval shall become null and void. A zoning variance shall be specific to the request made by the current applicant and shall not stay with the property, as is the case for a zoning change. 
CHAPTER 9-22-7. - APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION 

Sec. 9-22-7-1. - Appeal as a remedy. 
Persons may appeal to the planning and appeals board for relief when aggrieved by an action or an interpretation of an administrative official of the city made under this Code. All such requests for relief shall be taken as an appeal to the planning and appeals board, as provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 9-22-7-2. - Initiation. 
Appeals of an administrative decision may be initiated by any person aggrieved by a decision made under this Code or by an officer or department head of the city. Such appeal shall be initiated within fifteen (15) days of the action or decision appealed from by filing with the director of planning and development an application for an appeal of an administrative decision specifying the grounds thereof. If the person aggrieved by an action within this Code does not initiate an appeal within fifteen (15) days, then the decision of the administrative official shall stand, and no further administrative remedy shall be available under this Code. 
Any applicant wishing to submit an application for an appeal of administrative decision must schedule an appointment with the planning department staff in order to review the application for completeness. No such application shall be accepted for processing by the director unless it meets the requirements of this section. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. The director is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of applications. 
Sec. 9-22-7-3. - Administrative resolution. 
The director of planning and development will attempt to resolve the issue within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice of appeal. Unresolved issues will be referred to the planning and appeals board for final action. 
Sec. 9-22-7-4. - Requirements for submittal. 
To initiate an appeal, an application must be submitted to the planning department which shall include at minimum the following: 
(a)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the department of planning and development on the department's application forms. 
(b)  Fee. All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the governing body. A fee shall not be charged if the governing body or the planning and appeals board initiate the application. 
(c)  Written narrative. A written narrative explaining the request and purpose for the appeal. 
The planning department in reviewing an application shall also be authorized to require any supporting information necessary to review an administrative decision on the record necessary to resolve the request for appeal. These may include but are not limited to plat or boundary survey, architectural renderings, or concept plan or as-built surveys. When the appeal application is referred to the planning and appeals board, the applicant shall be required to submit a sufficient number of scaled and reproducible size copies of such supporting documentation as determined by the planning department. 
Sec. 9-22-7-5. - Public notice and public hearing. 
An application for an appeal approval shall comply with the public notice and public hearing process as described in chapter 9-22-2 for a rezoning or special use request, with the exception that a decision by the planning and appeals board shall constitute final action. 
Sec. 9-22-7-6. - Stay of proceedings. 
The filing of a completed application for an appeal of an administrative decision stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer or department head from whom the appeal is made certifies to the planning and appeals board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed unless the applicant for appeal of an administrative decision gains a restraining order which must be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 9-22-7-7. - Decision. 
The planning and appeals board shall make findings and render a decision after the initial public hearing on the appeal application. The planning and appeal board's secretary shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its decision within five (5) days after the board has rendered its decision. 
The planning and appeals board may affirm, overrule or modify, in whole or in part, the rulings of an administrative officer's decision or interpretation pursuant to this Code. In cases where an appeal is granted, the planning and appeals board may direct the issuance of land development permits or building permits, not otherwise inconsistent with this Code or other ordinance adopted by the governing body. 
A decision of the planning and appeals board pursuant to this chapter shall constitute final action and may be appealed only to a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by law. 
Sec. 9-22-7-8. - Effect. 
Approval of an appeal on a property located within the city shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the planning and appeals board. An appeal approved by the planning and appeals board on a property located within the city shall be effective for that specific request and applicant. Approval of said appeal shall not be transferable. (Language from current Code in amendment for applications adopted last year). 
CHAPTER 9-22-8. - TEXT AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 9-22-8-1. - Applicability. 
This Code may be amended from time to time in whole or in part by the governing body under the provisions of this section. 
Sec. 9-22-8-2. - Initiation. 
A text amendment may be initiated by the governing body, planning and appeals board, or historic preservation commission by a majority vote of those voting, or by the director or other city departmental director. 
Sec. 9-22-8-3. - Application requirements. 
A pre-application meeting with the director is required prior to filing a text amendment. Applications for text amendments shall require submittal of the following: 
(a)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the department of planning and development on the department's application forms, including signed and notarized signature of property owner. 
(b)  Fee. All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the governing body. A fee shall not be charged if the governing body or the planning and appeals board initiate the application. 
(c)  Letter of intent. A written narrative describing the purpose of the request and addressing how the proposed application meets the criteria to consider for text amendments as specified in section 9-22-2-5. 
(d)  Disclosure. A statement of disclosure complying with O.C.G.A. 36-67-1, "Conflict of Interest in Zoning Actions," if not incorporated into the required application form. 
In cases where an applicant is proposing a text amendment to modify an existing zoning district or create a new zoning district, and where the applicant also desires to rezone property to the modified or new zoning district, the two (2) applications shall not be considered concurrently. 
Sec. 9-22-8-4. - Notice of public hearings. 
Before the governing body may take final action on a proposed text amendment, the planning and appeals board or historic preservation commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. At least fifteen (15) days but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the public hearing before the planning and appeals board or historic preservation commission, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The published notice shall be prepared by the planning department and shall include the nature of the proposed text amendment, and the date, time and place of the public hearing before the planning and appeals board or historic preservation commission. Notice of the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the governing body shall also be included in the notice. 
Sec. 9-22-8-5. - Criteria to consider for text amendments. 
The governing body, planning and appeals board, or historic preservation commission shall consider the following standards for text amendments, giving due weight or priority to those standards that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(a)  The extent to which the proposed text amendment is consistent with the purpose and intent of this Code. 
(b)  The extent to which the proposed text amendment is compatible with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Whether the proposed text amendment adequately addresses new or changing conditions in the city. 
(d)  Whether the proposed text amendment is needed to properly implement the comprehensive plan. 
(e)  The extent to which the proposed text amendment promotes the public health, safety, morality or general welfare of the city. 
Sec. 9-22-8-6. - Appointed hearing and recommendation. 
The planning and appeals board or historic preservation commission shall convene a public hearing on the text amendment as provided in the public notice. The public hearing shall follow policies and procedures which govern calling and conducting public hearings established in chapter 9-22-9. The planning and appeals board or historic preservation commission shall have sixty-five (65) calendar days from the date of its public hearing within which to submit its recommendation on the text amendment. The planning and appeals board or historic preservation commission may submit any additional report it deems appropriate. The recommendations of the planning and appeals board or historic preservation commission shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the governing body. 
Sec. 9-22-8-7. - Action by governing body. 
The governing body shall hold a public hearing on the text amendment. In rendering a decision on any such text amendment, the governing body shall consider all information supplied by the applicant, director and the planning and appeals board or historic preservation commission, any information presented at the public hearing of the planning and appeals board, and information gained at its own public hearing. The governing body shall either approve or disapprove of the application, or it may modify the text amendment language as proposed or recommended and approve the text amendment as modified. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XLIII, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-22-8-8. - Withdrawal of application. 
Any application for a text amendment may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or entity initiating such a request upon notice to the director, up until the public hearing by the planning and appeals board or historic preservation commission is closed. 
Sec. 9-22-8-9. - Effect. 
Approval of a text amendment shall be in full force and effect upon its approval or upon the stated effective date thereof, and shall thereupon apply to every property for which a use has not been established or for which a building permit or development permit may subsequently be requested. 
For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this Code prior to the effective date of a text amendment affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed under the provisions for nonconformities in article 9-11. Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this Code prior to the effective date of a text amendment may continue to completion as though no change had occurred and, upon completion, shall be governed under the provisions for nonconformities in article 9-11, as applicable. 
Sec. 9-22-8-10. - Waiting period for reapplication. 
There shall be no waiting period for reapplication of text amendments. 
CHAPTER 9-22-9. - PROCEDURES FOR CALLING AND CONDUCTING PUBLIC HEARINGS 

Sec. 9-22-9-1. - Applicability. 
Any public hearing required by this article shall be called and convened at the scheduled time and place, and it shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "hearing body" shall refer to the governing body, the planning and appeals board, and the historic preservation commission. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting a presiding official or hearing body from conducting a public hearing in a fair, orderly, and decorous manner. 
Sec. 9-22-9-2. - Presiding official. 
The presiding officer shall preside over the public hearing as follows: 
(a)  Governing body. In the case of a governing body, the mayor shall have authority to preside but may delegate the presiding official's duties to the city attorney. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall have authority to preside but may delegate the presiding official's duties to the city attorney. In the absence of both the mayor and mayor pro tempore, another member of the governing body shall be have authority to preside but may delegate the presiding official's duties to the city attorney. 
(b)  Planning and appeals board. In the case of the planning and appeals board, the chairperson of said board shall preside, or in the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson if designated, or if neither is present to preside, another member of the board shall be designated to preside. 
(c)  Historic preservation commission. In the case of the historic preservation commission, the chairperson of said commission shall preside, or in the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson if designated, or if neither is present to preside, another member of the commission shall be designated to preside. 
Sec. 9-22-9-3. - Opening of public hearing. 
The presiding official shall indicate that a public hearing has been called on one or more applications made pursuant to this article, shall summarize the processes required by this chapter, and shall open the public hearing. Thereupon, the presiding official shall call the first case and the hearing body shall consider each application on an individual basis in succession as printed on the published agenda or as otherwise approved by the hearing body; provided, however, that the presiding officer may at his or her discretion call and consider more than one application simultaneously when more than one application involves the same piece of property, and when proceedings would be efficiently completed by combining separately required public hearings and discussing more than one scheduled matter as a single group of applications. 
Sec. 9-22-9-4. - Report of director. 
Upon opening the public hearing, the presiding official shall, unless he or she elects to summarize and present information about the application personally, recognize the director or designee of the planning and development department, who shall provide a summary of the application and present any recommendations or results of investigations. In the case of public hearings before a governing body, unless a member of the planning and appeals board or historic preservation commission is present and is authorized and willing to speak for the board on the subject application, the director shall also summarize the recommendations made by the planning and appeals board or historic preservation commission. Any member of the hearing body upon recognition by the presiding official may ask questions of the director or designee or other city official, or planning and appeals board or historic preservation commission representative providing the report or recommendations. 
Sec. 9-22-9-5. - Applicant. 
When an individual application comes up for hearing, the presiding official may ask for a show of hands of those persons who wish to appear in support of the application. If it appears that the number of persons wishing to appear in support of the application is in excess of that which may reasonably be heard, the presiding official may request that a spokesperson for the group be chosen to make presentations. Following the report of the director or designee, the presiding official shall recognize the applicant or his or her agent, spokesperson, or each of them, who shall present and explain the application. 
There shall be a minimum time period of ten (10) minutes per application at the public hearing for the proponents to present data, evidence, and opinions; the hearing body shall not be obligated to provide the full ten-minute period to the proponents if they elect not to use that much time. Any member of the hearing body upon recognition by the presiding official may ask questions of the applicant or agent of the applicant, or both. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
Sec. 9-22-9-6. - Public. 
At the conclusion of the applicant's presentation, the presiding official shall initiate the public comment portion of the public hearing. When an individual application comes up for review, the presiding official may ask for a show of hands of those persons who wish to ask questions, make comments, and/or appear in opposition to the application. If it appears that the number of persons wishing to ask questions, make comments, or appear in opposition to the application is in excess of that which may reasonably be heard, the presiding official may request that a spokesperson for the group be chosen to make presentations and ask questions, or appear in opposition. There shall be a minimum time period of ten (10) minutes per application at the public hearing for the opponents to present data, evidence, and opinions and ask questions; the hearing body shall not be obligated to provide the full ten-minutes per application to the opponents if they elect not to use that much time. 
Prior to speaking, each speaker will identify him or herself and state his or her current address. Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed application under consideration and shall address his or her remarks only to the hearing body. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed application under consideration. The presiding official may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this procedure. 
The hearing body will consider the questions raised during the public portion of the hearing and may elect to answer questions following the speakers, or it may defer questions to the applicant to be answered during rebuttal. Any member of the hearing body upon recognition by the presiding official may ask questions of a member of the public giving testimony. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
Sec. 9-22-9-7. - Applicant's rebuttal. 
At the conclusion of public testimony, or upon the expiration of time allotted for public testimony, the applicant or his or her agent, or both, shall be allowed a short opportunity for answer questions, rebut the testimony of the public, and provide final comments and remarks. The time devoted to any such rebuttal shall be counted toward the total ten (10) minutes allotted to the applicant if a time limit is set by the presiding official. 
Any member of the hearing body upon recognition by the presiding official may ask questions of the applicant, his or her agent, or both. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
Sec. 9-22-9-8. - Close of hearing. 
After the foregoing procedures have been completed, the presiding official will indicate that the public hearing is closed. Upon the closing of the public hearing, the applicant or his agent and any member of the public shall no longer address the hearing body in any way, including hand waving or motions for attention; provided, however, that at any time considered appropriate the presiding official may reopen the public hearing for a limited time and purpose. 
Sec. 9-22-9-9. - Decision. 
After the public hearing is closed, the hearing body may either vote upon the application or may delay its vote to a subsequent meeting, subject to the limitations of this article, provided that notice of the time, date and location when such application will be further considered shall be announced at the meeting during which the public hearing is held. 
After hearing evidence, in making a decision, the hearing body shall apply the evidence to the criteria specified in this article, as appropriate given the type of application. It will not be required that the hearing body consider every criterion given the type of application. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that approval of the proposed application will promote the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. 
If the hearing body determines from the evidence presented by the applicant has shown that the proposed application promotes the health, safety, morals, and general welfare under applicable criteria, then the application shall be granted, subject to those reasonable conditions as may be imposed by the hearing body on its own initiative or as may be recommended by the planning and appeals board or the director. Otherwise, such application shall be denied. In cases where one or more companion applications are submitted and the governing body attaches conditions to the application, such conditions shall unless otherwise specifically stated otherwise become conditions of approval for each companion application. 
Sec. 9-22-9-10. - Planning and appeals board special provisions. 
In the case of the planning and appeals board, the following provisions shall apply to its decision making: 
(a)  A total of four (4) planning and appeals board members present shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the quorum shall be necessary to approve any decision or recommendation. 
(b)  If a motion to recommend approval of an application fails, the application is automatically recommended for denial. If a motion to recommend denial of an application fails, another motion would be in order. 
(c)  A tie vote on a motion to recommend approval of an application shall be deemed a recommendation for denial of the application. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(d)  If no action is taken on an application, it will go forward to the governing body with no recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-47, § XLIV, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 9-22-9-11. - Historic preservation commission special provisions. 
In the case of the historic preservation commission, the following provisions shall apply to its decision making: 
(a)  A motion to recommend approval or denial of a designation application, or a motion to approve or deny a certificate of appropriateness, must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least three (3) members in order for the motion to be approved. 
(b)  A recommendation to approve or deny a proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the historic preservation commission within fifteen (15) days following the public hearing, and shall be in the form of an ordinance to the governing body. 
(c)  The historic preservation commission shall hold a public hearing and act upon all proposed certificates of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a complete application. Should a request for a certificate of appropriateness be tabled, the 45-day period will start over to allow time for the applicant to modify an application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
Article 9-23 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION APPLICATIONS AND PROCEDURES 

 
CHAPTER 9-23-1. - DEFINITIONS 
Alteration: A visible change to the exterior of a structure; or work which impacts any exterior architectural feature. Alteration includes construction, reconstruction, introduction or removal of any building or building element. 
Certificate of appropriateness: A document that is evidence of the approval by the historic preservation commission (or in the case of minor projects, by the director of planning and development) for a person to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or property located within a designated historic district. 
Character-defining: An element whose design and material is associated with the age and style of a building and helps define its architectural style; parts of a structure that make it distinctive. 
Commission: The historic preservation commission of the city. 
Design guidelines: Standards (not laws) that are an extension of the secretary of the interior's standards for rehabilitation used for evaluating proposed changes to locally designated historic landmarks or buildings, structures, site features, and other exterior elements of properties located within a locally designated historic district. 
Designation: A decision by the city council to designate an individual landmark or district as "historic" and thereafter prohibit all exterior material changes in appearance prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. 
Exterior architectural features: The architectural style and general design of the exterior of a structure including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features: All those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property, including but not limited to walls, fences, signs or other appurtenant elements thereof including any improvement, grading or alteration of the land. 
Georgia Historic Preservation Act: The state enabling legislation which authorizes communities in the state to establish a local historic preservation commission, and establishes minimum standards for local jurisdiction historic resources protection that is not tied to the exercise of zoning power. The Georgia Historic Preservation Act provides a benchmark against which each local governing jurisdiction may either evaluate existing preservation policy or formulate a preservation policy tailored to local needs. 
Historic district: A geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, works of art or a combination thereof which exhibit a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the governing body. 
Historic fabric: Materials original to a building or structure. 
Historic landmark: An individual structure, site, or work of art which exhibits a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the governing body. 
In-kind: Using the exact same material when replacing a damaged architectural element. 
Integrity: The state of being unimpaired—both a building and its setting. Authenticity of a property's historic identity, evidenced by the survival of physical characteristics (i.e. location, setting, design, materials and workmanship) that existed during the property's historic period. 
Major work project: Unless further clarified in the approved design and construction guidelines, this involves a change in the appearance of a structure or site and is more substantial in nature than routine maintenance or minor work projects. 
Material change in appearance: A change that will affect either the exterior architectural features or exterior environmental features of an historic property or any structure, site or work of art within an historic district, and may include any one or more of the following: 
(a)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of an historic property, including any of its architectural elements or details; 
(b)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(c)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(d)  A change in the location of advertising or parking area visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(e)  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building or other structure within an historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Minor work project: Unless further clarified in the approved design and construction guidelines, this involves a change that goes beyond ordinary maintenance but does not constitute a significant or character-altering change in the appearance of a structure or site. 
Ordinary or routine maintenance: Any action performed in order to preserve historic materials and other elements—including minor replacement of materials in-kind provided that no change in the design or general appearance is made to a structure or site. 
Preservation: The sustaining of the existing form, integrity and material of a building or structure; and the existing form and landscaping of a site. 
Rehabilitation or renovation: Returning a structure or property to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those components that are significant to the historical, architectural and cultural values. 
Remodel: To alter a structure in a way that may or may not be sensitive to the preservation of its significant architectural forms and features. 
Restoration: Accurately recovering the form and details of a structure and its setting as it appeared at a particular time in history by removing recent work and/or replacing missing earlier work. 
Work project: Any work performed to maintain and repair an existing structure or site and landscape feature; or any work performed to replace an existing structure or site and landscape feature, or component of such; or any work to build new construction (additions, infill, outbuildings, fences, etc.). 
CHAPTER 9-23-2. - DESIGNATIONS 

Sec. 9-23-2-1. - Generally. 
The purpose of this chapter, and other historic preservation related chapters of this Code, is to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, architectural, cultural or aesthetic interest or value. An individual landmark or a group of properties comprising a district may be designated as local historic landmarks and districts, respectively, under the procedures in this chapter. 
The historic preservation overlay zone and historic preservation overlay zone maps, as described in chapter 9-8-8, may be amended from time to time to include new or separate, noncontiguous designated historic districts, to modify existing local historic districts, to designate historic landmarks, or for other reason, provided that such amendment conforms to the provisions of this chapter and O.C.G.A. 44-10-26 as applicable. 
If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the governing body shall have the power to suspend or issue a moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition involving a property or properties under consideration for designation; in which case, no building or demolition permits shall be issued until the final designation status is determined. 
Sec. 9-23-2-2. - Initiation. 
Local designations for either districts or individual landmarks may be proposed to be established, or to be rescinded, by the governing body, the historic preservation commission, or property owner(s). Local designations shall be considered as amendments to the historic preservation overlay zone as described in chapter 9-8-8. 
An application for designation shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs or plans as required by section 9-23-2-3, or as may be required by the director or historic preservation commission. Any applicant wishing to submit an application for a designation request must schedule an appointment with the planning department staff in order to review the application for completeness. No such application shall be accepted for processing by the director unless it meets the requirements of this chapter. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. The director is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of applications. 
Sec. 9-23-2-3. - Requirements for submittal. 
All applications for designations shall at a minimum consist of the following: 
(a)  Districts. 
(1)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the department of planning and development on the department's application forms. 
(2)  Boundary map. Provide a map of the proposed district, showing property boundary lines and the proposed district boundary line as well as streets and street names. This map should include the proposed name of the district. Indicate the historic or common name of each site. Maps can be a copy of the tax map, or the applicant can obtain a map of the general area from the planning department upon an appointment and for a fee. 
(3)  List of current property owners and occupants. Provide a list of all current property owners and occupants, including name and mailing address, for the properties to be designated as a district. A paper copy and an electronic copy in Microsoft Excel format. 
(4)  Petition of support. A form included as part of the official designation application form provided by the planning department. The petition requires the name, contact information, and signature of property owners in support of the request. It is encouraged that the applicant obtain the support of at least fifty (50) percent of the property owners within the proposed district. 
(5)  Photographs. Provide two (2) clear sets of recent photographs of at least 4" × 6" in size. The photographs can be black and white or color. Polaroids will not be accepted. Provide photographs of a structure representative of each architectural style within the proposed district as follows: 
i.  Provide one photograph of each elevation with text identifying the view (e.g. "south elevation" or "main entry"). 
ii.  Provide two (2) perspective photographs (i.e. Photo looking at the front of the structure, including some of the front lawn area and any other unique feature). 
iii.  Provide additional photographs of garages, outbuildings, or other significant feature that will aid the visual representation and architectural significance of the district. 
iv.  Type the following information on a self-adhesive label and attach it to the back of each photograph: common name of property, street address and tax parcel number, name of photographer, date of photo, and view and direction. 
(6)  Written statements. On the "written statements" form included with the application form provided by the planning department (or as typed on a separate attachment), provide detailed information with respect to the significance of the district, description of the proposed district, history of the proposed district, and statement of justification. 
(b)  Individual landmarks. 
(1)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the department of planning and development on the department's application forms. 
(2)  Plat/boundary survey. Provide a plat/boundary survey that is prepared by a registered land surveyor and depicts at a minimum the property boundary lines, all existing structures, and street names. 
(3)  Legal description. Legal description with the metes and bounds that corresponds with the said plat or boundary survey. A paper copy and an electronic copy in Microsoft Word format of the legal description must be submitted. 
(4)  Copy of grant deed. Provide a copy of the grant deed which verifies current ownership. Such information should match the information held to be true by the Hall County Tax Assessor's Office. 
(5)  Photographs. Provide two (2) clear sets of recent photographs of at least 4 × 6 in size, following the guidelines outlined in this Section for district designations. 
(6)  Written statements. On the "written statements" form included with the application form provided by the planning department (or as typed on a separate attachment), provide detailed information with respect to the significance of the district, description of the proposed district, history of the proposed district, and statement of justification. 
The director may request information in addition to that specified in this section when considered necessary for review of the application by the governing body or historic preservation commission. 
Sec. 9-23-2-4. - Notice of public hearing by historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Notice in the newspaper. Before the governing body may take final action on a designation application, the historic preservation commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. At least ten (10) days but not more than twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing before the historic preservation commission, notice shall be published at least three (3) times in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The published notice shall be prepared by the planning department and shall include a general description of the location(s) to be considered for designation, total acreage, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the historic preservation commission. 
(b)  Notice to owners and occupants of properties proposed for designation. At least ten (10) days but not more than twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing before the historic preservation commission, the planning department shall mail written notice of the public hearing to all owners and occupants of such properties. Notice sent via the United States Mail to the last-known owner and current occupant of the property shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing by the historic preservation commission. 
Sec. 9-23-2-5. - State documentation report; investigations and staff findings. 
(a)  State documentation report. The director or designee, on behalf of the historic preservation commission, shall prepare a formal report at least thirty (30) days prior to the historic preservation commission holding a public hearing and making a recommendation on a designation application. Said report, a copy of which shall be provided to the state historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources, shall be used to educate the community and to provide a permanent record of the designation, and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  A physical description; 
(2)  A statement of the historical, architectural, cultural or aesthetic significance; 
(3)  A map showing district boundaries and classification of individual properties therein in accordance with the criteria outlined in section 9-23-2-6, or showing boundaries of individual historic landmarks; 
(4)  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
(5)  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Investigations and staff findings. 
(1)  Within a reasonable period of time after acceptance of a complete application, the director may but shall not be required to send the application or notice thereof out for review by internal municipal departments and external agencies as may be appropriate. Any written comments received in a timely manner as a result of such review shall be submitted for consideration to the historic preservation commission and governing body, or summarized in a memorandum. Any such comments shall become public records. 
(2)  The director may but shall not be required to investigate and write a report of findings regarding the designation application. Any such investigation and report of findings shall if in writing be made available to the applicant and historic preservation commission prior to its public hearing and shall become public records. Copies of the director's report of findings, if provided, shall be available no later than the time of the historic preservation commission's public hearing on the matter. 
Sec. 9-23-2-6. - Criteria to consider for designations. 
The director, the historic preservation commission, and governing body shall consider the following standards in considering any designation application, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(a)  Criteria for selection of historic district. 
(1)  [Geographically definable area.] A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains structures, sites, works of art or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Exhibits a significant historical, architectural, cultural or environmental character or value; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history; and 
c.  Constitutes a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county by reason of above. 
(2)  Boundaries. Boundaries of a historic district shall be specified on tax maps; and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. Boundaries shall be included in the separate ordinances designating local districts; boundaries specified in legal notices shall coincide with the boundaries proposed for designation. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within districts proposed for designation shall be classified as: 
a.  Historic: An individual property that is more than fifty (50) years old and contributes to the historic district; 
b.  Non-historic: An individual property less than fifty (50) years old that possesses an architectural character which does not contribute nor detract from the district; or that is associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance; or 
c.  Intrusive: An individual property that is less than fifty (50) years old, and does not contribute to the historical character of the district. 
d.  Vacant: An individual property that contains no buildings or other structures. 
(b)  Criteria for selection of a historic landmark. 
(1)  A historic landmark is an individual structure, site or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation for one or more of the reasons listed below: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of an era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
c.  It is a site or structure associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance; or 
d.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic value that is continuing to contribute to the historical or cultural development and heritage. 
(2)  Boundaries. Boundaries of a historic landmark shall be clearly defined for individual properties on tax maps; and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(3)  Evaluation of individual landmarks. 
a.  Historic: An individual property that is more than fifty (50) years old and contributes to the historic district; 
b.  Non-historic: An individual property less than fifty (50) years old that possesses an architectural character which does not contribute nor detract from the district; or that is associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance; or 
c.  Intrusive: An individual property that is less than fifty (50) years old, and does not contribute to the historical character of the district. 
d.  Vacant: An individual property that contains no buildings or other structures. 
Sec. 9-23-2-7. - Criteria to consider for amendments or renunciation. 
Upon a written application of a party of interest and 30-day written notice to all necessary agencies, the governing body may amend or rescind the designation of a historic district or landmark following a public hearing and upon the finding that the district or landmark fails to comply with the designation criteria outlined in section 9-23-2-6. 
A request to amend or rescind the historic designation shall follow the procedures outlined in section 9-23-2-2 for initiating an application for designation. 
The written application shall state why the designated district or landmark fails to comply with the designation criteria; the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to show that the designation by the governing body fails to comply with the designation criteria. The applicant or historic preservation commission may appeal the decision made by the governing body to amend or rescind the designation to a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by law. 
Sec. 9-23-2-8. - Investigations and staff findings. 
Within a reasonable period of time after acceptance of a complete application, the director may but shall not be required to send the application or notice thereof out for review by internal municipal departments and external agencies as may be appropriate. Any written comments received in a timely manner as a result of such review shall be submitted for consideration to the historic preservation commission and the governing body, or summarized in a memorandum. Any such comments shall become public records. 
The director may but shall not be required to investigate and write a report of findings regarding the application for designation. Any such investigation and report of findings shall if in writing be made available to the applicant and historic preservation commission prior to its public hearing and shall become public records. Copies of the director's report of findings, if provided, shall be available no later than the time of the historic preservation commission's public hearing on the matter. 
Sec. 9-23-2-9. - Historic preservation commission hearing and recommendation. 
The historic preservation commission shall convene a public hearing on the designation application as provided in the public notice. The public hearing shall follow policies and procedures which govern calling and conducting public hearings established in chapter 9-22-9. 
In rendering a decision on a designation application, the historic preservation commission shall consider all information supplied by the applicant, the director, and any information presented at the public hearing of the historic preservation commission. A recommendation to approve or deny the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the historic preservation commission within fifteen (15) days following the public hearing. The historic preservation commission may submit any additional report it deems appropriate. The recommendations of the historic preservation commission shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the governing body. 
Sec. 9-23-2-10. - Notice of public hearing by governing body. 
(a)  Notice in the newspaper. At least ten (10) days but not more than twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing before the governing body, notice shall be published at least three (3) times in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The published notice shall be prepared by the planning department and shall include a general description of the location(s) to be considered for designation, total acreage, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the governing body. 
(b)  Notice to owners and occupants of properties proposed for designation. At least ten (10) days but not more than twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing before the governing body, the planning department shall mail written notice of the public hearing to all owners and occupants of such properties in the form of an action letter stating the action taken by the historic preservation commission. Notice sent via the United States Mail to the last-known owner and current occupant of the property shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing by the governing body. 
Sec. 9-23-2-11. - Action by governing body and the designation ordinance. 
Following the receipt of the historic preservation commission's recommendation and a public hearing; the governing body may approve the designation application, approve the application with conditions or amendments, deny the application, allow for withdrawal of the application, table the application, or refer the application for designation back to the historic preservation commission for further consideration. The applicant or the historic preservation commission may appeal the decision made by the governing body to adopt or reject the designation ordinance to a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by law. 
Any ordinance designating a district or individual landmark as historic shall: 
(a)  Include a description of boundaries for a proposed historic district and a list of properties located therein; or a description of the proposed individual historic landmark; 
(b)  Set forth the names of the owners of the designated properties; 
(c)  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the historic preservation commission prior to any exterior material change in appearance of a structure or site of the designated property; and 
(d)  Require that the district or landmark be shown on the official zoning map. 
Sec. 9-23-2-12. - Duties of the director following action by governing body. 
Within thirty (30) days immediately following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the governing body, the director shall notify the owner and occupants of each designated historic property, or individual landmark, of said designation. Said notice shall apprise the owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any work project involving an exterior material change in appearance of a structure or the site. 
The director also shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
Sec. 9-23-2-13. - Withdrawal. 
A designation application may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or entity initiating such a request upon notice to the director, up until the public hearing by the historic preservation commission is closed without restriction on the refiling of said designation application. 
The application may be withdrawn administratively by the director at any point during the public hearing process without restriction on the refilling of said designation application, whether or not in the form of a modified version. 
Sec. 9-23-2-14. - Incorporation clause. 
This chapter is intended to comply with the provisions of the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et. seq., which Act is incorporated by reference in its entirety into this chapter. Where any provision of this chapter is in conflict with any provision of the Act, the Act shall control. Or where this chapter is incomplete in having failed to incorporate a provision necessarily required for the implementation of the Act, such provision of the Act, so as to meet the mandate of the Act, shall be fully complied with. 
CHAPTER 9-23-3. - CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 9-23-3-1. - Generally. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, architectural, cultural or aesthetic interest or value. 
After the designation of a historic district or landmark, no material change in the exterior appearance of the structure or the site of such property shall be made, or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant, until an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to the planning department and approved by the historic preservation commission for major work projects, or, in the case of minor work projects, by the director. 
Sec. 9-23-3-2. - Initiation, issuance and technical assistance. 
(a)  Initiation. 
(1)  An application for a certificate of appropriateness for any property or properties locally designated as historic may be initiated by the governing body, historic preservation commission, the owner or an occupant of the property, or some other person(s) given authorization by property owner to file said application. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs or plans as required by section 9-23-3-4, or as may be required by the director or historic preservation commission. 
(2)  Any applicant wishing to submit an application for a certificate of appropriateness request must schedule an appointment with the planning department staff in order to review the application for completeness. No such application shall be accepted for processing by the director unless it meets the requirements of this chapter. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. The director is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of applications. 
(b)  Issuance. 
(1)  Alterations and new construction. The historic preservation commission, or the director in the case of a minor work project, shall issue a certificate of appropriateness for alterations or new construction if the proposed plans and specifications conform in design, building materials, setback and landscaping as specified in the adopted design and construction guidelines for locally designated historic districts and landmarks. 
(2)  Demolition or relocation. No demolition or relocation shall be allowed prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. An application for a certificate of appropriateness involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by both pre- and post-demolition (or relocation) plans for review by the historic preservation commission. 
(3)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission, or the director in the case of a minor work project, shall not consider the interior design or other use that has no effect on exterior architectural features. This chapter does apply if the interior revisions materially impact the exterior architectural character. 
(c)  Technical assistance. The historic preservation commission may seek technical advice from the planning department and from outside its members. The director, in the case of minor work projects, may seek technical advice from the historic preservation commission or outside agencies. 
Sec. 9-23-3-3. - Major work projects vs. minor work projects. 
Major and minor work projects shall be further clarified in the approved design and construction guidelines, but are generally defined as follows: 
(a)  Major work projects. A major work project involves a change in the appearance of a building, structure or site and is more substantial in nature than routine maintenance or a minor work project. 
(b)  Minor work projects. A minor work project involves a change that goes beyond ordinary maintenance but does not constitute a significant or character-altering change in the appearance of a building, structure or site. 
All certificates of appropriateness for major work projects shall be reviewed and approved by the historic preservation commission as contained in this chapter. All certificates of appropriateness for minor work projects shall be administratively reviewed and approved by the director in accordance with the approved design and construction guidelines and this Code. The director shall refer minor work projects to the historic preservation commission for review and approval if it is determined that the proposed work project involves alterations, additions, or removals that are substantial, or do not meet the adopted design and construction guidelines, and/or are of a precedent-setting nature. 
In those instances where there is no clear determination of what is considered a major work project versus what is considered a minor work project, as further defined in the approved design and construction guidelines; the director of planning and development shall have the authority to make the determination. 
Sec. 9-23-3-4. - Requirements for submittal. 
All applications for certificates of appropriateness shall at a minimum consist of the following: 
(a)  Pre-filing conference. An applicant must schedule an appointment for a prefiling conference with the planning department staff. 
(b)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the department of planning and development on the department's application forms. 
(c)  Application fee. All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the governing body. 
(d)  Written description. A written narrative detailing the proposed work project, indicating the reason why the work project is being proposed. Include a description of existing site conditions, an explanation of how such conditions will be changed, an explanation of how the work will be performed, and a description of materials to be used. 
(e)  Copy of the recorded grant deed. A copy of the recorded grant deed confirming current ownership by applicant or person(s) giving authorization for the application to be made. 
(f)  Boundary survey/plat. A plat or boundary survey of the property or properties involved in the application. 
(g)  Photographs. Provide one clear set of four (4) × six (6) size recent photographs of the existing building(s) and site. The photographs can be black and white, or color. Polaroids will not be accepted. Type the following information on a self-adhesive label and attach it to the back of each photograph: common name of property, street address and tax parcel number, date of photo, and view/direction. 
(h)  Architectural drawings. 
(1)  Additions and new construction. Architectural drawings of all elevations, providing eight (8) copies if drawn in color or if of a size larger than eight and one-half (8.5) × eleven (11) (only for additions and other new construction work projects). Provide two (2) copies of colored or large-scale size documents involving a minor work project. Architectural drawings stamped by a registered architect shall be required for an addition or new building exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet in size. 
(2)  Signs. Provide a scaled, color rendering of new signage or proposed changes to existing signage, indicating the height and structural supports of the sign, the materials, and illumination. On the plat/boundary survey submitted, locate and label any proposed freestanding signage, indicating the distance from the right-of-way. 
(3)  Fences or walls. Provide a structural plan for any fence or wall, indicating the height, color and materials to be used. 
(i)  Concept plan and landscape plan. A scaled size concept plan, indicating the location of new construction or site changes and existing mature and newly proposed trees and other landscaping, shall be submitted with all applications for a certificate of appropriateness. For major work projects, provide eight (8) copies if drawn in color or if of a size larger than eight and one-half (8.5) × eleven (11). Provide two (2) copies of colored or large-scale size plans involving a minor work project. Said plans must be stamped by a registered engineer, land surveyor, or landscape architect if the work project involves an addition or other new construction exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet in size. 
(j)  Floor plan. A floor plan for any addition or new construction shall be submitted. For major work projects, provide eight (8) copies if drawn in color or if of a size larger than eight and one-half (8.5) × eleven (11). Provide two (2) copies of colored or large-scale size plans involving a minor work project. Said floor plan must be stamped by a registered architect if the work project involves an addition or other new construction exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet in size, demolition or relocation. 
(k)  Pre- and post demolition (relocation) plans. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by both pre- and post-demolition (relocation) plans for review by the historic preservation commission. Provide eight (8) scaled and folded copies, folded to fit into an 8" × 10" size envelop, and one 11" × 17" reproducible copy. Said plans must be stamped by a registered engineer or land surveyor. 
(1)  Pre-plans shall indicate the as-built conditions of the site, depicting the existing floor plan, trees and other landscaping, and other site features; and shall include architectural elevations stamped by a registered architect. 
(2)  Post-plans shall indicate the proposed structural and site changes, including the proposed floor plan, tree and landscape plan, and architectural elevations stamped by a registered architect. 
(l)  Documentation of earlier historic appearance. Provide written documentation, and drawings or photographs when available, of the earlier historic appearance of a building or structure, or site (restoration projects only). 
(m)  Report from certified expert. A report from a certified arborist or forester confirming a mature tree proposed for removal is dead or diseased (only for a minor work project involving the removal of a dead or diseased tree, or a tree that poses of public safety hazard). 
Sec. 9-23-3-5. - Notice of public hearing by the historic preservation commission. 
Before the historic preservation commission may take final action on a proposed certificate of appropriateness application, the historic preservation commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the review of such applications, notice of the hearing shall be given in the following manner: 
(a)  Published in the local newspaper. The published newspaper notice shall be prepared by the planning department and shall include the location of the property, the nature of the proposed work project, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the historic preservation commission. 
(b)  Notice sign. Written upon a notice sign which is to be placed on the subject property by the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. The notice sign, which shall state the date, time and place of the public hearing before the historic preservation commission, shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the property for which the certificate of appropriateness has been requested. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. 
(c)  Notice letters. Written notice shall be mailed to the owner and occupant of the subject property and to owners of property or properties located within the locally designated district, or to the owners of property adjoining a locally designated landmark. The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing by the historic preservation commission. 
Sec. 9-23-3-6. - Investigations and staff findings. 
Within a reasonable period of time after acceptance of a complete application, the director may but shall not be required to send the application or notice thereof out for review by internal municipal departments and external agencies as may be appropriate. Any written comments received in a timely manner as a result of such review shall be submitted for consideration to the historic preservation commission, and the governing body in the case of an appeal, or summarized in a memorandum. Any such comments shall become public records. 
The director may but shall not be required to investigate and write a report of findings regarding the application for a certificate of appropriateness. Any such investigation and report of findings shall if in writing be made available to the applicant and historic preservation commission prior to its public hearing and shall become public records. Copies of the director's report of findings, if provided, shall be available no later than the time of the historic preservation commission's public hearing on the matter. 
Sec. 9-23-3-7. - Criteria to consider for certificates of appropriateness. 
The historic preservation commission shall issue a certificate of appropriateness for alterations or new construction if the proposed plans and specifications conform in design, building materials, placement and orientation, and landscaping as specified in the adopted design and construction guidelines and if the process and procedures specified in this chapter are complied with. In making this determination, the historic preservation commission shall consider the following, in addition to any other pertinent factors: 
(a)  The historical, environmental and architectural value and significance; 
(b)  The architectural style; general design and arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved; and 
(c)  The relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other structures located in the immediate vicinity. 
No demolition or relocation shall be allowed prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, and the historic preservation commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing both the pre- and post-demolition or relocation plans as part of the application. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the historic preservation commission shall apply the procedures set forth in this chapter to determine whether to deny the application or issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
Sec. 9-23-3-8. - Historic preservation commission hearing and action. 
The historic preservation commission shall hold a public hearing and act upon all proposed certificates of appropriateness referred to it (i.e., excluding minor work projects) within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a complete application. The property owner or applicant shall have an opportunity to speak at the public hearing. 
(a)  Historic preservation commission action. The historic preservation commission shall approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the application with modifications, or deny the request. 
(1)  Approval. The historic preservation commission shall approve, or approve with modifications, an application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the exterior appearance of the building, structure or site would not adversely affect the historical, architectural, aesthetic, cultural or environmental character or value of the historic district or individual landmark. 
(2)  Denial. The historic preservation commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in exterior appearance of the building, structure or site would adversely affect the historical, architectural, aesthetic, cultural or environmental character or value of the historic district or individual landmark. 
(b)  Deadline for action. Failure of the historic preservation commission to hold a public hearing and act upon the request within the said forty-five (45) days shall constitute approval of the certificate of appropriateness. 
If the historic preservation commission denies an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall state on the public record its reasons for denial. The director shall mail to the applicant and/or property owner a written action letter, stating the historic preservation commission's reasons for denial; as well as keep a record of such action and reasons. If the historic preservation commission denies the request for a certificate of appropriateness, no building permit shall be issued in those cases in which an exterior material change would require the issuance of a building permit. 
Sec. 9-23-3-9. - Conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work performed is not in accordance with such certificate, the appropriate city department on behalf of the historic preservation commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
The governing body, or the historic preservation commission upon authorization by the governing body, shall be authorized to institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction in order to: prevent any exterior material change in appearance of a designated historic district or landmark, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions and authority of this chapter, and to prevent any illegal act with respect to such historic district or landmark. 
Sec. 9-23-3-10. - Notice of approval and duration of validity. 
Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the owner, occupant and/or applicant. Such notice of approval shall be posted in the form of a sticker on the land development and building permit signs posted on a site undergoing alterations requiring such permits. The design and color of said approval sticker shall be at the discretion of the director. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall expire unless construction is commenced within six (6) months of the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen (18) months and are renewable upon a showing of cause. 
Sec. 9-23-3-11. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to city council. The governing body may approve, modify, or deny the determination made by the historic preservation commission if the governing body finds that the historic preservation commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision, or finds that the determination is unfounded by the provisions of this Code and the adopted design and construction guidelines, and/or are contrary to applicable law. 
An application for appeal must be filed within fifteen (15) days after notification is sent of the historic preservation commission's determination. The application for appeal shall include the reasons for why the determination or decision is unsupported by the provisions of this Code, the adopted design and construction guidelines, and/or are contrary to applicable law. 
Appeals from a decision of the governing body may be taken to a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by law. 
Sec. 9-23-3-12. - Withdrawal. 
An application for certificate of appropriateness may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or entity initiating such a request upon notice to the director, up until the public hearing by the historic preservation commission is closed without restriction on the refiling of said designation application. 
The application may be withdrawn administratively by the director at any point during the public hearing process without restriction on the refilling of said certificate of appropriateness application, whether or not in the form of a modified version. 
Sec. 9-23-3-13. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Department of transportation. The state department of transportation and any of its contractors, including the city and Hall County; performing work funded by the state department of transportation; are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, as provided by the "Georgia Historic Preservation Act" (O.C.G.A. 44-10-27G). 
(b)  City. The city is exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness; provided that the governing body shall notify the historic preservation commission forty-five (45) days prior to an activity that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the historic preservation commission an opportunity to comment. 
Sec. 9-23-3-14. - Incorporation clause. 
This chapter is intended to comply with the provisions of the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. 44-10-20 et. seq., which Act is incorporated by reference in its entirety into this chapter. Where any provision of this chapter is in conflict with any provision of the Act, the Act shall control. Or where this chapter is incomplete in having failed to incorporate a provision necessarily required for the implementation of the Act, such provision of the Act, so as to meet the mandate of the Act, shall be fully complied with. 
CHAPTER 9-23-4. - UNDUE HARDSHIP 

Sec. 9-23-4-1. - Generally. 
Persons may appeal to the historic preservation commission for relief when compliance with the requirements of this article and other article related to the historic preservation overlay zone would create a particular and undue hardship. 
An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. Such relief may be granted only to the extent necessary to alleviate such unnecessary hardship and not as a convenience neither to the applicant or owner, nor to gain any advantage or interest over similarly designated properties. 
Sec. 9-23-4-2. - Initiation. 
An application for an undue hardship variance for any property located within a designated district, or for any designated landmark, may be initiated by the governing body, historic preservation commission, the owner or an occupant of the property, or some other person(s) given authorization by property owner to file said application. An application for an undue hardship variance shall be accompanied by such documentation as required by section 9-23-4-3, or as may be required by the director or historic preservation commission. 
Any applicant wishing to submit an application for an undue hardship must schedule an appointment with the planning department staff in order to review the application for completeness. No such application shall be accepted for processing by the director unless it meets the requirements of this chapter. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. The director is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of applications. 
Sec. 9-23-4-3. - Requirements for submittal. 
To initiate an application for undue hardship, an application must be submitted to the planning department which shall include at minimum the following: 
(a)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the department of planning and development on the department's application forms. 
(b)  Fee. All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the governing body. 
(c)  Written narrative. A written narrative explaining the purpose and intent of the application, detailing the undue hardship. If the undue hardship involves economic reasons, a financial analysis indicating how compliance with the provisions of this article and other articles related to the historic preservation overlay zone imposes an undue economic hardship. 
The historic preservation commission in reviewing an application for undue hardship shall also be authorized to require any additional supporting information necessary to review an application for undue hardship. These may include but are not limited to a boundary survey/plat, architectural renderings, or a concept plan or an as-built survey. 
Sec. 9-23-4-4. - Notice of public hearing by the historic preservation commission. 
Before the historic preservation commission may take final action on an application for undue hardship, the historic preservation commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the review of such applications, notice of the hearing shall be given in the following manner: 
(a)  Published in the local newspaper. The published newspaper notice shall be prepared by the planning department and shall include the location of the property, the nature of the request, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the historic preservation commission. 
(b)  Notice letters. Written notice shall be mailed to the owner and occupant of the subject property and to owners of property or properties located within the locally designated district, or to the owners of property adjoining a locally designated landmark. The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing by the historic preservation commission. 
Sec. 9-23-4-5. - Historic preservation commission hearing and action. 
An undue hardship variance may be granted in whole or in part, or with conditions, in such an individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the historic preservation commission that compliance with such provision will result in a hardship to the property or owner that is substantially unwarranted by the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, and the need for consistency among all properties similarly designated and of: 
(a)  A similar historical, environmental and architectural value and significance; 
(b)  Architectural style, general design and arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved; and 
(c)  The relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other structures located in the designated district or upon the designated landmark. 
In no case shall an undue hardship variance be granted by the historic preservation commission for a condition created by the applicant, including the result of an unwise investment decision or real estate transaction. 
Sec. 9-23-4-6. - Effect and duration of validity. 
Approval of an application for an undue hardship variance on a property located within the city shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the historic preservation commission and shall be effective for a period of twelve (12) months. If no action is taken by the applicant to implement the purpose of the application within twelve (12) months from the date of approval, said approval shall become null and void. 
An undue hardship variance shall be specific to the request made by the current applicant and shall not stay with the property, as is the case for designation. 
Sec. 9-23-4-7. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of an undue hardship may appeal such determination to governing body. The governing body may approve, modify, or deny the determination made by the historic preservation commission if the governing body finds that the historic preservation commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision, or finds that the determination is unfounded by the provisions of this Code and are contrary to applicable law. 
An application for appeal must be filed within fifteen (15) days after notification is sent of the historic preservation commission's determination. The application for appeal shall include the reasons for why the determination or decision is unsupported by the provisions of this Code and are contrary to applicable law. 
Appeals from a decision of the governing body may be taken to a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by law. 
Article 9-24 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

 
CHAPTER 9-24-1. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 9-24-1-1. - Fees. 
From time to time, the governing body may adopt fees for the issuance of permits, the submission of applications, the provision of inspections, and such other activities and authorizations as regulated by this Code. 
Sec. 9-24-1-2. - Right to inspect. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, inspections personnel of the city or county, the state soil and water conservation commission, the Hall County Soil and Water Conservation District, or the state environmental protection division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
Sec. 9-24-1-3. - Director of planning and development. 
The director of planning and development or designee shall have all the necessary powers explicitly provided or reasonably implied in connection with the administration of this Code, including but not limited to those enumerated in this section. Where such provisions indicate the director of planning and development has the authority to review and approve a given application or activity, said authority shall also include the denial of such application or activity. 
(a)  Schedules. To adopt schedules of dates, times and places as appropriate and necessary for the processing of applications established by this Code. 
(b)  Administrative procedures and forms. To prepare administrative procedures, guidelines, application forms, to tend to other administrative details not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, and to implement the provisions of this Code. 
(c)  Approval of preliminary and final plats. To review and approve preliminary plats and final plats as also specifically provided in section 9-13-1-2. 
(d)  Land development plans. To review and approve or deny land development plans and issue or refuse to issue land development permits in accordance with chapter 9-13-7. 
(e)  Home occupations. To review and approve home occupations as specifically provided in section 9-10-4-12. 
(f)  Special temporary outdoor events. To review and authorize, and to issue permits for special temporary outdoor events as provided in section 9-10-8-2. 
(g)  Nonconforming situations. To compel an applicant to completely correct or reduce the noncompliance of nonconforming situations, pursuant to authority and subject to the limitations of chapter 9-11-5. 
(h)  Modify and extend application requirements. To waive certain requirements, and to require additional information be submitted, for applications submitted pursuant to article 9-22 and article 9-23. 
(i)  Public notices. To provide notices or require the notice of applications submitted pursuant to article 9-22 and article 9-23. 
(j)  Recommendations on applications. To provide recommendations on annexation, rezoning and special use applications to the planning and appeals board and governing body, as may be appropriate, and as authorized in article 9-22. Also, the director may provide findings or recommendations regarding zoning variances to the planning and appeals board. 
(k)  Certificates of appropriateness. To review, approve, and issue certificates of appropriateness for minor work projects and to provide findings and if appropriate recommendations to the historic preservation whether to issue certificates of appropriateness for major work projects pursuant to chapter 9-23-1. 
(l)  Permits for tree removal. To issue permits when required for the removal of certain trees as specified in section 9-16-5-7. 
(m)  Secretary, planning and appeals board. To serve as secretary to the planning and appeals board, as provided in section 9-21-1-10, or to appoint a planning commission clerk or other designee to serve in such capacity. 
(n)  Inspections and investigations. To conduct such investigations as he or she may reasonably deem necessary to assure or compel compliance with the requirements and provisions of this Code, even if such responsibilities are delegated to code enforcement officers or other administrative or enforcement officers of the city. 
(o)  Enter property. To enter at reasonable times upon any property for purposes of investigation, inspection and enforcement. 
(p)  Enforcement. To enforce any and all provisions of this Code. 
(q)  Delegation. To delegate the functions and responsibilities of the director's position to other personnel in the planning and development department. 
(r)  Interpretation. To interpret the provisions of this Code, as provided in section 9-2-1-1. Also, when the administrative or enforcement responsibilities of this article are in question, the director of planning and development shall make such interpretation. 
(s)  Maintain official zoning maps and overlay zone maps. To maintain and update the official zoning map of the city as provided in section 9-4-1-3 and overlay zone maps of the city as provided in section 9-4-2-3. 
(t)  Determine zoning boundaries. To determine the location of the boundary of zoning districts and overlay zones when the exact location cannot be determined, as provided in section 9-4-3-7. 
(u)  Administrative variances. To review and approve applications for administrative variances, as provided under chapter 9-24-3 and as specifically provided in any other chapters or sections of this code not specifically referenced in said chapter. 
Sec. 9-24-1-4. - Director of public works. 
The director of public works shall have all the necessary powers explicitly provided in connection with the administration of this Code, as they pertain to functions assigned to said director, including but not limited to those enumerated in this section. Where such provisions indicate the director of public works has the authority to review and approve a given application or activity, said authority shall also include the denial of such application or activity. 
(a)  Inspection. To periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Delegation. To delegate the functions and responsibilities to other personnel in the public works department. 
(c)  Land development plans. To review land development plans and review streets and non-utility related public improvements and recommendations for acceptance of public improvements by the governing body as provided in article 9-13. 
(d)  Promulgation of additional technical standards. To promulgate additional technical standards and construction specifications for land development improvements not already specified by this Code, including but not limited to streets, storm drainage systems, driveways, curb cuts, and parking lots, as specifically provided in section 9-13-1-2. 
(e)  Traffic impact analyses. To administer the provisions of chapter 9-22-5 regarding the technical review of traffic impact analyses, and to promulgate and require the use of additional technical specifications for conducting traffic impact analyses, as provided in section 9-22-5-12. 
(f)  Flood hazard area regulations. To fulfill the functions and duties assigned under article 9-15 relative to flood plain management regulations. 
(g)  Enforcement. To enforce those provisions of this Code that relate to the primary activities of the director of public works. 
(h)  Airport zones. To direct a property owner to that a tree or structure that violates airport overlay zone requirements be removed or modified to the extent necessary to comply with the applicable height limit, as provided in section 9-8-1-9; and to review and recommend variances with regard to airport overlay zone requirements as provided in section 9-8-1-11. 
(i)  Administrative variances. To review and approve applications for administrative variances, pursuant to chapter 9-24-3, but only as explicitly permitted in this Code. 
Sec. 9-24-1-5. - Director of public utilities. 
The director of public utilities shall have all the necessary powers explicitly provided in connection with the administration of this Code, as they pertain to functions assigned to said director, including but not limited to those enumerated in this section. Where such provisions indicate the director of public utilities has the authority to review and approve a given application or activity, said authority shall also include the denial of such application or activity. 
(a)  Approval of public utilities. To review and approve the design of public utilities for subdivisions and land developments. 
(b)  Inspection. To periodically inspect the sites of utility installations for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Code. 
(c)  Delegation. To delegate the functions and responsibilities to other personnel in the public utilities department. 
(d)  Promulgation of additional technical standards. The director of public utilities is authorized to promulgate additional technical standards and construction specifications for land development improvements not already specified by this Code, including but not limited to water and sanitary sewer systems and utilities. 
(e)  Enforcement. To enforce those provisions of this Code that relate to the primary activities of the director of public utilities. 
Sec. 9-24-1-6. - Building official. 
The building official shall have all the necessary powers explicitly provided in connection with the administration of this Code, as they pertain to functions assigned to the building official, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Building permits and certificates of occupancy. To review, approve, and issue building permits and certificates of occupancy, and to administer all provisions of article 9-20. 
(b)  Delegation. To delegate the functions and responsibilities to one or more building inspectors. 
(c)  Enforcement. To enforce those provisions of this Code that relate to the primary activities of the building official. 
CHAPTER 9-24-2. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 9-24-2-1. - Complaints. 
Whenever a violation of this Code occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint with the designated code enforcement officer of the city. Such complaint shall state clearly and fully the causes and bases of the complaint. The designated code enforcement officer shall record properly such complaint, investigate, and take action thereon as may be appropriate to enforce this Code. 
Sec. 9-24-2-2. - Enforcement responsibilities generally. 
If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing, development, building construction, or use or other activities has failed to comply with any provision of this Code, the city through the appropriate official as provided in this article shall enforce the provisions of this Code as more fully set forth in this chapter. 
The director of planning and development, the director of public works, the director of public utilities, and the building official shall have responsibilities and the authority to enforce the provisions of this Code as provided in this chapter. City marshals, code enforcement officers, land development inspectors, planners, utility inspectors, and building inspectors, if delegated such responsibilities, shall have such authority and responsibility to enforce the provisions of this Code assigned to the officer delegating such authority. 
Sec. 9-24-2-3. - Enforcement responsibilities specifically. 
Without limiting the generality of this chapter, enforcement responsibilities are logically divided into different activities regulated under this Code. It is the intent of this chapter to assign enforcement responsibilities to the administrative personnel who has primary review responsibility for that particular activity, but that intent shall not preclude one or more administrative officers assigned enforcement responsibilities by this article from enforcing a provision of this Code that is not a primary review responsibility. 
Sec. 9-24-2-4. - Enforcement techniques. 
Administrative officers shall have at their disposal the enforcement techniques provided in this chapter, subject to the limitations specified in this chapter. 
Sec. 9-24-2-5. - Written notice to comply. 
When violations are discovered, a written notice to comply shall be served upon the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property. Each of these persons shall be assumed to be individually responsible for compliance with this Code. 
The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the violating activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this Code. 
Sec. 9-24-2-6. - Stop work order. 
Upon notice from the city, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. 
Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where in the opinion of the director of planning and development, director of public works, or building official an emergency exists (whichever has enforcement responsibilities), no written notice shall be required. 
Such stop work order may be lifted at such time as the enforcing officer is satisfied that a good faith effort is being made to comply with applicable provisions of this Code. Nothing shall prevent said officer from reissuing a stop work order where warranted. 
Sec. 9-24-2-7. - Injunction. 
The city through authorized personnel may issue an injunction to cause a violation of this Code to cease or to be corrected. 
Sec. 9-24-2-8. - Revocation of permit or license. 
The city may suspend or invalidate existing land development permits and building permits in order to enforce the provisions of this Code. 
The city is authorized and directed to deny and withhold permits or permissions on any new project or application pursuant to this Code where the applicant, applicant's business or agent has failed or refused to comply with this Code. 
The city may revoke business registrations, work permit or other authorization for the unlawful conduct of any activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
Sec. 9-24-2-9. - Bond forfeiture. 
The city may deem that a person required to post a bond (e.g., performance bond or landscape bond) pursuant to this Code is in violation of the provisions of this Code and may find a violator of this Code to have forfeited such bond. The city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to bring the unlawful activity into compliance. 
Sec. 9-24-2-10. - Withholding of utility service. 
The city may request or direct an applicable utility service provider to withhold utility service to any property on which a violation is alleged to have occurred. 
Sec. 9-24-2-11. - Refusal of plat recording. 
The city may request or direct the clerk of superior court to refuse or deny the recording of a final subdivision plat that is found to be in violation of this Code. 
Sec. 9-24-2-12. - Citation. 
The city shall have authority to issue citations and to prosecute violations before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 9-24-2-13. - Other necessary actions. 
Administrative officers with authority and responsibility for enforcement as described in this article shall be authorized to take any other appropriate or necessary action to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 9-24-2-14. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction by the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-1-7 of the City Code. Violations of this Code may be tried upon citation with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. 
CHAPTER 9-24-3. - ADMINISTRATIVE VARIANCES 

Sec. 9-24-3-1. - Authority. 
The director of planning and development shall have the authority to upon application grant or deny administrative variances from certain provisions of this Code as enumerated in this article, where in his or her opinion, the intent of this Code can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting an administrative variance. 
Sec. 9-24-3-2. - Administrative variances by the director of planning and development. 
In addition to any other administrative variances specifically authorized by this Code, the following provisions of this Code may be administratively varied by the director of planning and development, subject to the specific limitations of this section. Where this section omits specific reference to the director of planning and development's authority to grant an administrative variance, and such authority is clearly evident in a provision of this Code, the omission from this section shall not be construed as limiting the director's authority. 
(a)  Front building setback for a principal building, reduction not to exceed seven (7) feet. 
(b)  Side building setback for a principal building, reduction not to exceed three (3) feet. 
(c)  Rear building setback for a principal building, reduction not to exceed five (5) feet. 
(d)  Setback for an accessory building, reduction not to exceed two (2) feet. 
(e)  Maximum building coverage, maximum impervious surface coverage, not to exceed five (5) percent above the applicable maximum. This provision shall not apply in the North Oconee Water Supply Watershed overlay zone. 
(f)  Maximum height of a building, not to exceed five (5) feet above the applicable maximum. This provision shall not apply to height limits imposed in the airport overlay zones. 
(g)  Minimum open space, reduction of not more than ten (10) percent of total minimum required landscaped open space. For example, a minimum open space requirement of twenty (20) percent of the lot can not be reduced administratively below ten (10) percent by the director. 
(h)  Landscape strip minimum widths, reduction not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the minimum required width. For example, if the minimum landscape strip width is ten (10) feet, the director may authorize a reduction to no less than eight (8) feet. The director may also authorize an average width of landscape strip rather than a minimum. 
(i)  The required number of parking spaces, reduction not to exceed twenty (20) percent below the minimum required, and addition not to exceed ten (10) percent above the maximum permitted number of spaces. 
Sec. 9-24-3-3. - Administrative variances by the director of public works. 
This Code authorizes the director of public works in certain instances to vary or waive requirements (as distinguished from design variances as specified in article 9-13). In such instances, the director of public works may exercise such authority upon application for such an administrative variance to the director of planning and development, which shall be forwarded to the public works director for review and approval, conditional approval, or disapproval, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 9-24-3-4. - Requirements for administrative variance applications. 
To initiate an application for administrative variance, an application must be submitted to the planning department which shall include at minimum the following: 
(a)  A completed application form supplied by the department and a statement of hardship form included with application form must be completed by the applicant. 
(b)  A non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the governing body. 
(c)  A written narrative explaining and justifying the request; 
(d)  Plat or boundary survey. One scale copy and one 8.5" × 11" or 11" × 17" reproducible size copy of a plat or boundary survey of the property or properties involved in the application. 
The planning department in reviewing an application shall also be authorized to require any supporting information necessary to review an administrative variance on the record necessary to resolve the request for relief. These may include but are not limited to architectural renderings, concept plans or as-built surveys. 
Sec. 9-24-3-5. - Review for completeness. 
The planning department shall review the application for completeness within ten (10) days of the published closing date. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. 
Sec. 9-24-3-6. - Criteria for approval of administrative variances. 
In acting upon applications for administrative variances, the director of planning and development (or, if he or she has jurisdiction, the director of public works) shall consider whether one or more of the following condition(s) exist to justify or provide grounds for disapproval of said request: 
(a)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, location within or near environmentally sensitive area, or topography; 
(b)  The application of this Code to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
(c)  There are conditions that are peculiar to the property which adversely affect its reasonable use or usability as currently zoned. 
Sec. 9-24-3-7. - Decision. 
In rendering a decision on an administrative variance application, the director of planning and development (or, if he or she has jurisdiction, the director of public works) shall consider all information supplied by the applicant. Within twenty-one (21) calendar days of receipt of a completed application for administrative variance, the director of planning and development may: 
(a)  Approve the application as submitted; 
(b)  Approve the application with conditions; or 
(c)  Deny the application. 
Sec. 9-24-3-8. - Notice of action. 
Notice of the action on an administrative variance shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant. If the application for administrative variance is denied, the reasons for denial shall be stated in the notice of action. 
Sec. 9-24-3-9. - Finality and variance remedy. 
The action of the director of planning and development on the administrative variance application (or, if he or she has jurisdiction, the director of public works) shall be final and may not be appealed as an administrative decision pursuant to chapter 9-22-7; provided, however, that any person who is denied an application for administrative variance pursuant to this chapter may file an application for variance with the planning and appeals board pursuant to chapter 9-22-6. 
Sec. 9-24-3-10. - Records. 
The director of planning and development shall keep public records of all administrative variances applied for and granted pursuant to this chapter. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since Ordinance No. 05-37, as amended. Ordinances adopted since Ordinance No. 05-37, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 