THE CODE OF ECHOLS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

 
OFFICIALS 
of 
ECHOLS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
J. Lamar Raulerson 
Chairman 
____________ 
E. Devane Ritter 
Louis E. Corbett 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Warren Turner 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Brenda Stalvey 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Echols County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
This 2009 republication includes all amendatory legislation through May 5, 2008, and was accomplished under the supervision of Mary Summers, Editor. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Ronald K. McLaughlin, Senior Code Attorney, and Sherry Allbritton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Jackie L. Carter, EMA Director, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Echols County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Echols County, Georgia. 
©   Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and Echols County, Georgia. 2003. 
PART I - SPECIAL ACTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—This Part I is a compilation of local legislation enacted by the Georgia General Assembly which was deemed advisable to print. Enacting and other nonsubstantive language has been deleted from each act printed herein. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For ease of reference and indexing, section numbers have been arbitrarily assigned to the provisions of this part and history notes have been provided indicating the source of each section. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 1.1. - Commissioners; election, terms, etc. 
There shall be a Board of Commissioners of Echols County to consist of three persons to be elected by the voters of Echols County and commissioned by the Governor. Said commissioners shall hold office for terms of four years from January 1, 1981, and until their respective successors have been elected and qualified. Said commissioners shall be elected at the November general election in 1980, and at the November general election every four years thereafter. There shall be three posts on said board designated as "Post 1," "Post 2," and "Post 3." Each candidate for office on said board of commissioners shall be required to designate by number the post to which he/she seeks to be elected. Elections of members shall be held in accordance with the "Georgia Election Code." 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. sess., page 2054, § 2; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3727, § 1)
Sec. 1.2. - Members elected in 1968. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 1.1 to the contrary, candidates elected to the board in the 1968 general election to take office on January 1, 1969, shall serve for a term of office of four years. Thereafter the terms of office of the members of the board of commissioners of roads and revenues of Echols County shall be for four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 3418, § 1)
Sec. 1.3. - Bond, oath. 
Before entering upon the duties of the office, each of said commissioners shall give bond, payable to the Governor, constituting an obligation of each of said commissioners, conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties as required by law, the same as other county officers, which bond shall be executed by some bonding company authorized to do business in Georgia. The probate judge of said county shall administer the oaths of office to said commissioners, but shall not administer the oath of office nor deliver the commissions to any of said commissioners until said bond has been executed and filed with the probate judge as other bonds of county officers. The premium on said bonds shall be paid out of the funds belonging to the county. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. sess., page 2054, § 3)
Sec. 1.4. - Duties. 
Said board of commissioners shall have exclusive jurisdiction, when sitting for county purposes, in governing and controlling all county property in accordance with law; to levy taxes, licenses, and other levies, except those specially delegated to other officers by law; to establish, alter and abolish all county roads [and] bridges; to examine, allow and settle all claims against the county; to cause to be examined and audited the accounts of all the officers of the county not otherwise provided by law; to receive and pay out all fines and forfeitures and to require, under penalty of having their office declared vacated, a complete and regular accounting of all funds coming into the hands of the sheriff, clerk of the superior court, the county court, judge and clerk, and other officers or persons receiving public funds and forfeitures, and all other funds belonging to the county, or funds in which the county has an interest, except school funds, at such time or times as they shall deem needful; and shall have authority to make all rules and regulations needful and necessary in carrying out all their duties. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. sess., page 2054, § 4)
Sec. 1.5. - Compensation. 
Said commissioners shall pay themselves per month each, which shall be in lieu of all salary or other compensation for their respective services. They shall pay to themselves their actual expenses incurred in performing their duties that require their presence outside the County of Echols, but not otherwise. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. sess., page 2054, § 5; 1992 Ga. Laws, page 5381, § 1)
Sec. 1.6. - Chairman. 
Said commissioners shall meet on the first Thursday of each month, and at such other times as they shall, by majority vote, designate, or when called by the chairman. They shall elect from among their number a chairman, and a vice-chairman, who shall have such power and authority, in accordance with this Act, as they shall by majority designate. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. sess., page 2054, § 6)
Sec. 1.7. - Clerk. 
Said commissioners shall elect a clerk biennially, who shall be paid per month. Such clerk shall keep all the minutes and other records of said commissioners, and shall record in the minutes all action taken by said commissioners. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. sess., page 2054, § 7; 1962 Ga. Laws, page 2738, § 1)
Sec. 1.8. - County attorney. 
Said commissioners may at any time appoint a county attorney whose duty it shall be to counsel with said commissioners on legal matters and perform such other legal services as may be required of him. He/she shall be paid for services rendered. This section shall not be construed to prevent said commissioners from employing said county attorney or other attorneys for extraordinary services as may be required for litigation. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. sess., page 2054, § 8; 1969 Ga. Laws, page 3677, § 2)
Sec. 1.9. - Superintendent of roads. 
Said commissioners may employ a superintendent of county roads and such other employees as they may deem necessary in order to work the roads and perform such other duties as may come within the power and under the jurisdiction of the commissioners. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. sess., page 2054, § 9; 1955 Ga. Laws, page 2040, § 3)
Sec. 1.10. - Funds. 
Said commissioners shall maintain a county depository or depositories in which money receipts shall be deposited and from which withdrawals shall be made by checks. The clerk shall keep a complete and accurate record of all county funds in such manner as said commissioners shall provide, and which shall be simple and easy to understand and keep, but full and complete. No withdrawals from the depositories shall be made without approval of chairman [or designee] and checks require two signatures. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. sess., page 2054, § 10; 1955 Ga. Laws, page 2040, § 4)
Sec. 1.11. - Incumbents. 
The present commissioners of said county shall serve until the expiration of the terms for which elected, and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. sess., page 2054, § 11)
Sec. 1.12. - Records, reports. 
All the books and records of said commissioners shall be open to inspection by the grand jury and the public at large at all reasonable times. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, Jan.-Feb. sess., page 2054, § 12)
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2.1—2.20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SHERIFF 

Sec. 2.21. - Fee system. 
The present mode of compensating the sheriff of Echols County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, an annual salary for such officer is prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
(1965 Ga. Laws, page 2918, § 1)
Sec. 2.22. - Salary. 
The sheriff shall receive an annual salary per Georgia Code. 
(1965 Ga. Laws, page 2918, § 2; 1975 Ga. Laws, page 3664, § 1)
Sec. 2.23. - Fees. 
After the effective date of this Act, said officer shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed him/her as compensation for services in any capacity, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the 15th day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, the sheriff shall furnish the governing authority of the county a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. 
(1965 Ga. Laws, page 2918, § 3)
Sec. 2.24. - Expenses. 
The county shall pay from its general fund such necessary expenses, the increment of which may be authorized by the governing authority of the county for communication equipment, office supplies, and authorized travel outside the limits of said county per mile. It shall also reimburse the sheriff for the cost of meals for prisoners per Georgia Code. All other expenses, including automobile expense, shall be paid from the sheriff's budget. 
(1965 Ga. Laws, page 2918, § 4)
Secs. 2.25—2.50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAX COMMISSIONER 

Sec. 2.51. - Created. 
The offices of Tax Receiver and Tax Collector of Echols County are hereby consolidated and combined into the one office of Tax Commissioner of Echols County. The rights, duties and liabilities of said office of tax commissioner, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be the same as those imposed upon tax receivers and tax collectors by the laws of this State. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2977, § 1)
Sec. 2.52. - Election. 
The first election for the office of tax commissioner created herein shall be held at the same time as the election for other county officers of Echols County is held in 1972, and the person so elected shall take office on January 1, 1973, for a term of four (4) years and until his/her successor is elected and qualified. All future elections for tax commissioner shall likewise be held at the same time as elections for other county officers, and all future tax commissioners shall likewise have a term of office of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Nothing herein shall affect the term of office of the present Tax Collector and Tax Receiver of Echols County, and the terms of such tax collector and tax receiver shall continue through December 31, 1972. Should any vacancy occur in the office of tax commissioner, the same shall be filled as vacancies are filled in the office of tax collector. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2977, § 2)
Sec. 2.53. - Salary. 
The Tax Commissioner shall be compensated by an annual salary, per Georgia Code, in equal monthly installments from the funds of Echols County. The governing authority of Echols County, at its discretion, shall be authorized to increase the annual salary provided for herein by 5% at the beginning of each new four-year term of office, and the first such increase may become effective on January 1, 1977, at the discretion of said governing authority. 
(1976 Ga. Laws, page 4005, § 1)
Sec. 2.54. - Taxes due. 
All taxes due and payable at the time the tax commissioner takes office shall continue to be due and payable until paid. All tax fi. fas. theretofore issued shall have full force and effect and be collectible as issued. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2977, § 3)
Sec. 2.55. - Collection of taxes; appointment of personnel. 
All fees, commissions, costs and other income collected by the tax commissioner, including those commissions allowed by an Act approved March 9, 1955 (1955 Ga. Laws, page 659), as amended, relating to the sale of motor vehicle license plates by local tax officials, notwithstanding the fact that such services for which the commissions are derived, may have been performed in the capacity of an agent for the State Revenue Department, and an Act relating to commissions on taxes collected in excess of a certain percentage of the taxes due according to the Tax Net Digest, approved January 17, 1938 (1937-1938 Ga. Laws, ex. sess., page 297), as amended, shall be the property of Echols County and once each month shall be turned over to the fiscal authority of said county by the tax commissioner with a detailed, itemized and sworn statement showing the source from which such fees, commissions, costs and other income were collected. The tax commissioner shall have authority to appoint a deputy or such other personnel as he/she may deem necessary to aid him/her in the conduct of his/her office; however, compensation for personnel shall be included in the tax collector's budget. All reasonable expenses incurred by the tax commissioner in operating and discharging the official duties of his/her office, except for the compensation of personnel, shall be paid by the county from county funds; however, no equipment or fixtures for said office may be purchased without the prior approval of the county commissioners. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2977, § 4)
Sec. 2.56. - Office hours. 
The tax commissioner shall not be required to leave his/her office or make rounds for the purpose of receiving returns or collecting taxes. The tax commissioner shall keep his/her office open for business per Georgia Code. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2977, § 5)
Sec. 2.57. - Oath. 
The tax commissioner, before entering upon the duties of his/her office, shall take the oath prescribed for the tax collector and shall give bond as provided for the tax collector. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2977, § 6)
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 3.1—3.20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER AUTHORITY 

Sec. 3.21. - Short Title. 
This may be cited as the "Echols County Water Authority Act." 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 1)
Sec. 3.22. - Echols County Water Authority. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic, to be known as the Echols County Water Authority which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The Authority shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be residents of Echols County, Georgia, and shall at the time of appointment be users of the facilities of the Authority. The provision as to being a user shall not apply to the members of the Authority initially appointed. 
The initial members of the Authority shall be the following named persons and each of said persons shall serve as a member of the Authority for the number of years set forth opposite their respective names: 

 
Thereafter, members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the users of the facilities of the Authority at its annual meeting to be held in January of each year and such members so appointed shall serve for a term of five (5) years and until their successors shall have been appointed. Any member of the Authority may be appointed to succeed himself. 
Immediately after their appointment, the members of the Authority shall enter upon their duties. They shall elect one of their number as chairman, another as vice-chairman, and may also elect a secretary and/or treasurer, who need not necessarily be a member of the Authority. The chairman and vice-chairman, secretary and treasurer shall serve for a period of one year and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Three members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum. 
In the event of a vacancy by reason of death, disqualification, resignation, or other reason, the remaining members of the Authority, by majority vote, shall appoint a person meeting the qualifications above set out for membership to serve until the next annual meeting of the users of the facilities of the Authority, when such vacancy shall be filled by majority vote of said users. 
No vacancy on the Authority shall impair the rights of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and perform all of the duties of the Authority. 
The chairman of the Authority shall not be entitled to vote upon any issue, motion, or resolution, except in the case of a tie vote of the other members voting on said motion, resolution, or question. 
The members of the Authority shall serve without compensation provided that all members shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. The Authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 2)
Sec. 3.23. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)	The word "Authority" shall mean the Echols County Water Authority created by Section 3.22 of this Act. 
(b)	The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition and construction of all necessary and usual water facilities useful and necessary for the obtaining of one or more sources of water supply, the treatment of water and the distribution and sale of water to users and consumers, including counties and municipalities, for the purpose of resale, within and without the territorial boundaries of Echols County and the operation, maintenance, additions, improvements, and extensions of such facilities so as to assure an adequate water utility system deemed by the Authority necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of such type of undertaking; the acquisition and construction of all necessary and usual facilities useful and necessary for the gathering of waste matter, individual and industrial, the treatment of such waste including the acquisition and construction of treatment plants, lagoons, without and within the territorial boundaries of Echols County, and the operation, maintenance, additions, improvements, and extensions of such facilities deemed necessary by the Authority to be necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of a sanitary and storm sewer system. 
(c)	The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of acquisition of existing facilities, the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project, the placing of the same in operation, and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(d)	The terms "revenue bonds" and "bonds" as used in this Act, shall mean revenue certificates as defined and provided for in the Revenue Certificate Law of Georgia, (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761, as amended) and such type of obligations may be issued by the Authority as authorized under said Revenue Certificate Law and in addition, shall also mean obligations of the Authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for in this Act. 
(e)	Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the Authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the Authority therefrom will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued for the cost of such project or projects. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 3)
Sec. 3.24. - Powers. 
The Authority shall have powers: 
(a)	To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure;
(b)	To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease, and dispose of, real and personal property, of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)	To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property, or rights of easements therein, or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the name so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the Authority, the Authority being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act, and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action or proceedings as may be just to the Authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; and if the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any other lands the title to which shall then be in the State of Georgia, the Governor is hereby authorized to convey, for and in behalf of the State, title to such lands to the Authority upon payment to the State Treasurer for the credit of the general fund of the State, the reasonable value of such lands, such value to be determined by three appraisers to be agreed upon by the Governor and the chairman of the Authority; 
(d)	To appoint, select and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(e)	To make contracts, leases, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases or projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and any and all persons, firms and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the State are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements, with the Authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations and counties and to the Authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of water and related services and facilities by the Authority to such municipal corporations and counties for a term not exceeding fifty (50) years; 
(f)	To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the Authority or from such proceeds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(g)	To accept loans and/or grants of money, materials, or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may require; 
(h)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(i)	To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, provided the same is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this State; and 
(j)	To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 4)
Sec. 3.25. - Revenue Bonds. 
The Authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the Authority created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds of the Authority, in a sum not to exceed one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars outstanding at any one time, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund hereby provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding nine per cent (9%) per annum, payable at such time or times, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, or at such times exceeding 40 years as may hereafter be authorized by the bonding laws of the State of Georgia, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be redeemable before maturity, at the option of the Authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority in the resolution for the issuance of bonds. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 5)
Sec. 3.26. - Same, form; denominations; registration, place of payment. 
The Authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the State. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the Authority may determine. Provisions may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 6)
Sec. 3.27. - Same; signatures; seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds, or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon, shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes, the same as if he/she had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the Authority and the official seal of the Authority shall be affixed thereto and attached by the secretary of the Authority and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the signature or facsimile signature of the chairman of the Authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signature of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the Authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 7)
Sec. 3.28. - Same; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instrument laws of this State. Such bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the State. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 8)
Sec. 3.29. - Same; sale; price. 
The Authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the Authority, but no such sale shall be made at a price so low as to require the payment of interest on the money received therefor at more than nine percent (9%) per annum, computed with relation to the absolute maturity of the bonds in accordance with standard tables of bond values, excluding, however, from such computation, the amount of any premium to be paid on redemption of any bond prior to maturity. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 9)
Sec. 3.30. - Same; proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds, or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued, to provide the amount of any deficit, which, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds, or in the trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same, and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund, without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into the fund, hereinafter provided, for the payment of principal and interest of such bonds. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 10)
Sec. 3.31. - Same; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the Authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 11)
Sec. 3.32. - Same; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The Authority may also provide for the replacement of any bonds which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 12)
Sec. 3.33. - Conditions precedent to issuance; object of issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings, or the happening of any conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the Authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution, providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the Authority by a majority of its members. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 13)
Sec. 3.34. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Echols County or a pledge of the faith and credit of said county, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for, and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate said county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor, or to make any appropriation for the payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this Section. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 14)
Sec. 3.35. - Same; trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the Authority, any issuance of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the State. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be received by the Authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the project, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the Authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor, and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other monies be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this State to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the Authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the Authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 15)
Sec. 3.36. - Same; to whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The Authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person, who, or any agency, bank or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 16)
Sec. 3.37. - Same; sinking funds. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such have been issued unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the Authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds not pledged, from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking funds shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be found for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 17)
Sec. 3.38. - Same; remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia, or granted hereunder, or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the Authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 18)
Sec. 3.39. - Same; refunding bonds. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds of the Authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the Authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 19)
Sec. 3.40. - Same; venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such Authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Echols County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 20)
Sec. 3.41. - Same; validation. 
Bonds of the Authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937, as amended. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the Authority for services and facilities of the water system for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated, and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the Authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, against the Authority issuing the same, and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality contracting with the said Echols County Water Authority. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 21)
Sec. 3.42. - Same; interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said Authority or of its officers, employees, or agents, shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority, will be created which will compete with the Authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the rights and interests of the holders of such bonds, nor will the State itself so compete with the Authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the Authority and, the holder of any such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 22)
Sec. 3.43. - Monies received considered trust funds. 
All monies received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants, or other contributions, or as revenues, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 23)
Sec. 3.44. - Purpose of the Authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this Act, the general purpose of the Authority is declared to be that of acquiring an adequate source or sources of water supply, treatment of such water, and thereafter the distribution of same to [the] Echols County water system, and the various townships and citizens in said county and environs, including adjoining counties and municipalities located therein; and further for the general purpose of gathering and treatment of waste, both individual and industrial, but such general purpose shall not restrict the Authority from selling and delivering water direct to consumers in those areas where there does not now exist water distribution systems or furnishing sewer facilities to such consumers and areas where neither any county nor municipality deems it desirable or feasible to furnish water in such locality. 
The Authority shall also have the authority, where it deems it feasible, to sell its products and services to consumers, governmental agencies, or governmental instrumentalities of adjoining states provided the laws of the adjoining state do not prohibit or tax said activity. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 24)
Sec. 3.45. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls, or charges, and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls, or charges, for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvements, betterment or extension of the water and sewer utility system, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 25)
Sec. 3.46. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the Authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act, including the basis on which water and sewer service and facilities shall be furnished. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 26)
Sec. 3.47. - Tax exempt status of Authority. 
The properties of the Authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the State of Georgia, and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income; and such properties and the Authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any city, county, or the State or any political subdivision thereof. The tax exemption herein provided shall not include any exemption from sales and use tax on property purchased by the Authority or for use by the Authority. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 27)
Sec. 3.48. - Tort immunity. 
The Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as Echols County; and the officers, agents and employees of the Authority when in the performance of the work of the Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents and employees of Echols County when in [the] performance of their public duties or work of the county. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 28)
Sec. 3.49. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing Sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 29)
Sec. 3.50. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the State and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to affect the purposes thereof. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 30)
Sec. 3.51. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 31)
Sec. 3.52. - Preservation of Powers. 
This Act does not in any way take from Echols County or any municipality located [within Echols County] or any adjoining county the authority to own, operate and maintain water or sewer systems or issue revenue certificates as is provided by the Revenue Certificate Law of Georgia. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2981, § 32)
Secs. 3.53—3.70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Printed in this division is 1965 Ga. Laws, page 710, which was an amendment to the state constitution. This amendment was continued in force and effect by 1987 Ga. Laws, page 3827.

Sec. 3.71. - Proposed amendment. 
Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
A.	Created. There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in Echols County in the State of Georgia to be known as the Echols County Development Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of Echols County and a public corporation and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the "Authority." 
B.	Members. The Authority shall consist of five members who shall serve for a term of five years and who shall be eligible for reappointment. The members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Echols County. The first members shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years, respectively, and thereafter their successors shall be appointed for terms of five years. Members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Echols County. A majority of members shall constitute a quorum and a majority may act for the Authority in any matter. No vacancy shall impair the power of the Authority to act. Membership on the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Echols County shall not prohibit any such member from being appointed to the Authority. Membership on the Authority will not disqualify any person to hold any public office. 
C.	Property. The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the Authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations and interest on the obligations of Echols County. The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not extend to tenants nor lessees of the Authority; and shall not include exemptions from sale and use taxes on property purchased by the Authority or for use by the Authority. 
D.	Powers. The powers of the Authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power: 
(1)	To buy, acquire, accept and give options upon, develop, improve, own, operate, maintain, sell, lease, as lessor or lessee, and mortgage land, buildings, and real and personal property of all kinds within Echols County. 
(2)	To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts.
(3)	To grant, loan and lease without adequate consideration or without any consideration and with and without security, any of its funds and property to private persons and corporations operating or proposing to operate any industrial plant or establishment within Echols County. The provisions of this clause shall not be construed to limit any other power of the Authority. 
(4)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue notes, bonds and debentures and execute deeds to secure debt, trust deeds, trust agreements or indentures, and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor. 
(5)	To issue revenue anticipation certificates of bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the Authority. To exercise all of the rights, powers and privileges and be subject to the same liabilities as a municipality under the provisions of the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, pages 761—774), as amended, with reference to the issuance of such certificates or bonds and validation of same insofar as such pertain to the corporate purposes of the Authority. 
(6)	To contract with Echols County and other political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and with private persons and corporations and to sue and to be sued in its corporate name. 
(7)	To have and exercise usual powers of private corporations except such as are inconsistent with this amendment, including the power to appoint and hire officers, agents and employees and to provide their compensation and duties, which officers and agents may or may not be members of the Authority and the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the Authority. 
(8)	To encourage and promote the expansion and development of industrial, agricultural, recreational and trade facilities in Echols County, and to make long range plans therefor, so as to relieve insofar as possible unemployment within its boundaries, and to that end its acquiral by purchase or gift any building or structure within the limits of Echols County suitable for and intended for use as a factory, mill, shop, processing plant, assembly plant, fabricating plant, or any other type of structure, including all necessary and appurtenant lands and appurtenances thereto, and all necessary or useful furnishings, machinery and equipment. Such acquisition may be through the acquisition of land and the construction thereon of a building, including the demolition of existing structures, or through the acquisition of an existing building and the remodeling, renovating, reconstructing, furnishing and equipping of such building. All of such acquisitions of property or machinery, equipment or furnishings may be made through the use of funds derived through the issuance of revenue certificates and all expansions of new or existing facilities may be made through the use of such funds. 
(9)	To exercise such other powers and duties, consistent with the purposes of the Authority, as may be delegated to it by the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Echols County. 
(10)	To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested. 
(11)	To designate officers to sign and act for the Authority generally or in any specific matter. 
(12)	To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the Authority as herein stated. 
E.	Debts. The Authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against Echols County, nor the State of Georgia. 
F.	Torts. The Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the State of Georgia; and the officers, agents and employees of the Authority, when in [the] performance of the work of the Authority, shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents and employees of the State of Georgia when in [the] performance of their public duties or work of the State. The Authority may be sued the same as private corporations on any contractual obligation of the Authority. 
G.	Member compensation. The members of the Authority shall receive only such compensation for their services to the Authority as shall be authorized by the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Echols County but such compensation shall be paid from funds of the Authority. 
H.	Taxes. The governing authority of Echols County is hereby authorized to levy an annual tax in an amount to be determined by such governing authority, but in no event shall such tax exceed three (3) mills on all taxable property within the County for the support of the Authority and for its use and purposes, and all funds raised by such tax shall be paid and appropriated by Echols County to the Authority and when paid to the Authority, shall become a part of its funds and may be used by it for any of its purposes and powers as herein stated or as may be hereafter provided by law, which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes authorized by law. 
I.	Funds. Echols County is also authorized, in addition to the tax provided above, to appropriate to the Authority such amount from its funds each year as its governing authority shall determine to be appropriate, but not exceeding twenty per cent of its total receipts from business licenses for the year, and any funds so appropriated when paid to the Authority shall become a part of its funds and may be used by the Authority in accordance with its powers and purposes as herein stated or as may be hereafter defined by law. 
J.	Property. The property of the Authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process except such property, income or funds as may be pledged, assigned, mortgaged or conveyed to secure an obligation of the Authority, and any such property, funds, or income may be sold under legal process or under any power granted by the Authority to enforce payment of the obligation. 
K.	Intent. This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare of Echols County and its citizens, industry, agriculture, trade, commerce and recreation within Echols County, and making of long range plans for such development and expansion and to authorize the use of public funds of Echols County for such purposes, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the Authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of this purpose. 
L.	General Assembly. The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the Authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the Authority. The Authority shall be an instrumentality of Echols County, and the scope of its operations shall be limited to the territory embraced within Echols County. The General Assembly shall not extend the jurisdiction of the Authority nor the scope of its operations beyond the limits of Echols County. 
M.	Unlimited Debts. There shall be no limitation upon the amount of debt which the Authority may incur, but no debt created by the Authority shall be a debt of Echols County, nor the State of Georgia. 
N.	Title to property. Should said Authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of any kind and nature, real and personal, held by the Authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Echols County, subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
O.	Definitions. As used herein, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)	The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include property, real and/or personal, acquired or held by the Authority for the assistance, promotion, establishment or development of a new industry or industries, or the assistance, promotion or expansion of existing industry, trade or commerce in Echols County, or any combination thereof; the acquisition of any such property for any such purpose or purposes; the improvement of any such property or properties; and/or the construction, installation and/or expansion of one or more buildings, plants, and/or articles of equipment for the purpose of using, selling, donating, leasing and/or renting such land, properties, improvements, structures or equipment to public or private persons, firms, corporations and/or associations for such purposes. 
(2)	The term "cost of project" shall embrace the cost of lands, buildings, improvements, machinery, equipment, properties, easements, rights, franchises, materials, labor and services acquired and/or contracted for; the cost of financing charges and/or of interest prior to and during construction; architectural, accounting, engineering, inspection, fiscal and/or legal expenses; cost of plans and/or specifications; and/or any other expenses necessary or incident to construction and/or improvements, and/or to determining the feasibility and/or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and/or the acquisition, construction, equipping and/or operating any project or any part thereof. 
P.	Effective date. This amendment shall be self-executing and effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the Governor and the first members of the Authority shall be appointed within thirty (30) days after such proclamation. 
(1965 Ga. Laws, page 710, § 1)
Sec. 3.72. - Publication and submittal. 
When the above proposed amendment to the Constitution shall have been agreed to by two-thirds of the members elected to each of the two branches of the General Assembly, and the same has been entered on their journals with the "Ayes" and "Nays" taken thereon, such proposed amendment shall be published and submitted as provided in Article XIII, Section I, Paragraph I of the Constitution of Georgia of 1945, as amended. 
The Ballot submitting the above proposed amendment shall have written or printed thereon the following: 

 
All persons desiring to vote in favor of ratifying the proposed amendment shall vote "Yes." All persons desiring to vote against ratifying the proposed amendment shall vote "No." 
If such amendment shall be ratified as provided in said Paragraph of the Constitution, it shall become a part of the Constitution of this State. The returns of the election shall be made in like manner as returns for elections for members of the General Assembly, and it shall be the duty of the Secretary of State to ascertain the result and certify the result to the Governor, who shall issue his/her proclamation thereon. 
(1965 Ga. Laws, page 710, § 2)
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIARY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Printed in this article is 1976 Ga. Laws, page 1821, which was an amendment to the state constitution. This amendment was continued in force and effect by 1987 Ga. Laws, page 3829.

Sec. 4.1. - Probate judge as county judge. 
Article VI, Section VI of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following paragraph: 
Effective January 1, 1979, the Judge of the Probate Court of Echols County shall be also and is hereby designated the Judge of the County Court of Echols County. The Judge of the County Court of Echols County elected at the 1976 general election shall serve until December 31, 1978, and the term of office of said Judge is hereby shortened to expire on December 31, 1978. On January 1, 1979, the Judge of the Probate Court of Echols County shall be vested with all the powers and duties as Judge of the County Court of Echols County as well as the powers and duties of the Judge of the Probate Court of Echols County. The compensation of the Judge of the Probate Court of Echols County also serving as Judge of the County Court of Echols County shall be as provided by local law, but until otherwise provided by local law, such Judge shall receive an annual salary per Georgia Code, which shall be payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Echols County. The governing authority of Echols County shall be authorized to increase said salary by 5% at the beginning of each new four-year term of office with the first such increase, at the discretion of said governing authority, becoming effective on January 1, 1981. Effective January 1, 1979, and thereafter, all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed the Judge of the Probate Court of Echols County and the Judge of the County Court of Echols County for services in any capacity shall be paid into the treasury of Echols County on or before the 15th day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. 
(1976 Ga. Laws, page 1821, § 1)
Sec. 4.2. - Collections. 
All fees, costs, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, allowances, and all other perquisites of whatever kind, as are now or may hereafter be allowed by the law, to be received or collected as compensation for service by the clerk of the Superior Court of Echols County shall be received and diligently collected by the clerk of the Superior Court of Echols County for the sole use of Echols County and shall be held as public moneys belonging to Echols County and accounted for and paid into the county treasury by the tenth day of each month, for the immediately preceding month, at which time a detailed itemized statement shall be made by the clerk of the superior court under oath showing such collections and the sources from which collected, and Echols County shall keep a separate account showing such collections and the sources from which they are paid. 
(1993 Ga. Laws, page 3754, § 1)
Sec. 4.3. - Salary of superior court clerk. 
The clerk of the Superior Court of Echols County shall receive a salary in the minimum amount specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-6-88, payable in equal monthly installments from county funds. 
(1993 Ga. Laws, page 3754, § 2)
Sec. 4.4. - Employment of deputies and other employees. 
The governing authority of Echols County may, but shall not be required to, authorize the clerk of the superior court to employ deputies and other employees. The salaries of the above employees shall be payable in equal monthly installments out of county funds. 
(1993 Ga. Laws, page 3754, § 3)
Sec. 4.5. - Chief magistrate. 
The judge of the Probate Court of Echols County shall serve as chief magistrate of Echols County. The minimum compensation of the person serving as judge of the Probate Court and chief magistrate of Echols County shall be per Georgia Code. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3727, § 1)
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of selected Special Acts relating to the county and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Adoption of Code; name. 
The codification of resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances passed by the board of commissioners is adopted as "The Code of Echols County, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Echols County Code." 
Sec. 1-2. - Incorporation of resolutions. 
Any resolution, general resolution or ordinance not presently included in the Official Code of Echols County, Georgia, and passed subsequent to the preparation of such codification, is automatically included and incorporated in this Code by reference. 
Sec. 1-3. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
A copy of the Code shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk to the board of commissioners, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or someone authorized by the clerk to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances which indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make such resolution and ordinances a part of the Code when such resolutions and ordinances have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from the Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the board of commissioners. This copy of the Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the Code and shall be considered the Code of Echols County, Georgia. 
Sec. 1-4. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all resolutions and ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Board of commissioners. The term "board of commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of Echols County, Georgia. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Echols County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Commissioner. The term "commissioner" means one or more members of the board of commissioners. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County and the county. The terms "county" and "the county" mean the County of Echols, State of Georgia. 
County clerk. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the term "county clerk" means the person employed by the board of commissioners to fulfill the duties of clerk of the board of commissioners as then defined. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Joint authority. All terms giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such terms are used to grant authority to the board of commissioners. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the State of Georgia, the resolutions of the county, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
May. The term "may" is permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is mandatory. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the term "of Echols County" was added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and, in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal resolutions, ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are adopted as governing the penal ordinances or resolutions of the county. 
Person. The term "person" includes a natural person, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, club, company, business, trust and any other group acting as a unit, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he/she is absent, he/she has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his/her residence. 
Road and street. The terms "road" and "street" include all roads, streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this county which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the county clerk's office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the county seal. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" means the Sheriff of Echols County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State and the state. The terms "state" and "the state" mean the State of Georgia. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-7. - References to titles of officers, employees, public bodies. 
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the county. 
Sec. 1-8. - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Sec. 1-9. - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the resolutions of the county unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
(1)	Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
(2)	Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)	Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
Sec. 1-10. - Acts by agent. 
When an act is required by resolution or ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by a designated agent. 
Sec. 1-11. - Causing, permitting, abetting or concealing prohibited act. 
Whenever in the resolutions or ordinances of the county any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
Sec. 1-12. - Construction of provisions. 
The provisions of the resolutions or ordinances of the county and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
Sec. 1-13. - Effect of repeal or expiration of resolution. 
(a)	The repeal of a resolution or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the resolution expired and shall not repeal the repealing clause of a resolution or revive any resolution or ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(b)	When a resolution or ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous resolution or ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
Sec. 1-14. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the resolution or ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Any resolution or ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)	Any contract or obligation assumed by the county.
(4)	Any resolution or ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee.
(5)	Any right or franchise granted by the county.
(6)	Any resolution or ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)	Any appropriation resolution or ordinance.
(8)	Any resolution or ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)	Any resolution or ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor.
(10)	Any zoning resolution or ordinance.
(11)	Any resolution or ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat.
(12)	Any resolution or ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county.
(13)	The administrative resolutions or ordinances of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)	Any resolution or ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code.
(15)	Any resolution or ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county.
(b)	No such resolution or ordinance shall be construed to revive any resolution or ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent resolution or ordinance which is repealed by this Code. All such resolutions or ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-15. - Provisions considered continuations of existing resolutions. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as resolutions or ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-16. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)	All resolutions or ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent resolutions or ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by their omission from affected reprinted pages. The subsequent resolutions or ordinances, as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent resolutions or ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent resolutions or ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)	If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Echols County, Georgia, is amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ;#rule;, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-17. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the county. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of resolutions or ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest resolution or ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in resolutions and parts of resolutions included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the resolution or ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)	Change the words "this resolution" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ;#rule; to ;#rule;" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the resolution or ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of resolution or ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of resolution or ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-18. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by resolution or ordinance or other official act of the board of commissioners. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-19. - General penalty, continuing violations; authority granted to court. 
(a)	O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 gives the board of commissioners, for the purpose of protecting and preserving the public health, safety and welfare, authorization to adopt resolutions and ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, violations of which resolutions and ordinances may be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both. 
(b)	The Georgia General Assembly, in 1991, amended O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20, relating to resolutions and ordinances for governing and policing all areas of the county, so as to increase the maximum fine from $500.00 to $1,000.00. 
(c)	O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 gives jurisdiction over violations of county resolutions and ordinances to the magistrate court of the county. 
(d)	O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 is incorporated as a part of the Official Code of Echols County, Georgia. 
(e)	Whenever in this Code or in any resolution or ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any resolution or ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such resolution or ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in prison or in the county jail and work and labor on the streets, roads or public works of the county, not exceeding 180 days or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any resolution or ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)	The judge of the magistrate court shall have the power and authority to:
(1)	Impose upon persons convicted in the magistrate court the fines provided for in this Code, the resolutions and ordinances of the county, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)	Sentence such person to community service work; or
(3)	Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(g)	The judge of the magistrate court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(a); display of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Sec. 1-20. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)	Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his/her office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)	Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— The administrative resolutions or ordinances of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provision of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-14(a)(13); civil emergencies, ch. 18; planning and development, ch. 34.
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Consolidated government. 
(1)	Echols County, Georgia, shall hereby be deemed to be and constituted as a consolidated government for the purposes of the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)	All acts and doings of the commissioners which are in conformity with the purposes and intent of this section shall be, and the same hereby are, in full respects approved and confirmed. 
(3)	This section shall take effect immediately upon its adoption and ratification by a majority of the electors of the county in a referendum. 
(Res. of 2-8-2008)
Editor's note— Passed by majority of electors on July 15, 2008. 
Secs. 2-2—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Chairperson. 
The chairperson shall act as chairperson of the board of commissioners and is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chairperson shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the board of commissioners. The chairperson shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The chairperson may introduce motions or second a motion and may introduce or second a motion to go into executive session as authorized by section 2-38. The chairperson shall not vote except to break a tie. The chairperson shall be elected by the entire board at the initial meeting of their four-year term and shall serve at the pleasure of the board for the term as designated by the board members. 
Sec. 2-32. - Vice-chairperson. 
(a)	The board of commissioners shall select a vice-chairperson from the commissioners at the beginning of each calendar year. The vice-chairperson shall fulfill the duties of the chairperson if the chairperson is not in attendance. 
(b)	The vice-chairperson shall be selected and serve in the same manner as the chairperson.
Sec. 2-33. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
Sec. 2-34. - Organizational meeting. 
The board of commissioners shall hold an organizational meeting on or before the second Monday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the county clerk. 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 et seq.; open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-35. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held on the first Thursday of each month. Regular meetings shall be held at 8:00 a.m. or 7:00 p.m. as determined by the board of commissioners at the previous meeting. All regular meetings shall be held in the courthouse. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-36. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the county by the chairperson for any reason. Other special meetings may be called as provided by state law. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the county or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-37. - Emergency sessions. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the board of commissioners may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the county or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the board of commissioners as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
Sec. 2-38. - Executive sessions. 
(a)	Executive sessions of the board of commissioners may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the board of commissioners is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board of commissioners taken in a public meeting. 
(b)	The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the county clerk at the direction of the chairperson. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the board of commissioners may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
Sec. 2-39. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the board of commissioners. A quorum is a majority of all of the commissioners then in office. It is the duty of the chairperson to enforce this rule. Any commissioner may raise a point of order directed to the chairperson if he/she believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a commissioner leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the chairperson with the approval of the commissioners present. 
Sec. 2-40. - Voting; majority. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of commissioners present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in these procedures, a majority shall mean more than half of the commissioners present excluding abstentions. Where a two-thirds majority is specified, a majority vote shall mean at least two-thirds of the commissioners present excluding abstentions. In the event of a tie vote, the chairperson shall vote to break the tie. 
Sec. 2-41. - Abstentions. 
A commissioner should vote on all motions unless he/she has a conflict of interest that would prevent him/her from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall explain for the record his/her decision to abstain on any vote. 
Sec. 2-42. - Agenda. 
(a)	The county clerk, with the advice of the chairperson and the commissioners, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. An agenda work session shall be held by the county clerk to finalize the agenda. The chairperson and all commissioners may participate in the work session. Whenever a quorum of the board of commissioners is present for an agenda work session, the meeting shall be open to the public and all notice and recordkeeping requirements applicable to an open meeting must be met. The agenda shall be made available to the commissioners at least one business day before every board of commissioners' meeting. 
(b)	Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. To be considered, this request must be submitted to the county clerk and received at least three business days before the meeting. 
(c)	The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. A new subject that requires urgent attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a two-thirds vote of the board of commissioners. 
(d)	A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within one business day prior to the meeting. 
State Law reference— Meeting agenda required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-43. - Consent agenda. 
(a)	A consent agenda may be prepared by the county clerk for the board of commissioners to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and where no debate is expected may be placed on a consent agenda. 
(b)	At the appropriate time of the meeting, the chairperson shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a commissioner objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the chairperson shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the chairperson will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent. 
Sec. 2-44. - Minutes. 
(a)	The county clerk shall promptly record the minutes for each board of commissioners' meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the board of commissioners' meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the board of commissioners but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners. The minutes shall specify the names of commissioners present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the commissioner who proposed each motion, the commissioner who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote, the name of each commissioner voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a commissioner has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the board of commissioners. 
(b)	The board of commissioners must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the board of commissioners. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the commissioners at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the board of commissioners at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chairperson and attested to by the county clerk. 
Sec. 2-45. - Order of business. 
All regular board of commissioners meetings shall follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
(1)	Call to order.
(2)	Minutes.
(3)	Invited guests.
(4)	Reports from committees and departments.
(5)	Consent agenda.
(6)	Old business.
(7)	New business.
(8)	Public comments.
(9)	Adjournment.
Sec. 2-46. - Decorum. 
(a)	All commissioners must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chairperson and not to individual commissioners, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A commissioner is not allowed to speak at a meeting until he/she has been recognized by the chairperson. All comments made by a commissioner shall address the motion that is being discussed. 
(b)	The chairperson shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a commissioner believes that a rule has been broken, he/she can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairperson can rule on the question or he/she may allow the board of commissioners to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
Sec. 2-47. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the board of commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	Public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members of the public who wish to address the board of commissioners must submit their names and the topic of their comments to the county clerk at least three business days before the board of commissioners meeting. These individuals will be allotted five minutes to make their comments and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(2)	Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the board of commissioners may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the board of commissioners. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may only speak once. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. Anyone wishing to speak at any board of commissioners meeting must be recognized by the chairperson before addressing the board of commissioners. 
(3)	Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a board of commissioners meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for commissioners in section 2-46. Individuals who violate any rules of the board of commissioners may be ruled out of order by the chairperson or on a point of order made by a commissioner. A majority vote of the board of commissioners will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairperson. 
(4)	Public hearings. The board of commissioners may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the board of commissioners. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the board of commissioners or at such other places and times as the board of commissioners may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. 
Sec. 2-48. - Amendments to rules. 
Any amendments to the rules of order must be submitted by a commissioner in writing to the county clerk three business days before a regular meeting of the board of commissioners. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all commissioners. All amendments require a two-thirds vote of the board of commissioners to be adopted. 
Sec. 2-49. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable and requires a two-thirds vote of the board of commissioners. Rules governing quorum, voting methods and requirements, the notification to commissioners of meetings, and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
Sec. 2-50. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings may be permitted for all public meetings. 
Secs. 2-51—2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-71. - Rules of procedure. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, procedures for meetings of the board of commissioners shall follow an edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, prescribed by the chairperson. 
Sec. 2-72. - Parliamentarian. 
The county clerk or his/her designee shall serve as the parliamentarian for board of commissioners meetings. 
Sec. 2-73. - Main motion. 
In order for the board of commissioners to take any official action on any subject, a commissioner must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the chairperson until another commissioner agrees to second the motion. A second does not require the commissioner seconding the motion to support the motion. A commissioner may withdraw a main motion that he/she has made at any time before the board of commissioners has voted on that motion. 
Sec. 2-74. - Debate. 
(a)	After the main motion is recognized by the chairperson, the board of commissioners shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the chairperson in a manner that is fair to all members of the board of commissioners. Commissioners may participate in the debate only when they are recognized by the chairperson. 
(b)	During the course of debate, commissioners may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the board of commissioners take a particular action on a motion. There are two classes of subsidiary motions: debatable subsidiary motions and undebatable subsidiary motions. Debatable subsidiary motions consist of motions to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee, and postpone to a time certain. Debatable subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. There are three undebatable subsidiary motions: limit debate, vote immediately, and lay on the table. They require a second and cannot be debated. 
(c)	Commissioners may also introduce privileged motions. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on privileged motions. 
Sec. 2-75. - Voting; procedure. 
Voting on debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	Debatable motions. In the case of debatable motions, the vote can be proposed in one of two ways: 
a.	If debate has been completed and no other commissioner wishes to speak, the chairperson call for the vote. If there are no objections, then the chairperson can proceed with the vote; 
b.	If the chairperson calls for the vote and there is an objection, a member of the board of commissioners may move to vote immediately (move the previous question). If this motion is seconded and approved by a two-thirds vote, debate will stop. The chairperson will then read the proposed motion to the board of commissioners and ask for the votes of the commissioners. 
(2)	Undebatable motions. In the case of undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is recognized by the chairperson. The chairperson shall read the proposed motion to the board of commissioners and then call for the vote. 
Secs. 2-76—2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LEGISLATION 

Sec. 2-101. - Legislative authority generally. 
The board of commissioners shall exercise the legislative functions of the county, and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the government of the county; however, such ordinance or resolution shall not be in conflict with state law, the state constitution, or the constitution or the laws of the United States. 
Sec. 2-102. - Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the county shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the manner provided in this division. 
Sec. 2-103. - Preparation of ordinances. 
Whenever possible, all ordinances shall be prepared by the county attorney. 
Sec. 2-104. - Required elements of ordinances. 
All ordinances passed by the board of commissioners shall contain the following items, which shall be set forth in the ordinance in the following order: 
(1)	Ordinance number.
(2)	Title and purpose.
(3)	Enacting clause.
(4)	Body of ordinance by sections.
(5)	Severability clause.
(6)	Penalty clause.
(7)	Repealing clause.
(8)	Adoption date.
(9)	Effective date.
(10)	Authentication of county clerk.
Sec. 2-105. - Introduction of ordinances, resolutions and other matters. 
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters of subjects requiring action by the board of commissioners must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-106. - Action restricted; emergencies. 
No ordinance shall be put on its final passage on the same day on which it is introduced, except that where an emergency exists and public health and safety require it, an ordinance containing a full statement of the facts and reasons for the emergency may be made effective upon its adoption, if approved by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-107. - Reading of ordinances. 
Each ordinance shall be read at two consecutive meetings of the board of commissioners. This subsection may be waived by two-thirds of those voting upon the question of waiver. 
Sec. 2-108. - Subject matter of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; and no ordinance, or section of such ordinance, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed. When practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
Sec. 2-109. - Adoption of ordinances, resolutions, contracts. 
An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives an affirmative vote of a majority of the whole board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-110. - Effective date of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall take effect until ten days after its adoption unless deemed an emergency measure, in which case the ordinance shall take effect immediately. 
Secs. 2-111—2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Any resolution or ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-14(a)(4).
State Law reference— Employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11; county manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq.; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-131. - Personnel provisions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance relating to the county's personnel classification system, employee pay plan, retirement plan, or employee benefits. All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out in this Code. 
Secs. 2-132—2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LEGAL DEFENSE OF OFFICIALS 

Sec. 2-151. - Scope of defense. 
(a)	The county will undertake to defend all civil, criminal, or quasi-criminal actions brought or maintained against the commissioners of the county, supervisors, administrators, employees, or other elected or appointed county officers, arising out of the performance of their duties, or in any way connected therewith, whether based on negligence, violation of contract rights, or violation of civil, constitutional, common law or statutory rights. However, the county shall not undertake to defend or furnish a defense to any person charged with a criminal offense involving theft, embezzlement, or other like crime with respect to property or money of or in which the county has an interest. 
(b)	The county shall undertake to defend all civil, criminal, or quasi-criminal actions brought or maintained against any of the commissioners of the county, supervisors, administrators, employees or other elected or appointed county officers, arising out of the performance of their duties or in any way connected therewith, regardless of whether such individual is a commissioner, supervisor, administrator, employee or other elected or appointed county officer at the time the action is filed, provided such person was associated with or employed by the county at the time the action arose and the cause of action arose out of such person's performance of his/her duties with the county. 
(Res. of 4-4-1977, §§ 1—3)
Sec. 2-152. - Legal expenses. 
The county shall pay all legal expenses for the defense of such actions including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court costs, deposition costs, witness fees and compensation, and all other like costs, expenses and fees. 
(Res. of 4-4-1977, § 4)
Secs. 2-153—2-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Any resolution or ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-14(a)(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-14(a)(3).

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-171—2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-191. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this division are to: 
(1)	Seek lower cost, better quality and purchase terms for acquisitions of goods and services for the county by: 
a.	Seeking standardization of purchasing procedures and processes;
b.	Encouraging the reduction and eventual elimination of small orders and emergency purchases;
c.	Encouraging advanced planning;
d.	Reducing paperwork through combined purchases;
e.	Encouraging competitive purchasing; and
f.	Encouraging cooperative intergovernmental purchasing by departments.
(2)	Provide budget control and ensure the financial stability of the county.
(3)	Ensure that the greatest value is received for the tax dollar expended.
Sec. 2-192. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Equipment means automotive equipment, machinery, construction contracts or other items of a permanent or semipermanent nature, both real and personal. 
Inventory means the fixed asset inventory for the county, updated annually. 
Local vendor means a business or supplier which operates and maintains a regular place of business within the geographical boundaries of the county, and which has paid its occupation tax to the county for the current year. 
Materials and supplies means such items as are normally used or consumed during the current year, and for which a general appropriation has been made. 
Purchasing office means the office designated and maintained pursuant to this Code and the board of commissioners. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 2-193. - Purchases. 
Documentation of any purchases made by an officer or employee of the county shall be provided to the office of the commissioners in a timely manner. Departmental purchase order numbers may accompany the invoices. 
Sec. 2-194. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-195. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-196. - Open market purchases. 
Except in cases of emergency, no order shall be issued for the delivery on a contract or open market purchases until it has been determined that there exists a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance for the budget line item to be charged. 
Sec. 2-197. - Purchasing procedure. 
Where practicable, all county purchases and contract work shall be subject to fair and open bidding subject to state law, county ordinance and the following: 
(1)	State contract prices. Items that can be purchased from a published list of bid prices provided by the state or its agencies may be purchased in accordance with such bid list and contract price without bids subject to the accrual of revenue and availability of funds which shall be confirmed and coordinated with the board of commissioners prior to purchase. 
(2)	Small purchases. Small purchases of less than $250.00 may be from suppliers and distributors in the ordinary course of business when such purchases are generally sold on a competitive basis. When several small purchases can be reasonably combined for nonmonthly recurring purchases, then consideration shall be given to a pooled or bulk purchase subject to the bidding process. 
(3)	Purchases between $250.00 and $2,500.00. For items sold by more than one distributor, at least two sources shall be contacted and a cost estimate obtained from each of the items costing up to $2,500.00. 
(4)	Purchases between $2,500.00 and $10,000.00. All purchases and contracts having an estimated cost between $2,500.00 and $10,000.00 shall be subject to bids with at least two suppliers or contractors submitting bids in writing except as follows: 
a.	Bulk gas purchases may be subject to oral solicitation on a regular monthly basis provided the bidders and amounts of bids are noted in writing. 
b.	Items covered by other provisions of this division or law.
c.	Where otherwise requested by the board of commissioners.
(5)	Purchases and contracts over $10,000.00. Unless otherwise provided in this division, all purchases and contracts estimated to cost $10,000.00 or more, except public works contracts and materials, shall be subject to a written sealed bid after advertisement in the official organ of the county at least 15 days prior to the bid opening date. Subject to prior notice and approval by the board of commissioners, used equipment and property may be purchased, without advertisement, provided that the department head has made a diligent search of the market place and provides documentation of such search. Documentation shall include information as to the cost of such equipment if new, its availability, warranty, expected life, proposed use, etc. 
(6)	Bulk purchases. When items to be purchased are also used by other county departments and can be reasonably purchased in bulk with other county departments, then such departments shall coordinate such purchases with each other and with the purchasing office to promote the most economical purchase price and to minimize the number of transactions involved. 
(7)	Inventory. All purchases resulting in a fixed asset (vehicle, equipment, furnishings, etc.), with a value of over $500.00 shall be affixed with a numerical bar code and added to the fixed asset inventory. The department head shall be responsible for affixing the bar code sticker to the fixed asset. Each department head shall review the department's inventory for additions and deletions and shall submit such inventory list to the board of commissioners annually. 
(8)	Local vendors. Except for matters required to be bid by state law, including, without limitation, public works contracts and materials, any purchase or contract of under $100,000.00 that is put out to bid under the provisions of this division shall be awarded to a local vendor in the case of equivalent bids. In cases in which a bid by a local vendor is within five percent of the lowest overall bid supplied by a nonlocal vendor, the administration of the county is authorized to negotiate with such local bidder to match the lowest bid supplied by a nonlocal vendor. Negotiation is limited to purchases and contracts up to $100,000.00 and is not authorized in situations where state or federal laws do not allow vendor preferences. If a local bidder matches the lowest bid, including all other terms and conditions of the bid, then the local vendor will be awarded the contract. If the bids of more than one local vendor are within five percent of the lowest overall bid of a nonlocal vendor, the local vendor with the lowest bid price will be given the first opportunity to match the lowest overall bid. If this local vendor declines to match such bid, then the vendors with the next lowest bid within five percent will be given the opportunity to match the lowest bid. This process will continue with all local vendors having bids within five percent of the lowest overall bid by a nonlocal vendor. 
(9)	Indebted vendors. No bid shall be accepted nor any purchase made through any local or nonlocal vendor which owes real or personal, state, county, or school district ad valorem taxes to the county at the time of such sale. 
Sec. 2-198. - Procedures for purchases and contracting. 
All purchasing and contracting shall be in accordance with this division, state law and the following: 
(1)	A request or notice of purchase, in accordance with the approved budget, shall be submitted by the department head to the purchasing office of the board of commissioners prior to the proposed purchase or need for payment. The board of commissioners or its chairperson may request additional information prior to a decision on such matter. 
(2)	The notice or request for purchase shall contain information about the proposed purchase or contract, including the name and purpose of the item, the estimated cost, the method of bidding suggested for the purchase requested and the funding line item source. 
(3)	In the cases of bulk purchases or multiple department involvement, then a spokesperson or coordinator from such departments shall be designated by the departments subject to approval of the board of commissioners, and such spokesperson or designee shall coordinate such purchases with the board of commissioners. 
(4)	Depending on the size and nature of the purchase, and other applicable ordinances and policies, the county administrator, after conferring with the chairperson, may authorize the purchase. Otherwise, such purchase shall be referred to the board of commissioners for information and/or a decision. 
(5)	All county contracts must be signed by the chairperson of the board of commissioners.
Sec. 2-199. - Schedule of purchases and contracts. 
Where reasonably practical, all equipment and capital purchases shall be made on a periodic scheduled basis rather than all at one time. To avoid excessive demand on county revenue, the equipment and capital purchases shall be broken down and purchased over the term of the entire fiscal year. Bulk equipment purchases shall be scheduled so that no more than approximately one-fourth of the purchases shall be made within a single quarter. The board of commissioners may specify with any budgeted item or personnel a time for such purchase or employment. 
Sec. 2-200. - Approved vendors. 
(a)	The purchasing office shall maintain a file of all unqualified vendors who desire to do business with the county, which file shall be maintained according to the nature of goods and name. 
(b)	Purchases on behalf of the county shall not be made from the list of unapproved vendors.
Sec. 2-201. - Discretion for certain purchases. 
The purchasing office shall exercise discretion in making purchases where quality as well as price and service are factors for consideration. In circumstances in which brand name items are requisitioned by any department or official, the purchasing office has the authority to determine whether similar products of equal quality are available to the county at a lower price. If so, such products shall be ordered in lieu of the name brand items. 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means a business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted, which has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means a business or establishment, excluding any public or private educational institution and any mainstream theatre as defined by state law, to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted, which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereof either by law or by the operators of such business or establishment where employees or patrons of such business or establishment expose specified anatomical areas as provided by this article, or engage in specified sexual activities. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business or establishment, excluding any public or private educational institution or any mainstream theatre as defined by state law, to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted, that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment means premises on which defined establishments operate on which defined activities occur (excluding public libraries, private university libraries, medical supply companies, and any public or private educational institution). 
Bathhouse and massage parlor mean a business or establishment, excluding any business establishment operated by or for licensed medical practitioners or healing arts, any hospital, or any public or private educational institution, to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted, in which services offered include some form of physical contact between an employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as provided by this article. 
Church means a place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Conviction means adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the State First Offender Act (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.). 
Distance and measurement mean the measurement in lineal feet from the center of any door to the customer entry of the proposed premises of an adult entertainment establishment (or if not on ground level, then the beginning point for measuring the distance shall be the point of ground level determined by measuring from the center of any door of the customer entry perpendicular to the ground level) to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence or hospital. A radius shall be measured from the center of any door of the customer entry of the proposed premises to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence or hospital. 
Employee means any person engaged to provide or in fact providing services for an adult entertainment establishment to patrons on a regular basis whether for legal consideration or otherwise. Entertainers shall be considered an employee for the purposes of this article and/or dancers whether independent contractors or any other relationship with the adult entertainment establishment. 
Erotic entertainment/dance establishment means a business or establishment, excluding any public or private educational institution and any main stream theatre as defined by state law, to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted, which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers or entertainers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas as provided by this article. 
Escort bureau/introduction service means any individual, business or establishment, excluding any public or private educational institution or any service offered to any member, faculty, or student of any educational institution for the purpose of the furtherance of educational studies, any service offered to licensed medical practitioners in the furtherance of medical science, who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, profit or other consideration, furnishes or offers to furnish to the public, or any portion thereof, names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons to accompany other persons to social affairs or places of entertainment or amusement, or for persons to consort with other persons about any place of public resort or within any private quarters, for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas as provided by this article. 
Good moral character means a person who has not been convicted of any drug-related crime, any felonious crime, or sex-related crime, in the past ten years. (Drug-related crime does not include any alcohol-related traffic offense.) 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Park means any land or facility owned, operated, controlled or managed by any county, city or federal government or any governmental entity or agency in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Patron means any person who is a customer and/or spectator at any adult entertainment establishment during the hours of operation of the adult business establishment. 
Residence means a house, apartment, mobile home, boardinghouse, roominghouse, duplex, or other multifamily housing, for human dwelling. 
School means state, county, city, church or other schools, public or private, that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocation schools, colleges, post high school learning centers, kindergartens and day care centers for persons of all ages. 
Specified anatomical areas includes the following: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)	Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities includes any of the following: 
(1)	Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia or piquerism; 
(2)	Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
(3)	Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation;
(4)	Fondling or touching of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast;
(5)	Sexually oriented torture; or
(6)	Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented beating by the infliction of pain whether actual or simulated. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 6-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse effect on the property values and on the public health, safety, and welfare of the county, and on its citizens and property, and on the character of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. This article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods and developments through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment, or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-33. - Violations. 
(a)	Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-19. 
(b)	The violation of the provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such action may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. 
(c)	The violation of the provisions of this article may be abated as a nuisance.
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-34. - Compliance. 
All nonconforming adult entertainment establishments shall have 120 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived to come into compliance with all of the terms, requirements, and standards hereof. Any and all such adult entertainment establishments which are not in full compliance with such terms, requirements and standards at the end of such 90-day period shall cease and desist such use and shall no longer operate such facilities. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Secs. 6-35—6-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-61. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the unincorporated area of the county, any of the adult entertainment establishments, without a valid license. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the activity is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-62. - Application. 
Any person or legal entity desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the building inspector, or his/her designated representative. Concurrent with the submission of such application, a nonrefundable fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk, shall be paid to the building inspector to defray the cost of investigation and reporting as required by this article. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-63. - Application contents; supporting documents. 
(a)	The application for a license required by this division shall be written and on forms supplied by the office of the building inspector. Such application shall state the following: 
(1)	Name, address, social security number, and date of birth of the applicant;
(2)	Address of the premises where the proposed business is to be located;
(3)	Name of the owner of the premises and, if leased, a copy of the lease agreement; and
(4)	Nature and character of the business to be carried on.
(b)	If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names, addresses and social security numbers of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, whether general or limited, the applicant shall set forth the names, residence addresses, dates of birth, and social security numbers of the partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. 
(c)	A plat shall be filed in triplicate, by a registered surveyor licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in subsection (a)(3) of this section which provide that no adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any residential premises, or any residential dwelling; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; within 1,000 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined under this article is located; or within 1,000 feet of any establishment selling alcoholic beverages. 
(d)	The name and address of any and all persons who have a financial interest as a shareholder in the entity which is applying for the license shall be submitted with the application. 
(e)	Should the requirements of this article dictate that more than one individual and/or entity apply for and a license issue to such applicants, then all such applicants shall, on such application, designate the name, address, and telephone number of an individual resident of the county to act as agent for all applicants/licensees for the purpose of receiving communications and notices required under this article. Proof of delivery by registered and/or certified mail to such agent shall be conclusive proof of receipt by a licensee(s) of such notice, process or information. 
(f)	All applicants shall furnish all data, information, and records as mandated by this article upon the submission of an application for an adult establishment license. 
(g)	Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person who is considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. 
(h)	Each application must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the county for filing and processing. 
(i)	All applicants for licenses as to any premises which is to be subsequently renovated or improved shall furnish in triplicate plans and renderings of the premises as it is to exist at the time of opening. The applicant shall comply with all building, health, and similar county codes. 
(j)	Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)	The individual, if the applicant is an individual.
(2)	The manager or general partner, if a partnership.
(3)	The president or duly authorized agent of the corporation, if a corporation.
(4)	The chief administrative official, if any other organization or association.
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-64. - Status of application. 
The application for a license under this division does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-65. - Nature and scope. 
All licenses under this division shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable provisions of this article and other ordinances and resolutions of the county relating to such businesses. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-66. - Printed declaration. 
All licenses issued under this division shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and revoked under the provisions of the Ordinances of Echols County." 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-67. - For separate place of business. 
A separate license shall be required by this division for each place of business. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-68. - Status of applicant. 
(a)	Where the applicant for a license under this division is a:
(1)	Corporation, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either: 
a.	The majority shareholder thereof; or
b.	A person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the corporation;
(2)	Partnership, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either: 
a.	The managing general partner thereof; or
b.	A person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the partnership;
(3)	Sole proprietor, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he/she is working full-time in a managing capacity on the premises, and, if not, then to the sole proprietor and a person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the sole proprietor. 
(b)	For the purposes of this section, the term "managing capacity" shall mean the president or chief executive officer or managing or general partner of a corporation or partnership, or a person who has the responsibility for management of the operations at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor, or other ownership entity. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-69. - Notice of intent to engage in business. 
(a)	All applicants for licenses under this division shall give notice that the application has been filed and of the purpose of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the county commissioner in the newspaper in which legal advertisements are published. The first advertisement shall not appear more than 30 days prior to the date of such consideration. 
(b)	The advertisement shall be of type not smaller than ten point capital and lowercase and shall be at least a one-inch column. The advertisements shall appear on the same days as legal advertisements are regularly published. 
(c)	The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, the name of the applicant, the date, time, and place of hearing, and a statement that any legal objections to the issuance must be made at or prior to the time of hearing, and, if prior to the time of hearing, must be in writing and received by the office of the county building inspector on or before the date and time of hearing. 
(d)	Applicants shall provide proof of such notice by providing the county commissioner, at the time of the hearing on license issuance, the affidavit of the publisher of the newspaper in which such notice was published, which affidavit shall reflect the content of the notice and the dates of publishing. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-70. - Investigation; issuance. 
(a)	The county shall have 60 days to investigate an application for a license under this division and the background of the applicant. If the county commissioner fails to act upon the application request within 60 days, the application is automatically approved for a one-year period. Upon completion of the investigation, the county commissioner shall grant the license within the 60 days of the application if the county commissioner finds that: 
(1)	The required fee has been paid.
(2)	The application conforms to the mandates of this division.
(3)	The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application.
(4)	The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not, during the past ten years, been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related or drug-related crime, or any felonies. For the purpose of this section, misdemeanor alcohol-related traffic offenses are not considered drug-related offenses. 
(5)	The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not, during the past ten years, had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license denied or revoked in this county or any other local governmental jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(6)	The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable distance provisions of this article and would qualify to receive a certificate of occupancy under applicable building and health codes. 
(7)	The applicant, if a natural person, or if a partnership or corporation, the manager or duly authorized agent, is at least 18 years of age. 
(8)	On the date the business for which a license is required in this division commences and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open for business. 
(b)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, no license shall be issued to an applicant if within six months immediately preceding the filing of an application one or more of the following shall have occurred: 
(1)	The same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of this article applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection for reasons related to the location itself. 
(2)	The location has been rejected for any applicant.
(3)	The applicant has withdrawn, without permission of the county building inspector, an application at any time within seven days immediately preceding the time and date set for the hearing before the county commissioner unless at least six months shall have expired from such withdrawal. 
(c)	The six-month waiting period stated in subsection (b) of this section will not apply where the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding six months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding six months because of lack of qualifications of the applicant. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-71. - Renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments shall be renewed on a calendar-year basis provided that the licensee continues to meet the requirements and mandates set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to January 1 of the year for which such license is requested. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-72. - Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without affecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the licensee shall immediately notify the building inspector. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized is not issued at the time of the granting of a license under this division is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-73. - Change of location. 
No licensee under this division shall change the location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-74. - Change of name. 
No licensee under this division shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his/her name and the name of the business as specified on his/her license. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-75. - Modification of licensed premises. 
After issuance of any license under this division, no change in the location of the building within the premises or customer entry locations shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance requirement of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-76. - Refusal. 
If the county, following investigation of an applicant for a license under this division, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall so notify the applicant of such decision at the hearing before the county commissioner. Upon refusal of any application by the county commissioner, the applicant may immediately seek judicial review of the application by any court of competent jurisdiction. Service of process of any review shall be accepted and acknowledged by the county attorney's office for any petition for immediate judicial review. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-77. - Suspension, probation and revocation. 
(a)	No license issued under this division shall be suspended, revoked or placed on probation except for due cause as defined in this section, and after a hearing before the county commissioner following written notice to the holder of such license or his/her authorized agent of the time, place and purpose of such hearing addressed to the licensee or the licensee's authorized agent at the last address provided by the licensee, or to the address of the premises and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held, except as hereinafter provided. Five days' notice shall be deemed reasonable notification. 
(b)	Due cause for suspension, revocation, or probation of such license shall consist of the violating of any local, state, or federal laws, regulations or ordinances regulating such business or for any reason which would authorize the refusal to issue or renew such license as provided by this division. 
(c)	In all hearings pursuant to this section, the following procedures shall prevail, and the proceedings shall be as informal as compatible with justice: 
(1)	The county commissioner shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications against the licensee. He/she shall then read or cause to be read any response filed by the licensee. 
(2)	The county commissioner shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications as filed against the licensee and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)	The order of proof shall be as follows: The county representative shall present his/her evidence in support of the charges; the licensee shall then present his/her evidence. Evidence of each party may be supported by submission of pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)	The licensee and county may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross examine witnesses. Additionally, the county commissioner may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. 
(d)	The following enumerated periods of mandatory maximum suspension shall be imposed and enforced for each violation determined by the county commissioner: 
(1)	First offense. Suspension of license for four months. 
(2)	Second offense. Suspension of license for one year. 
(3)	Third offense. Permanent revocation of license for a period not less than five years. 
(e)	For the purpose of this section, each violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(f)	Delivery of written notice as required in this section shall be sufficient if delivered to the holder of such license or his/her authorized agent, or posted in the United States mail with appropriate postage addressed to the licensee or the licensee's authorized agent at the last address provided for either. 
(g)	Should any license be revoked or suspended, all signs indicating that such business is conducted on the premises shall be removed from the premises or covered during the period of revocation or suspension. 
(h)	The license holder may seek immediate review of the action of the county commissioner suspending or revoking any licenses by any court of competent jurisdiction. Any review by a court of competent jurisdiction shall operate as a stay of suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Secs. 6-78—6-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-101. - Employment or admission of minors. 
No adult entertainment licensee shall employ, admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-102. - Employment of minors. 
No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with any person to provide services or perform in such establishment who is not at least 18 years of age. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-103. - Sales to minor. 
No adult entertainment licensee shall sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-104. - Location restrictions. 
(a)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within the following distances as defined and measured as stated in this article: 
(1)	Within 1,000 feet of any single-family or multifamily residential dwelling.
(2)	Within 1,000 feet of a church, school, government-owned or operated building, library, civic center, public park, hospital, or community club. 
(3)	Within 1,000 feet of another adult entertainment establishment.
(4)	Within 1,000 feet of an establishment selling alcoholic beverages which is located within an incorporated municipality under Georgia or Tennessee laws. 
(b)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, an adult entertainment establishment operating in an unincorporated area of the county on July 6, 1993, shall not be required to meet the distance requirements set forth in this section as such distances pertain to such location for so long as the licensee holds a legally recognized and perfected property right to use and possess such location as of the date of the filing of an application for an adult entertainment license or renewal thereof, but only if such legal right as to such location was vested as of July 6, 1993, and such vested legal right has continued without the necessity of an act or consent to renew, continue or extend such applicant's property right by the applicant or any other party holding a superior legal property right in such location. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-105. - Report of gross receipts. 
No later than March 1 of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the office of the building inspector showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to employees for the preceding calendar year. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-106. - Retention of employee records. 
An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, ages, and social security numbers of all employees. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-107. - Use of devices and objects. 
No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall permit a dancer, entertainer, employee or patron to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the specified sexual activities described in this article in the view or presence of any patron. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-108. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No adult entertainment licensee shall permit the use of alcoholic beverages of any kind to be sold, possessed or consumed in or on the premises. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-109. - Illegal substances prohibited. 
No adult entertainment licensee shall permit the use of illegal drugs or illegally controlled substances of any kind to be allowed, permitted, possessed, or consumed in or on the premises. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-110. - Gambling prohibited. 
No adult entertainment establishment shall allow gambling in or on the premises. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-111. - Hours of operation. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall be closed between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. each day and on Christmas Day. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-112. - Unobstructed view of interior. 
No booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any adult entertainment establishment so as to prevent a clear view to any area of the establishment which is open for use or view by any patron. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-113. - Interior doors or other connections. 
No premises for an adult entertainment establishment shall have any interior connections or doors with any other place of business. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Secs. 6-114—6-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADULT DANCING ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 6-131. - Use of platform required. 
All live dancing shall occur on a platform constructed for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the next highest level of the remainder of the floor. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-132. - Proximity to patrons. 
No live dancing or entertaining by a dancer, entertainer, or employee shall occur closer than five feet from any patron. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-133. - Interaction with patrons. 
No dancer, entertainer, or employee shall fondle or caress any patron, or any other dancer, entertainer, or employee while in the presence or view of another patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer, entertainer or employee while a patron of the adult dancing establishment. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-134. - Illumination of patron's areas. 
All areas of the licensed premises which are open for use by or view of any patron shall be fully lighted at all times when open for business, which shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 candles per square foot. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-135. - Specified sexual activity prohibited. 
No dancer, entertainer, or employee shall perform or simulate any specified sexual activity while in the presence or view of a patron. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 6-136. - Self-arousal by employees. 
No dancer, entertainer, or employee shall engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation or, in the case of females, fondling of the breasts while in the presence or view of a patron. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-137. - Restriction for male employees. 
No male dancer, entertainer, or employee shall exhibit an unclothed erect penis in the presence or view of a patron. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-138. - Use of areas for specified sexual activities. 
No licensee under this article shall permit the use of any areas of the premises for the performance of any of the specified sexual activities between a patron and any employee or between any patrons. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Sec. 6-139. - Visibility of interior from the exterior of premises. 
No adult dance establishment shall be operated such that the activity occurring within the interior of the premises is visible from the exterior of the premises by any person. 
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Noise control for animals and birds, § 22-37.
State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3).

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-31. - Abandonment of dead dogs. 
(a)	Upon private property. No person shall intentionally abandon a dead dog on any private property belonging to another unless the person so doing shall have first obtained permission from the owner of the property on which the dog is being left and the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-5-3 are complied with in full. 
(b)	Upon public property. No person shall abandon a dead dog on any public property or public right-of-way unless the place in which the dog is being left is a public dump or other facility designed for receiving such and has been designated by the board of commissioners as a public facility for receiving trash or refuse and the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-5-3 are complied with in full. 
Sec. 10-32. - Abandonment of dogs. 
No person shall release a dog on any property, public or private, with the intention of abandoning the dog. 
Sec. 10-33. - Liability of owner for damages done by dog. 
(a)	The owner or, if no owner can be found, the custodian exercising care and control over any dog which goes upon the land of another and causes injury, death, or damage directly or indirectly to any livestock or poultry shall be civilly liable to the owner of the livestock or poultry for damages, death, or injury caused by the dog. The liability of the owner or custodian of the dog shall include consequential damages. 
(b)	This section is to be considered cumulative of other remedies provided by law. There is no intent to do away with or limit other causes of action which might inure to the owner of any livestock or poultry. 
Sec. 10-34. - Cruelty to dogs. 
(a)	No person shall perform a cruel act on any dog; nor shall any person harm, maim, or kill any dog, or attempt to do so, except that a person may: 
(1)	Defend his person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by a dog; or 
(2)	Kill any dog causing injury or damage to any livestock or poultry.
(b)	The method used for killing the dog shall be designed to be as humane as is possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely kills a dog under the circumstances indicated in subsection (a) of this section shall incur no liability for such death. 
(c)	This section shall not be construed to limit in any way the authority or duty of any law enforcement officer, dog or rabies control officer, humane society or veterinarian. 
Sec. 10-35. - Dogs in heat at large. 
No owner or custodian of any dog in heat shall permit the dog to roam or run free beyond the limits of his property. 
Secs. 10-36—10-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 22.

Sec. 10-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)	Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989; or 
(2)	Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Dog control officer means an individual selected by the board of commissioners pursuant to the provisions of section 10-64(c) to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or control of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within this state. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that without provocation bites a human being on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of a dog control officer provided for in this division. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 10-62. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)	The owner of a dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of section 10-67 or 10-68 or whose dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under section 10-69(a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature. Punishment for such violation shall be as provided in section 1-19 or state law. 
(b)	The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of section 10-67 or 10-68 or whose potentially dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under section 10-69(b) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)	If an owner who has a previous conviction for a violation of this division knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this division, such owner shall be guilty of a felony if the owner's dangerous dog attacks or bites a human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this division. 
(d)	An owner who knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a felony if the owner's dangerous dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of a human being under circumstances constituting a violation of this division. 
(e)	In addition to the penalties for violations under subsection (c) or (d) of this section, the dangerous dog involved shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or another person authorized by the dog control officer and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the county board of health, and, thereafter, the dangerous dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(f)	No owner of a dangerous dog shall be held criminally liable under this division for injuries inflicted by such owner's dog to any human being while on the owner's property. 
Sec. 10-63. - Exceptions. 
(a)	A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this division. 
(b)	A dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this division if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Sec. 10-64. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided by subsection (b) of this section, the county's jurisdiction for the enforcement of this division shall be the unincorporated area of the county. 
(b)	Any county or municipality or any combination of such local governments may contract or enter into agreements with each other for joint dog control services or for the provision of dog control services required by this division and for the separate or joint use of personnel, facilities, and equipment used in the provision of such services. 
(c)	The board of commissioners shall designate an individual to carry out the duties of a dog control officer as provided in this division. The board of commissioners may assign the additional duties of a dog control officer to any officer or employee of the county who is subject to the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. With the consent of the sheriff, the board of commissioners may assign the additional duties of a dog control officer to a county sheriff or to a sheriff's deputy. With the consent of the county board of health and the rabies control officer, the board of commissioners may assign the additional duties of a dog control officer to a rabies control officer appointed under O.C.G.A. § 31-19-7. A person carrying out the duties of a dog control officer shall not be authorized to make arrests unless the person is a law enforcement officer having the powers of arrest. 
(d)	The board of commissioners may provide by ordinance or resolution for the creation of an animal control board to hold hearings provided for in section 10-66. If such an animal control board is created, such board may hear and determine matters provided for in section 10-66. An animal control board may be created jointly by two or more local governments under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)	In lieu of conducting the hearings required by section 10-66 or creating an animal control board for such purpose as provided in subsection (d) of this section, the board of commissioners is authorized to designate the local board of health to conduct such hearings. Any board so designated is authorized and shall have jurisdiction to conduct such hearings and determine matters provided for in section 10-66. 
Sec. 10-65. - Investigations. 
(a)	Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, or county board of health, the dog control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this division. Any local government shall be authorized but not required to provide by ordinance or resolution for additional duties of a dog control officer in identifying dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs and their owners to carry out the provisions of this division. 
(b)	When a dog control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the dog control officer shall notify the dog's owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address of such classification or reclassification. Such notice shall be complete upon its mailing. 
Sec. 10-66. - Classification. 
(a)	As applied to the owners of potentially dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section must be carried out as a necessary condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this division against such owners. As applied to the owners of dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section shall not be an essential element of any crime provided for in this division. 
(b)	When a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog is classified as such, the dog control officer shall notify the dog's owner of such classification. 
(c)	The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements:
(1)	The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address; 
(2)	The notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)	The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)	The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the board of commissioners, the board of health, or the animal control board of the respective local government and shall specify the name of the applicable agency which will conduct the hearing; 
(5)	The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this division on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)	The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the applicable agency and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the agency. 
(d)	When the board of commissioners, animal control board, or local board of health, whichever is applicable, receives a request for a hearing as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The board of commissioners or board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the board of commissioners or board shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the board of commissioners or board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's classification of the dog. 
(e)	Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the board of commissioners or board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
Sec. 10-67. - Possession. 
(a)	It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this state a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)	Subject to the additional requirements of subsection (c) of this section for dangerous dogs, the dog control officer of a local government in which an owner possesses a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of such dog if the owner presents to the dog control officer or the dog control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)	A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; and
(2)	a.	The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. 
b.	The department of natural resources shall design a uniform symbol for the purpose of implementing subsection (b)(2)a no later than July 1, 1989, and shall provide copies of the design to the board of commissioners. The sign required to be posted by subsection (b)(2)a of this section shall conform substantially to the design provided by the department of natural resources pursuant to this subsection (b)(2)b. 
c.	The requirement of subsection (b)(2)a of this section shall become effective 60 days following the day the uniform design specified in subsection(b)(2)b of this section is distributed to the board of commissioners. 
(c)	In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the dog control officer evidence of: 
(1)	A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
(2)	A surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog. 
(d)	The owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the dog control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(e)	The owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer if the owner is moving from the dog control officer's jurisdiction. The owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register the dog as required in this section within 30 days after becoming a resident. The owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(f)	Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by a local government does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in subsections (b) and (c) of this section are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(g)	A dog control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. Law enforcement agencies of local governments and the sheriffs of counties shall cooperate with dog control officers in enforcing the provisions of this division. 
(h)	A local government may charge an annual fee, in addition to regular dog licensing fees, to register dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs as required in this section. Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, a dog control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this division. 
Sec. 10-68. - Running at large. 
(a)	It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(b)	It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
Sec. 10-69. - Confiscation of dogs. 
(a)	A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the dog control officer if the: 
(1)	Owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond required by section 10-67(c); 
(2)	Dog is not validly registered as required by section 10-67; 
(3)	Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or
(4)	Dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 10-68(a). 
(b)	A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: 
(1)	Not validly registered as required by section 10-67; 
(2)	Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or
(3)	Outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 10-68(b). 
(c)	Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this division and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. If the owner has not complied with the provisions of this division within 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
Sec. 10-70. - Liability. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that the owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such dog. Under no circumstances shall a local government or any employee or official of a local government which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this division be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog or by a dog that has been reported to the proper authorities as being a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog or by a dog that a local government has failed to identify as a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog or by a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in section 10-67(b) or by a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog on which its owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in section 10-67(c). 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal: Any domesticated animal, when such animal has been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or caged, or is placed upon or within the private property of another without the permission of the property owner and is left unattended and uncaged. Any domestic animal will also be considered abandoned when such animal has been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of this animal for a time period in excess of 36 hours unattended and without being supplied proper food or water. 
Animal at large: Any animal found loose and not under proper restraint. 
Animal control officer: Any person designated by the board of commissioners of the county to perform the duties of animal control enforcement. 
Animal under restraint: Any animal that is controlled within the property limits of its owner, is controlled by a leash, is at heel or beside a competent person and is obedient to the person's commands, or is within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets. 
Domesticated animals: Animals that are accustomed to live in or about the habitation of men, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, cows, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated wild animals or exotic animals. 
Guard or watch dog: Any dog trained by a recognized training facility for the purpose of protecting individuals from assault or preventing property loss or damage. A recognized training facility shall be deemed to mean any person holding a state kennel license and a business license for either of the purposes mentioned in this definition. 
Impoundment: The action of taking physical control of an animal by an animal control officer or other officers empowered to act by law and the transporting of such animal to the animal control facility. 
Owner: Any person who owns, harbors, keeps and maintains, has lawful possession of, or knowingly causes or permits an animal to be harbored or kept; or any person who has an animal in his care, who shelters and/or provides for such animal sufficient quantities of wholesome food and water, and permits an animal to remain on or around his premises two weeks or more. This shall include any person hired or acting as custodian of the animal for its owner. 
Proper restraint on owner's property: The term means, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	The dog is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other type enclosure from which the dog cannot climb, dig, jump, or escape on its own accord; 
(2)	The dog is securely and humanely restrained by chain, cable or trolley line or other such device of such strength to prevent escape; or 
(3)	The dog is on a leash and under control of a competent person or off the leash and obedient to that person's commands, and the person is present with the animal any time it is not restrained as provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition. 
Under control while off owner's real property: 
(1)	The dog is securely and humanely confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion;
(2)	The dog is property confined within a secure enclosure with the property owner's permission;
(3)	The dog is securely restrained by a leash or other method held by a competent person;
(4)	The dog is under immediate voice command of a competent person at any given time; or 
(5)	The dog is a hunting dog and is being used for hunting in accordance with state game and fish department laws, rules and regulations. 
Vicious or dangerous animal: Any animal that attacks, bites, or injures human beings, pets, companion animals or livestock without adequate provocation or which, because of temperament, conditioning or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite or injure human beings, pets, companion animals or livestock. No dog may be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Sec. 10-72. - Animal control unit/enforcement officer. 
There is hereby created for the county an animal control unit. It shall be staffed by an animal control officer appointed by the board of commissioners who shall be charged with the enforcement of this article. The animal control officer's compensation shall be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
State Law reference— Animal control board authorized, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(d). 
Sec. 10-73. - Enforcement generally; animal control officers. 
(a)	The primary responsibility for enforcement of this article shall be vested in the animal control unit. This unit shall consist of an animal control officer which shall be designated by the board of commissioners of the county. The officer shall be vested with the authority to issue citations for violation of this article, and the officer composing this unit may also call upon such other officers, constables and employees of the magistrate's office or sheriff's department of the county as may be necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(b)	Upon information known to or a complaint lodged with the animal control unit or the county sheriff's department or the board of commissioners that any owner or possessor of a domesticated animal is in violation of this article, a citation shall be issued requiring the owner or possessor of such domesticated animal to appear before the judge of the magistrate court of the county on a day and time certain to stand trial for the violation of this article. If such violation of this article has not been witnessed by an officer of the animal control unit or the sheriff's department or other employee of the county, a citation shall be issued to the person making the complaint requiring such person to appear on the day and time set to testify on behalf of the county. If the owner or possessor of any domesticated animal is not known, and such domesticated animal is at large in violation of this article, upon complaint made to or information known to the animal control unit, it shall be the duty of the unit to immediately take possession of such domesticated animal and impound it according to such rules and regulations and ordinances of the county for the detention, control and disposition of domesticated animals. 
(c)	The animal control officer may pursue such animal onto private property to effect capture and impoundment of such animal. All impounded animals shall be housed and cared for at the Lowndes County Animal Control Facility. 
(d)	It shall also be the responsibility of the animal control unit to enforce division 2 of this article relating to dangerous dogs. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Sec. 10-74. - Interference with enforcement officers. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer or officer empowered to act by law, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the vehicle used to transport the animal, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control shelter or impounding area or trap. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Sec. 10-75. - County not liable for disease, injury or death of impounded animals. 
The county, the animal control unit and its officers shall not be held responsible or liable for any accident, disease, injury or death of any animal while being impounded or boarded at the animal shelter. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Sec. 10-76. - Humane treatment of animals required; cleanliness of pens and yards. 
(a)	No person having an animal in his possession or control shall fail to provide such animal with sufficient food, water, shelter and adequate protection from the elements. Veterinary care shall be provided when needed to prevent suffering of such animal, and the animal shall be treated with humane care at all times. 
(b)	No person shall beat, ill treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit combat between animals. 
(c)	No person having an animal in his possession or control shall abandon such animal on public or private property. 
(d)	Any animal control officer, or other officer empowered to act by law, may impound any animal found to be cruelly treated. 
(e)	It shall be the duty of the owner to maintain in a clean and sanitary condition and free from extreme or unreasonable objectionable odor all structures, pens, yards and areas adjacent thereto wherein any animal is kept. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Sec. 10-77. - Identification tags/collars. 
All domesticated animals must wear identification collars. These collars must contain the owner's name and phone number. Domesticated animals not wearing identification collars will be considered nuisance animals and dealt with according to section 10-82 of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Sec. 10-78. - Abandoned animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willingly abandon any domestic animal within the limits of the county. Any person who does abandon such animal or knowingly or willingly permits such abandonment or aids in the abandonment of any domestic animal within the limits of the county shall be in violation of this section and punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Sec. 10-79. - Duty to keep animals under control. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal, or anyone having a domesticated animal in his possession or control, to permit such domesticated animal to be at large. If that owner or keeper of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure that all provisions of this article are complied with. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-3-1—4-3-12. 
Sec. 10-80. - Restraint of dogs on owner's property. 
It shall be the duty of every dog owner or custodian of any dog to ensure that such dog is kept under proper restraint and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the dog from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, possessor or custodian. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Sec. 10-81. - Restraint of dogs off of owner's property. 
It shall be the duty of the dog owner or anyone having a dog in his possession to keep the dog under restraint and control at all times while the dog is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor or custodian. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Sec. 10-82. - Nuisance animals. 
Any animal will be deemed a public nuisance animal is such animal: 
(1)	Is repeatedly found at large.
(2)	Damages the real property of any person other than the owner of such animal.
(3)	Is vicious. For the purposes of this section, the term "vicious" means any animal that attacks without provocation any human being or other domestic animal. 
(4)	Produces, because of the quantity, manner or method in which animals are kept, unsanitary conditions. 
(5)	Makes excessively disturbing noises, which include, but are not limited to, repeated or continuous barking, howling or crying causing unreasonable annoyance and disturbance to those in close proximity to where the animal is kept. 
Any such animal that has been impounded three times will not be returned to the owner. However, upon the second violation, if evidence is presented to the court, through testimony of either the animal control officer or other witnesses, that the owner of the animal has not taken necessary steps to keep his animal under control pursuant to laws of the county, the court shall order the animal to be impounded and disposed of in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Sec. 10-83. - Issuance of summons in lieu of impoundment. 
Any animal control officer may, at his discretion, not impound a dog or other animal found in violation of this article but may instead return the animal to its rightful owner and at that time issue to the owner a court summons for violation of such section of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Sec. 10-84. - Vaccination tag. 
(a)	Every dog and cat that is kept, possessed, maintained or harbored in the county at all times shall wear, affixed to its collar or harness, a current vaccination tag. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag to the collar of any animal to which it was not issued, or to remove such tag from any animal without the consent of its owner or possessor. 
Secs. 10-85—10-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT; ADOPTION 

Sec. 10-91. - Animals subject to impoundment. 
(a)	Dogs or other animals within any of the following classes may be captured and impounded at Lowndes County Animal Shelter: 
(1)	Dogs and other animals whose ownership is unknown.
(2)	Dogs without identification collars.
(3)	Vicious dogs or animals of all kinds.
(4)	Dogs in heat off the premises of their owners.
(5)	Dogs or other animals which have bitten a person or animal or which have been bitten by a dog or animal suspected of having rabies. 
(6)	Dogs not wearing a current vaccination tag.
(7)	Dogs or other animals suspected of having rabies.
(8)	Unconfined dogs in public areas. Public areas being defined as locations in the county where citizens congregate and/or where services are rendered. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Sec. 10-92. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the animal control unit to immediately notify the owner of each domesticated animal impounded if the owner of the domesticated animal is known or can be reasonably ascertained. The owner of any domesticated animal impounded may reclaim such domesticated animal by payment of fees as required by the impound facility. 
(b)	If any animal is seized or impounded by the animal control unit and shows evidence of contagious, infectious or fatal diseases, or is seriously ill or severely injured, such animal will be evaluated and the advice of a licensed veterinarian sought to determine whether to treat or euthanize the animal. In the absence of an available veterinarian, the animal control officer will determine a just reason for euthanasia. These steps will be taken to control disease spread and eliminate further pain and suffering of the animal. All attempts made to treat the animal and all veterinary expenses incurred will be paid by the owner of such animal. 
(c)	Any animal which is suffering excessively, or exhibits feral or wild tendencies or may present a real danger to persons or other animals, may be, without regard to the confinement period, destroyed by the most humane method available. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008)
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 22; noise control from construction or repairing of buildings, § 22-42; health and sanitation, ch. 26; manufactured homes, ch. 30; planning and development, ch. 34; roads, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 42.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Self-inspection by plumbers or utility contractors. 
The county is exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d) relating to the self-inspection of certain water and sewer lines, and such provisions shall not be applicable in the county. 
(Res. of 6-28-2001)
Secs. 14-2—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); state building, plumbing, electrical and other technical codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; application of building and fire related codes to existing buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq.

Sec. 14-31. - Adopted. 
The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall be enforced by the county: 
(1)	Standard Building Code;
(2)	Standard Mechanical Code;
(3)	Standard Gas Code;
(4)	Standard Plumbing Code;
(5)	National Electrical Code;
(6)	Standard Fire Prevention Code;
(7)	CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code; and
(8)	Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings.
(Res. of 6-28-2001)
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, §§ II, III(a)(12). 
Sec. 14-32. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the construction or erection of any building, whether commercial, business or residential, unless such construction is accomplished in strict compliance with the various construction codes adopted by this article. 
(Res. of 6-28-2001)
Sec. 14-33. - Enforcement. 
When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in the various construction codes adopted by this article, the county inspection officer shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the enforcement of such codes. 
(Res. of 6-28-2001)
Sec. 14-34. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)	Any person violating any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
(b)	A conviction of any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall automatically suspend the business license of the offending contractor. The license may be reinstated by an application to the mayor and council upon a showing of good cause. 
Sec. 14-35. - Permit and inspection fees. 
Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Sec. 14-36. - Public utilities. 
(a)	No public utility may furnish temporary electrical, water or gas connections for construction purposes unless the contractor has been issued a construction permit by the chief building official. 
(b)	No public utility may furnish permanent electrical, water or gas connections until the contractor has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the chief building official. 
(c)	No public utility may furnish power to a mobile home site until the owner has been issued either a building permit or a certificate of occupancy by the chief building official. 
(Res. of 6-28-2001)
Sec. 14-37. - Water supply and sewage disposal facilities. 
(a)	Building permits will not be issued until plans for water supply and sewage disposal have been approved by the county board of health. 
(b)	Certificates of occupancy will not be issued until the completed water supply and sewage disposal facilities have been approved by the board of health. 
State Law reference— Regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas, conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.l. 
Secs. 14-38—14-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 14-71. - Required. 
Prior to the erection of any building of any nature or an addition or alteration to any building in which the cost will exceed more than $999.00 within the county, a building permit must be acquired from the county inspection officer. 
Sec. 14-72. - Application. 
An application for a building permit shall be filed with the county commissioners' office and shall disclose the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant.
(2)	The address of the location of the building that is to be constructed, or the address of the building being repaired. 
(3)	The size and estimated cost of the construction or building alteration or repairs.
(4)	Sewage certification with verification of an adequate sewage disposal system.
Sec. 14-73. - Fees. 
The fee for a building permit shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Res. of 6-28-2001)
Sec. 14-74. - Issuance. 
It shall be the duty of the county commissioners' office to issue the applicant a building permit. 
Sec. 14-75. - Display. 
All permits issued pursuant to this article shall be posted on the property for which issued in such manner as to be clearly visible from the front or from the street or roadway. 
Sec. 14-76. - Utility connections. 
It shall be unlawful for any electric, gas or water utility company to connect electricity, gas or water to any building under construction unless a building permit has been issued by the county commissioners' office. 
Secs. 14-77—14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3.

Sec. 14-111. - Purpose of article. 
It is the purpose of this article to: 
(1)	Require the use of ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings; 
(2)	Require the certification of plumbing fixtures regarding flow rates and serviceability standards; 
(3)	Promote compliance with state laws for the purpose of conserving water;
(4)	Maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies; and
(5)	Reduce wastewater flows.
Sec. 14-112. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial building means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Plumbing fixtures means any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators. 
Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 14-113. - Enforcement; penalty for violation of article. 
Citations for violations of this article may be issued by the building official or his authorized representative. Any person violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, such person found guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
Sec. 14-114. - Standards for fixtures. 
No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 14-116. The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be April 1, 1992, and for commercial buildings the effective date shall be July 1, 1992. 
(1)	All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to in this section shall not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 

 
(2)	The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)	Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)	The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.lM-1989 Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in subsection (1) of this section. 
(5)	All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for low consumption water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME A112.19.6-1990 Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended. 
Sec. 14-115. - Product certification. 
The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards in section 14-114 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described in this section and providing, upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the county building official. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in section 8 of such standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
Sec. 14-116. - Exceptions. 
Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the building official. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building may be exempt from the standards of section 14-114 for the following: 
(1)	Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eyewash stations, etc. 
(2)	Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for the physically handicapped.
(3)	Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in a correctional institution which may require more water for proper operation. 
(4)	Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes that cannot be accommodated by existing technology. 
Secs. 14-117—14-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWER STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-151. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)	Provide for the appropriate location and development of communications towers and antennas to serve the residents and businesses of the county. 
(2)	Minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscaping, screening and innovative camouflaging techniques. 
(3)	Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
(4)	Lessen traffic impacts on surrounding residential areas.
(5)	Maximize use of any new and existing communications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the county; provided, however, that the use of shorter towers of a height which does not require lighting under FAA regulations will normally be given preference over the use of taller lighted structures even when the use of unlighted structures may require a larger number of towers to serve the county. 
(6)	Maximize and encourage use of alternative tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers. 
(7)	Encourage and promote the location of new communications towers in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
Sec. 14-152. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alternative tower and antenna structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, church steeples, light poles, flagpoles and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers so as not to be readily discernible as an antenna or tower. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if such highest point is an antenna. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
Tower owner means and includes the owner, permittee or lessee of the tower, antennas or associated equipment as well as any parent or subsidiary companies of the foregoing entities. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 14-153. - Conditional and permitted uses. 
(a)	Upon receipt of an appropriate building permit, freestanding communications towers may be located as a conditional use within the county, provided that the property owner first obtains a conditional use permit from the board of commissioners in accordance with the procedures set forth for conditional use permits. 
(b)	Unlighted alternative tower structure mounted communications towers and antennas may be located on any nonresidential buildings and alternative tower structures in the county, provided that: 
(1)	The property owner first obtains a building permit in accordance with the procedures established for commercial building permit applications and plan review; 
(2)	Such alternative tower or antenna is set back from any existing or planned off-site residence and separated from any residentially zoned property at least a distance equal to the greater of the required setback for primary uses in which such alternative tower and antenna structure is located or 25 feet; 
(3)	The height of the existing freestanding nonresidential structure (other than a tower) on which such tower or antenna is placed will not be increased by more than the lesser of two-fifths its existing height or 20 feet; 
(4)	No advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower;
(5)	No signs or lights are permitted on the alternative tower and antenna structures unless such signs or lights lawfully existed prior to erection of the alternative tower structure and will not be modified as a result of such erection; and 
(6)	The number and location of antennas, communications towers or other receiving or transmitting devices located on a single structure is not excessive and does not adversely affect adjacent properties and views. 
(c)	No new tower may be established if there is a technically suitable space available on an existing tower within the search area that the new tower is to serve. For the purpose of this article, the search area is defined as the grid for the placement of the antenna. 
Sec. 14-154. - Shared use. 
(a)	All new towers shall be designed to structurally accommodate the maximum number of additional users technically practicable. 
(b)	Once a new tower is approved, additional antennas and accompanying accessory uses may be permitted administratively in the same manner established for commercial building permits and in accordance with the approved share plan, if the county finds that the standards of this article are met. 
Sec. 14-155. - Special approval of the board of commissioners. 
An application for approval of the board of commissioners for a conditional use permitted under this article shall include a site plan and other information as may be required by the county. 
Sec. 14-156. - Application procedures. 
Application for a conditional use permit or a building permit for any communications tower or use of an alternative tower structure shall be made in accordance with this article and established procedures for commercial building permits. An application will not be considered until it is complete. A complete application must contain the following: 
(1)	An inventory of the applicant's existing towers that are either within the county, within one mile of the border thereof or provide direct service thereto, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The county may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under this article or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the county; provided, however, that the county is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(2)	Site plan to scale specifying the location of towers, guy anchors (if any), transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. 
(3)	Landscape plan to scale indicating location, size, spacing and species of plants.
(4)	Utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewerage, power lines and drainage facilities impacting the proposed tower site. 
(5)	An environmental impact statement fully describing the effects that the proposed tower and/or antenna will have on the environment and surrounding area including the radiological impact on human health, impacts on adjacent residential structures and districts, impacts on structures and sites of historic significance and impacts on streetscapes. 
(6)	A certified statement prepared by an engineer licensed to practice in the state that the construction of the tower, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, etc., service enjoyed by adjacent properties. 
(7)	A description of anticipated maintenance needs, including frequency of services, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
(8)	Report from a professional structural engineer licensed in the state documenting the following: 
a.	Tower height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design. A cross section of the tower structure shall be included. 
b.	Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated. 
c.	Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure.
d.	Failure characteristics of the tower and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
(9)	Satisfactory evidence that FAA, FCC and any appropriate state review authority requirements for the proposed tower are met or that the tower is exempt from those regulations. 
(10)	Letter of intent to lease excess space on the tower structure and to lease additional excess land on the tower site when the shared use potential of the tower is absorbed, if structurally and technically possible. 
(11)	A reasonable pro rata charge may be made for shared use, consistent with an appropriate sharing of construction, financing and maintenance costs. Fees may also be charged for any structural or RF changes necessitated by such shared use. Such sharing shall be a condition of approval, if approval is granted. 
a.	The applicant shall describe what range of charges are reasonably expected to be assessed against shared users. 
b.	The applicant shall base charges on generally accepted accounting principles and shall explain the elements included in the charge. 
(12)	The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number of types of antennas. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The county shall approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means. 
(13)	Evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. 
(14)	Each applicant must make a good faith effort to substantially demonstrate that no existing or planned towers can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna/transmitter as follows: 
a.	The applicant shall contact the owners of all existing or planned towers of a height roughly equal to or greater than the height of the tower proposed by the applicant. A list shall be provided of all owners contacted, the date of such contact, and the form and content of such contact. 
b.	Such contact shall be made in a timely manner; that is, sufficiently before the filing of an application for a building or special use permit to include a response into the application when filed. 
1.	Failure of a listed owner to respond shall not be relevant to the current application if a timely, good faith effort was made to obtain one. However, owners of other such existing or proposed towers to which this article applies shall be required to respond and failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this article and shall void all current and future applications from the tower owner so failing to respond until satisfactory remedy has been made. 
2.	The county shall maintain and provide, on request, records of responses from each owner. 
3.	Once an owner demonstrates an antenna of the sort proposed by the applicant cannot be accommodated on that owner's tower as described in subsection (14)c of this section, that owner need not be contacted by future applicants for antennas of the sort proposed. 
c.	The applicant shall request the following information from each owner contacted:
1.	Identification of the site by location, tax lot number, existing uses, and tower height.
2.	Whether each such tower could structurally accommodate the antenna proposed by the applicant without requiring that structural changes be made to the tower. To enable the owner to respond, the applicant shall provide each such owner with the height, length, weight, and other relevant data about the proposed antenna. 
3.	Whether each such tower could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural changes were made, not including totally rebuilding the tower. If so, the responding owner shall specify in general terms what structural changes would be required. 
4.	If structurally able, would shared use by such existing tower be precluded for reasons related to RF interference. If so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in either the existing or proposed antenna would be required to accommodate the proposed tower, if at all technically possible. 
5.	If shared use is possible, the fee an owner of an existing tower would charge for such shared use. 
d.	Shared use is not precluded simply because a reasonable fee for shared use is charged, or because of reasonable costs necessary to adapt the existing and proposed uses to a shared tower. The county may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fee and costs are reasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed unreasonable. The county may engage the services of an independent radio frequency engineer or other qualified individual or firm for the purpose of reviewing, evaluating and verifying the radio frequency propagation maps and other information submitted by the applicant. The cost of such services shall be added to the application fees otherwise provided for by this article and other applicable code sections and shall be paid by the applicant. 
(15)	Any other information which may be requested by the county to fully evaluate and review the application and potential impact of a proposed tower and/or antenna. 
Sec. 14-157. - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the board of commissioners shall be made to the county superior court within 30 days of the decision. 
Sec. 14-158. - Removal of antennas and towers. 
All towers and antennas shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such towers. If, upon inspection by the county, such tower is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower and the owner of the property, if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance. If such tower or antenna is not brought into compliance within 30 days, the county may provide notice to the owners requiring the tower or antenna to be removed. If such tower or antenna is not removed within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the county may remove such tower or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the county in taking action shall not in any way waive the county's right to take action. The county may pursue all legal remedies available to it to ensure that communications towers and antennas not in compliance with this Code and county ordinances or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The county may seek to have the tower or antenna removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
Sec. 14-159. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)	Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of the tower. The owner of an abandoned tower and the owner of the property where the tower is located shall be under a duty to remove such a tower or antenna. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the county notifying the owner of such abandonment, the county may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The county may pursue all legal remedies available to it to ensure that abandoned communications towers and antennas are removed. Delay by the county in taking action shall not in any way waive the county's right to take action. The county may seek to have the communications tower or antenna removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)	If the owner of an abandoned tower wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner must first apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
Sec. 14-160. - Preexisting towers/nonconforming uses. 
(a)	All communications towers lawfully operative on January 1, 2003, shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use and shall be treated as a nonconforming use. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such existing towers. New construction, other than routine maintenance on an existing communications tower, shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)	A communications tower that has received county approval in the form of conditional use and a building permit, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation, shall be considered an existing tower so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
Sec. 14-161. - Public property. 
Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the county shall be exempt from the requirements of this article, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the county. 
Secs. 14-162—14-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-181. - Scope. 
The requirements set forth in this division shall govern the location and construction of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this article, including alternative tower structures. 
Sec. 14-182. - Building codes, safety standards. 
To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee of a tower or alternative tower structure shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. Such inspection shall be conducted periodically and at least once every three years. Inspection shall be conducted by a trained and certified tower inspector and reviewed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. The tower inspector shall be either a state-licensed engineer or a person whose business includes the erections and/or inspections of communication towers. The results of such inspections shall be provided to the board of commissioners or its designee. If, upon inspection, the board of commissioners or its designee concludes that a tower fails to comply with all applicable codes and standards, then, upon receipt of written notice by the owner, permittee or lessee of the tower, such party shall have 30 days to bring the tower into compliance with such standards. If the deficiency constitutes an immediate danger to persons or property, then the tower owner shall immediately correct such deficiencies with or without notice from the county. If the owner, permittee or lessee fails to bring the tower into compliance within the 30-day period, the board of commissioners may remove the tower at the owner's, permittee's or lessee's expense. Prior to the removal of any tower, the board of commissioners or its designee may consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee for repairs of substandard towers, and may grant a reasonable extension of the compliance period referenced in this section if no immediate danger exists. 
Sec. 14-183. - Regulatory compliance. 
(a)	All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate communications towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the communications towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring such communications towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. 
(b)	Tower owners shall provide documentation showing that each communications tower is in compliance with all federal requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every 12 months. 
Sec. 14-184. - Security. 
Communications towers shall be enclosed by decay resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device; provided, however, the county may waive such requirements for alternative tower structures. 
Sec. 14-185. - Lighting. 
No illumination is permitted on an antenna or tower unless required by the FCC, the FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction in which case the county may review lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
Sec. 14-186. - Advertising. 
No advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower. 
Sec. 14-187. - Visual impact. 
(a)	Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(b)	At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(c)	If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(d)	To the extent possible, towers clustered at the same site shall be of similar height and design. 
(e)	Towers shall be the minimum height necessary to provide parity with existing similar tower supported antennas, and shall be freestanding unlighted monopole structures where the negative visual effect is less than would be created by use of a guyed tower, self-supported lattice tower or taller structure requiring lighting under FAA regulations. 
Sec. 14-188. - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property and shall be as follows: 
(1)	For towers 150 feet tall or less, a buffer area no less than ten feet wide shall commence at the property line. 
(2)	For towers more than 150 feet tall, a buffer area of not less than 20 feet wide shall be provided at the property line. 
(3)	The buffer zone is to consist of evergreen plant materials of a variety which can be expected to grow to form a continuous buffer at least 15 feet in height within five years of planting and a mature height of at least 25 to 30 feet or more. Recommended species include, but are not necessarily limited to, Foster Holly, N.R. Stevens' Holly, Carolina Cherry Laurel, Deodar Cedar, Leyland Cypress, Southern Magnolia. A mix of several species is encouraged over monoculture plants for visual quality and disease resistance. Buffer planting designs are subject to review and approval by the county. 
(4)	Trees and shrubs in the vicinity of guy wires shall be of a kind that would not exceed 20 feet in height or would not affect the stability of the guys, should they be uprooted, and shall not obscure visibility of the anchor from the transmission building or security facilities and staff/maintenance. 
(5)	Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that vegetation loss. 
(6)	In lieu of the standards of this section, the county may, at its sole discretion, allow use of any alternative detailed plan and specifications for landscaping and screening, including plants, fences, walls and other features designed to screen and buffer towers and accessory uses. The plan shall accomplish the same degree of screening achieved by the provisions of this section, except as lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes and/or for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived by the county. 
Sec. 14-189. - Maintenance impacts. 
Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector and local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector street unless approved otherwise for safety reasons. 
Sec. 14-190. - Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
(a)	Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made. 
(b)	Towers may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. Unless approved otherwise, the minimum distance between a tower and other principal use located on the same lot shall be for a monopole or lattice tower the greater of 20 percent of the tower height or 25 feet and for a guy tower, the greater of 100 percent of tower breakpoint or 25 feet. This separation is required to ensure compatibility of land uses and to provide for the health, safety and welfare of individuals and structures occupying the same site. 
(c)	Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals. The board of commissioners or its designee may grant an exception to the foregoing prohibition if the following conditions are met or exist: 
(1)	Farm use where the storage of such fuels or chemicals is solely for the purpose of on-site farm activities and is directly related to an ongoing bona fide farming operation for which the owner files a "Schedule F" with the related federal income tax return. 
(2)	Nonfarm uses which meet all of the following conditions:
a.	At least one-hour fire resistant interior surfaces are used in the construction of all buildings. 
b.	Fire extinguishers are on the property.
c.	Telecommunication facilities are not designed and operated in such a manner so as to minimize the risk of igniting a wildfire or intensifying one that otherwise occurs. 
d.	Graveled areas at least ten feet wide shall be installed completely around all new structures including the telecommunication towers. Fuels are kept in substantial compliance of the rules and regulations of the state safety fire commissioner and the state environmental protection division (EPD). 
e.	All tree trimmings and trash generated by construction of the facility shall be removed from the property and properly disposed of prior to building permit finalization or commencement of operation, whichever occurs first. 
f.	Demonstration of compliance with requirements of this article shall be signed off by a certified fire/safety inspector or engineer in the state on the building plans submitted. 
Sec. 14-191. - Tower lot size, setbacks and separations. 
(a)	The site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide an adequate setback from the base of the tower to any property line abutting a residential district, public property, or public street. Such setback shall be sufficient to: 
(1)	Provide for an adequate vegetative, topographic or other buffer as specified in this division; 
(2)	Preserve the privacy of surrounding residential property;
(3)	Protect adjoining property from the potential impact of tower failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in section 14-156. 
(b)	A site is presumed to be of sufficient size when it:
(1)	Meets the requirements of subsection (a) of this section;
(2)	Provides a setback equal to two times the height of the tower to any property line abutting a residential district, public property, or public street; and 
(3)	Provides a setback equal to or exceeding the rear yard setback required for the adjoining property where the adjoining property is not in a residential district nor a public property or a public street. 
(c)	Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
(d)	For a guyed structure, the site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide a setback equal to at least the height of the tower from a guy anchor to any property line abutting a residential district, public property or public street in addition to the size required to comply with subsection (b) of this section. Such setback shall be adequate to provide a vegetative, topographic or other buffer sufficient to obscure view to the anchor from such adjoining properties. 
(e)	All structures and uses associated with the transmission use other than the transmission tower shall be located to meet the setbacks where the tower is to be located. To encourage and accommodate shared use of a tower, the county may, but shall not be required to, waive or reduce setback requirements by up to 50 percent to accommodate the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment at a tower site. 
(f)	When not located on the same lot, no freestanding communications tower shall be allowed within a 1,000-foot radius of an existing tower within a residential district. 
(g)	When not located on the same lot, all freestanding towers shall conform to the following minimum tower separation requirements: 

 
Towers and antennas mounted on rooftops or alternative tower structures may be exempted from these minimum separation distances if so approved by the county. 
Chapter 18 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Emergency Management Assistant Compact , O.C.G.A. § 38-3-80 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - National Incident Management Systems (NIMS). 
Echols County hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in Echols County to train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Res. of 9-12-2005)
Secs. 18-2—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters or their imminent threat, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of these functions. 
(Res of 4-4-1994, § I; Res. of 7-7-2000, § I)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 18-32. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
(Res. of 4-4-1994, § VI)
Sec. 18-33. - Unlawful acts during emergencies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency: 
(1)	Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management agency in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this article. 
(2)	Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy; imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of the county; or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of the county. 
(3)	Wear, carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
Secs. 18-34—18-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY AUTHORITY 

Sec. 18-51. - Conditions authorizing declaration of emergency. 
The emergency management agency director and/or the chairman shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when, in his opinion, one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)	There is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions. 
(2)	Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of county roads or highways difficult or impossible. 
(3)	Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists.
(4)	There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the county.
Sec. 18-52. - Powers after declaration. 
After declaration of an emergency under section 18-51, the emergency management agency director and/or chairman, as chief executive, shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
(1)	Use employees of the county to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of its citizenry. 
(2)	Close roads and highways and delineate areas within the county wherein an emergency exists. 
(3)	Impose emergency curfew regulations.
(4)	Close business establishments within the affected area.
(5)	Close any or all county-owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public. 
(6)	Do all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the county. 
Sec. 18-53. - Effective period of emergency powers. 
No emergency power as set forth in section 18-52 may be effective for more than 72 hours after the declaration of an emergency by the chairman. However, upon declaration of a second or further emergencies to exist, the emergency powers as set forth in section 18-52 may be exercised during such further emergency period, but never for more than 72 hours in one declared emergency period. 
Sec. 18-54. - Duration. 
No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular, special or called meeting of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 18-55. - Specified area. 
The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the county shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
Secs. 18-56—18-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 18-81. - Participation. 
It is the desire and intent of the board of commissioners that a county emergency management agency be created. 
Sec. 18-82. - Appointment of director. 
The board of commissioners shall nominate for appointment, by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. 
(Res of 4-4-1994, § II; Res. of 7-7-2000, § II)
Sec. 18-83. - Duties of director. 
When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)	Represent the board of commissioners on matters pertaining to emergency management;
(2)	Assist county officials in organizing county departments;
(3)	Develop, in conjunction with county departments, the county plan for emergency functions set forth in section 18-84, such plan to be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities therein for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval; 
(4)	Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency; 
(5)	Submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc.; 
(6)	Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center; and 
(7)	Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, under the supervision of the county governing officials. 
(Res of 4-4-1994, § II; Res. of 7-7-2000, § II)
Sec. 18-84. - Composition; functions. 
(a)	The emergency management agency shall be established around existing county departments. The emergency functions are assigned as follows: 

 
(b)	Heads of county departments listed in subsection (a) of this section are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Res of 4-4-1994, § III)
Sec. 18-85. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
Upon a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the emergency management agency director and/or the chairman of the board of commissioners may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues the following powers: 
(1)	Enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)	Seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public;
(3)	Sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)	Perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Res of 4-4-1994, § IV)
Sec. 18-86. - Volunteers. 
All persons other than officers and employees of the county volunteering in service pursuant to the defense under this article shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such service, they shall have the same immunities as officers and employees of the county performing similar duties. 
(Res of 4-4-1994, § V)
Secs. 18-87—18-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 18-111. - Overcharging. 
(a)	Prohibited. In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which Echols County has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in Echols County to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(b)	Definitions. 
Overcharging is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. 
The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Echols County. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2008)
Sec. 18-112. - Building contractor registration. 
(a)	Required. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of Echols County, consisting of or relating to building, construction, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this section. 
(b)	Definitions. 
(1)	Building contractor. As used in this section, the work or term "building contractor" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
(2)	Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this section if: 
a.	He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
b.	He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation, or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
(3)	State of emergency. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(4)	Subsequent recovery period. That period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(c)	Registration; certification. All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of Echols County during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(d)	Registration fees. Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this section at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certificate. 
(e)	Penalties. Any building contractor required by this section to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this section. Violation of this section, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)	Transferability. Each certification issued under this section is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(g)	Display of registration certification. Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(h)	Revocation; suspension. Each certification granted under this section is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this section or any other county, state, or federal law. If, after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2008)
Sec. 18-113. - Suspension of portions of the Code and other formalities during a state of emergency. 
(a)	Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(1)	Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting Georgia or the United States, the affairs and business of Echols County may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of Echols County, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within Echols County. Such meeting may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(2)	Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(3)	Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of Echols County, or any portion thereof, where: 
a.	The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
b.	Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
c.	Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations.
(4)	Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee, or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees, or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(5)	Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee, or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the Echols County Health Department and Echols County Building and Inspections Department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six [months] in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(b)	Definitions. 
(1)	Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair, and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
(2)	State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3-(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence [of a] disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(3)	Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The subsequent recovery period shall not exceed six months. The state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Echols County. 
(4)	Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations of a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2008)
Sec. 18-114. - Curfew. 
(a)	Institution of curfew. 
(1)	Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of Echols County. 
(2)	All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(3)	The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(b)	Definitions. 
(1)	Curfew. A regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this section from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
(2)	Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, "exempt individuals" include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, property registered according to Echols County Ordinance to require registration and licensing of building and repair services during a state of emergency [section 18-113], performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
(3)	State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(c)	Prohibition. It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated Echols County during the state hours of the curfew. 
Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Dangerous dogs, § 10-61 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; health and sanitation, ch. 26; manufactured homes, ch. 30; planning and development, ch. 34; roads, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 42.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 22-31. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise that unreasonably or unnecessarily annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the county. The provisions of this article shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)	Any vehicle of the county while engaged in necessary public business.
(2)	Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the county or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)	The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses that are noncommercial in character. 
Sec. 22-32. - Enumeration. 
The acts contained in this article, among others, shall constitute a violation of this article; but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
Sec. 22-33. - Horns or signaling devices. 
The following shall be a violation of this article: 
(1)	The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the county except as a danger warning. 
(2)	The creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable period of time. 
(3)	The use of any signaling device, except a police whistle or one operated by hand or electricity. 
(4)	The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust.
(5)	The use of any signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason.
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 1)
Sec. 22-34. - Radios, phonographs, other machines or devices that produce or reproduce sound. 
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with a louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener shall be a violation of this article. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device 24 hours per day in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 2)
Sec. 22-35. - Loudspeakers, amplifiers or other devices for production or reproduction of sound for advertising. 
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure without a special permit from the county clerk or board of commissioners shall be a violation of this article. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer, in person, and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 3)
Sec. 22-36. - Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing. 
Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity shall be a violation of this article. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 4)
Sec. 22-37. - Animals and birds. 
The keeping of any animal or bird that will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise shall be a violation of this article. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10. 
Sec. 22-38. - Steam whistle. 
The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper county authorities, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 5)
Sec. 22-39. - Exhausts. 
The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 6)
Sec. 22-40. - Defect in vehicle or load. 
The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise shall be a violation of this article. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 7)
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 46. 
Sec. 22-41. - Loading, unloading or opening boxes. 
The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers shall be a violation of this article. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 8)
Sec. 22-42. - Construction or repairing of buildings. 
The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair, of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays, and 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, except on urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the county building official, shall be a violation of this article. Such permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and may be renewed by the board of commissioners for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the board of commissioners determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the board may grant permission for such work to be done from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., upon application made at the time the permit for the work is applied for or during the progress of the work. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 9)
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 22-43. - Schools, courts, churches or hospitals. 
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while they are in session or adjacent to any hospital, and which unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed about such institutions indicating the presence of such institutions, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 10)
Sec. 22-44. - Hawkers, peddlers and vendors. 
The shouting and crying of hawkers, peddlers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood shall be a violation of this article. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 11)
Sec. 22-45. - Noises to attract attention. 
The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale by creation of noise shall be a violation of this article. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 12)
Sec. 22-46. - Transportation of metal rails, pillars or columns. 
The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 22-47. - Piledrivers, hammers or other such appliances. 
The operation from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise without a special permit from the board of commissioners, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 13)
Sec. 22-48. - Blowers. 
The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 14)
Sec. 22-49. - Sound trucks. 
The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes and the use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during such hours or in such places or with such volume as would constitute such use a public nuisance shall be a violation of this article. 
(Mo. of 8-29-2002, § 15)
Sec. 22-50. - Vehicle repair in residential areas. 
The repairing, rebuilding, or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the residents of the area shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 22-51. - Exemptions. 
(a)	The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)	Noises of safety signals and warning devices.
(2)	Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or responding to an emergency. 
(3)	Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work requited to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(b)	Applications for other exemptions from the noise regulations of this article should be filed with the county clerk for approval by the chairman, and should state the time, date, organization and reason for the request. 
Sec. 22-52. - Injunctions. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this article which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents of this county shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Secs. 22-53—22-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything within the county that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this article. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 22-82. - Enumeration. 
(a)	The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
(b)	The following are declared to be nuisances:
(1)	Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the county. 
(2)	Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood. 
(3)	Discharging of offensive matter. The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)	Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the county. 
(5)	Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the county so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, as published and used by the United States Geological Survey, shall be the standard for such grading; and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(6)	Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)	Nonconforming structures and machines. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or county ordinance. 
(8)	Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
(9)	Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the county. 
(10)	Depositing trash, garbage and refuse on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the county or which unreasonably annoys others. 
(11)	Unoccupied buildings. Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed. 
(12)	Unsafe vehicles, machinery and equipment. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in a good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards). The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked. 
(13)	Gutters or spouts. Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the county. 
Sec. 22-83. - Prohibited generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the county. 
Sec. 22-84. - Issuance of summons for abatement. 
Whenever any nuisance exists within the county, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the county that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the county, and the owner or other responsible person refuses or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate the nuisance, the sheriff, or the officer having responsibility for enforcement of this article, may issue a summons and cause the summons to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts of ordinances claimed to be violated, and requiring such person to appear before the magistrate judge at a time, date and place specified in the summons, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
Sec. 22-85. - Order for abatement. 
(a)	If the magistrate judge at the hearing required by section 22-84 shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code or the ordinances of the county is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his/her order and judgment so finding and shall order the property owner or other responsible person to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated, including, but not limited to, rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property owner or other responsible person shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the county shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever actions deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition; and the expense shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for county taxes. 
(b)	Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of county taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as in the case of county taxes. 
State Law reference— Authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 22-86. - Special provisions for old, unused, stripped, junked automobiles. 
(a)	Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in a good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more, except in licensed junkyards, within this county is a nuisance. 
(b)	The owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot within this county upon which the storage of property is made, and also the owners and/or lessees of the property involved in such storage shall jointly and severally abate the nuisance by the prompt removal of the property into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes, if within the county, or otherwise by removing it to a location outside the corporate limits. 
Sec. 22-87. - Constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in sections 22-84 and 22-85. 
Sec. 22-88. - Service on nonresidents and others. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the county to proceed under sections 22-84 and 22-85 and the owner of the property or other responsible person resides outside the county limits, or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 22-85 shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved, and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the county once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to the hearing. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the county limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
Sec. 22-89. - Other powers preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the magistrate judge to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the magistrate judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his/her order. 
Secs. 22-90—22-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 46.
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.

Sec. 22-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer which: 
(1)	Has been left by the owner or some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman, or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of 30 days after the time agreed upon; or within 30 days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer, repairman, or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within 30 days after the completion of necessary repairs; 
(2)	Is left unattended on a public street, road, highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(3)	Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim to the vehicle; 
(4)	Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without the owner's having made claim to the vehicle; or 
(5)	Has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim to the vehicle. 
Motor vehicle and vehicle mean a motor vehicle and trailer. 
Owner means the owner, lessor, lessee, security interest holders, and all lienholders as shown on the records of the state department of revenue. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. 
Sec. 22-142. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise, to store or deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, any abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the county. 
Sec. 22-143. - Removal—Required. 
Any abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle shall be removed upon ten days' written notice to the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the motor vehicle is stored or deposited, or to the owner thereof if the identity of such owner of the motor vehicle can be ascertained through license plates or otherwise. If such motor vehicle is not removed after ten days' written notice, the sheriff's department of the county shall remove or cause the removal and sale at the cost of the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of such motor vehicle, if such owner can be ascertained. Sale shall be made to the highest of two bids obtained from dealers in such property. 
Sec. 22-144. - Same—Notice to owner and state. 
(a)	Any person who removes a motor vehicle from public or private property at the request of someone other than the owner or who stores any motor vehicle which has been left unattended shall seek the identity of the owner of such vehicle and shall, within 15 days of the day such vehicle became an abandoned motor vehicle, give notice in writing to the state department of revenue and the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, stating the manufacturer's vehicle identification number, the license number, the fact that such vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle, and the present location of such vehicle, and requesting the name and address of all owners, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of such vehicle. If a person removing or storing the vehicle has knowledge of facts which reasonably indicate that the vehicle is registered or titled in a certain other state, he/she shall check the motor vehicle records of that other state in the attempt to ascertain the identity of the owner of the vehicle. 
(b)	Upon ascertaining the owner of such motor vehicle, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall, within three days, by certified or registered mail, notify the owner, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of the location of such vehicle and of the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(c)	If the identity of the owner of such motor vehicle cannot be ascertained, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall place an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such vehicle was obtained or, if there is no newspaper in the county, shall post such advertisement at the county courthouse in such place where other public notices are posted. Such advertisement shall run in the newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks or shall remain posted at the courthouse for two consecutive weeks. The advertisement shall contain a complete description of the motor vehicle, its license and manufacturer's vehicle identification numbers, the location where such vehicle was initially left unattended by the owner, the present location of such vehicle, and the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2. 
Chapter 26 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; manufactured homes, ch. 30; solid waste, ch. 42.
State Law reference— County boards of health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-31. - Adopted. 
The following rules and regulations of the state department of human resources are adopted: 
(1)	Chapter 290-5-26, On-Site Sewage Management Systems.
(2)	Chapter 290-5-14, Food Service.
(3)	Chapter 290-5-18, Tourist Courts.
(Ord. of 7-2-1990, § I)
Sec. 26-32. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)	Any person violating the provisions of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-19. Separate offenses shall be deemed to be committed on each day during on or which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)	In addition to all other provisions of this article, any violation of this article is deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction in the superior court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 7-2-1990, § III)
Sec. 26-33. - Issuance of citation. 
(a)	Upon information of a violation of any of the rules and regulations adopted in this article being made known to the county health officer or to his designee, there shall cause a citation to be issued requiring such violator to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for such violation. 
(b)	Citations issued under this section shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and shall be personally served upon the person accused of such violation. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(Ord. of 7-2-1990, §§ II, IV)
Chapter 30 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND PREOWNED HOUSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 26; planning and development, ch. 34; roads, ch. 38.
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-490 et seq.; issuance of mobile home location permits; display of decals, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492; the Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Permit required. 
Prior to the location or relocation of any house or mobile home within the county, a building permit must be acquired from the county commissioners' office. 
(Mo. of 2-2-1976)
Secs. 30-2—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DECAL 

Sec. 30-31. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any mobile home dealer or mover to locate or relocate a house or mobile home on any land in the county whose owner has not made application for a building permit from the county commissioners' office, as required in section 30-1, and obtained a decal from the county tax commissioners' office and have the decal affixed thereto. 
(Mo. of 2-2-1976)
Sec. 30-32. - Application. 
The application for a building permit, as required in section 30-1, shall be filed with the county commissioners' office and shall disclose the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant.
(2)	The location and address of the house or mobile home upon which land such house or mobile home is to be placed. 
(3)	The manufacturer, size, year, model and serial number of the mobile home to be located or relocated within the county. 
(4)	Sewage certification with verification of an adequate sewage disposal system.
Sec. 30-33. - Fee. 
The fee for a permit required by this article shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Mo. of 2-2-1976)
Sec. 30-34. - Issuance. 
It shall be the duty of the county commissioners' office to issue to an applicant under this article a permit for the location or relocation of a house or mobile home. 
(Mo. of 2-2-1976)
Sec. 30-35. - Renewal. 
Renewal of decals under this article shall be granted by the tax commissioner each year thereafter, upon payment of taxes due, if applicable. In such cases where the mobile home is a homestead there shall be no fee. 
Sec. 30-36. - Display. 
All decals issued pursuant to this article shall be affixed on the mobile home in such manner as to be clearly visible from the front or from the street or roadway. 
Sec. 30-37. - Utility connections. 
It shall be unlawful for any electric, gas or water utility company to connect electricity, gas or water to any house or mobile home to be located in the county unless a building permit has been issued by the county commissioners' office, and a decal attached thereto. 
Secs. 30-38—30-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USED, PREOWNED HOMES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-71. - Inspection required; exception. 
No used or preowned house, mobile home or manufactured home being moved into the county shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this county without an inspection if such house, mobile home or manufactured home is over 12 years old. However, mobile home or manufactured home that is located in the county as of February 10, 2003, shall not be affected by passage of the resolution from which this section was derived if such existing mobile home or manufactured home was manufactured prior to U.S. Housing and Urban Development Department construction standards. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-72. - Permit requirements. 
No permit shall be issued under this division unless a septic tank permit has been obtained from the health department. All houses, mobile homes or manufactured homes being moved into the county shall conform to all permitting requirements. No house, mobile home or manufactured home permit shall be issued unless proof of payment of the current year's taxes is provided. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-73. - Inspections outside the county. 
Mobile homes or manufactured homes 12 years old or older can be moved into the county only after passing an inspection on all requirements set out in this article. These inspections outside the county shall be: 
(1)	Limited to a 100-mile radius of the county, with none accepted outside this radius;
(2)	Inspections to be conducted by the county building inspection department;
(3)	Scheduled by the building inspector;
(4)	Subject to the fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-74. - Violations. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be brought before the magistrate court for violation of this article and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-19. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by that person and shall be punished by a fine per day as provided in section 1-19 for the violation. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Secs. 30-75—30-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 30-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assignee means any bank financing institution or any person purchasing a retail installment contract that has as security a manufactured home. 
Preowned manufactured home means any manufactured home as defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131(3) that has been previously utilized as a residential dwelling. 
Retailer is synonymous with dealer as defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131(2). 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 30-102. - Sanitary facilities. 
Every preowned house or manufactured home shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet all in working condition when properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be in a sanitary, working condition free from leaks and obstructions. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-103. - Hot and cold water supply. 
Every kitchen sink, lavatory and tub or shower in a preowned house or manufactured home must be connected to a supply of both cold and hot water. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-104. - Water heating facilities. 
Every preowned house or manufactured home shall have water heating facilities in a safe, working condition. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-105. - Heating facilities. 
(a)	Every preowned house or manufactured home shall have heating facilities in safe, working condition. Where a central heating system is not provided, each house or manufactured home shall be provided with facilities whereby heating appliances may be connected. 
(b)	Unvented fuel-burning heaters shall be prohibited except for gas heaters listed for unvented use and the total input rating of the unvented heaters is less than 30 BTUs per hour per cubic foot of room content. 
(c)	Unvented fuel-burning heaters shall be prohibited in bedrooms.
(d)	In lieu of inspecting the heating facilities of a preowned house or manufactured home, the retailer may request a heating inspection by a qualified third party. Approval by such person will be accepted as compliance with those portions of the safety standards established in this division which pertain to heating systems. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-106. - Smoke detector. 
Every preowned house or manufactured home shall be provided with a state-approved smoke detector, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-107. - Windows. 
Every habitable room in every preowned house or manufactured home, excluding bathrooms, kitchens and hallways, shall have at least one window that can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors. Glass must be in the windows. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-108. - Ventilation. 
Every habitable room in every preowned house or manufactured home shall have at least one window or skylight which can be opened, or such other device that will ventilate the room. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-109. - Electrical. 
(a)	Distribution panels. Distribution panels in every preowned house or manufactured home shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all unused openings covered with black covers approved and listed for that purpose. 
(b)	Electrical system. The electrical system (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in a working condition. The preowned house or manufactured home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to ensure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
(c)	Third party inspection. The retailer may, in lieu of inspecting the electrical and heating systems of a preowned house or manufactured home, request an electrical inspection by a qualified third party. Approval by such a person will be accepted as compliance with those portions of the safety standards established in this division which pertain to electrical systems. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-110. - Exterior walls. 
The exterior of the preowned house or manufactured home shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the preowned house or manufactured home. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-111. - Exterior siding. 
The exterior siding of the preowned house or manufactured home shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-112. - Roofs. 
Roofs of every preowned house or manufactured home shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects, which might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-113. - Interior floors, walls and ceiling. 
Every floor, interior wall and ceiling of every preowned house or manufactured home shall be kept in sound condition to prevent the admittance of rain or moisture. 
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Sec. 30-114. - Exception for homes purchased for repair. 
(a)	If a preowned house or manufactured home is to be sold as is for purposes of repair prior to occupancy, the sales agreement and/or contract shall specifically state that the purchaser understands that the home is not habitable in its present condition and that the purchaser must bring the home into compliance with the specified standards. 
(b)	No home may be placed for occupancy until the standards in this division are met.
(Res. of 2-9-2003)
Chapter 32 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 32-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the county to engage in any conduct described as follows subsections: 
(1)	Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of his life, limb, or health; 
(2)	Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)	Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)	Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(5)	Be in or about any place, alone or with another or others, with the purpose of or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable thing, or to aid or abet any person in doing so; 
(6)	Be in or about any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, narcotics or dangerous drugs (controlled substances) is practiced, allowed or tolerated, for the purpose of or with intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcoholic beverages; 
(7)	Direct "fighting words" toward another, i.e., words which by their very nature tend to incite a breach of the peace; 
(8)	Interfere, by acts of physical obstruction, with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation;
(9)	Congregate with another or others in or on any public way or grounds so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and fail to clear that public way or grounds after being ordered to do so by a county law officer or another lawful authority; 
(10)	Disrupt, by actions which tend to incite a breach of peace, the activities of any house of worship, hospital, home for the elderly or any lawful meeting, gathering or procession; 
(11)	Throw bottles, paper, cans, glass, sticks, stones, missiles, or any other debris on public property; 
(12)	Be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane or loud unbecoming language. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2003)
Chapter 34 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any zoning resolution or ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-14(a)(10); any resolution or ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-14(a)(11); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; manufactured homes, ch. 30; roads, ch. 38.
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Amendment to comprehensive plan. 
The board of commissioners adopts the amendment to the 2015 Echols County Comprehensive Plan and transmit notification to the South Georgia Regional Development Center and the state department of community affairs for certification of completion. 
(Res. of 6-5-2000)
Sec. 34-2. - Housing authority. 
A housing authority shall be established to function in the county. Such housing authority shall be known as the Housing Authority of Echols County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 4-2-1979)
Secs. 34-3—34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOUTH REGIONAL JOINT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—A resolution adopted September 12, 2005, redesignated the Lowndes County, Lanier County, Berrien County and Echols County Development Authority as the South Regional Joint Development Authority.

Sec. 34-61. - Authority to create. 
Two or more counties located in the state may, pursuant to the Development Authorities Law (1963 Ga. Laws, page 531, § 1; 1969 Ga. Laws, page 137, § 1), create a joint authority. 
(Res. of 11-19-1998)
Sec. 34-62. - Creation. 
On March 31, 1995, the Board of Commissioners of Lowndes County, Georgia, and the Board of Commissioners of Lanier County, Georgia, each determined that it was in the best interests of the residents of the counties governed by each to create a joint authority for the purpose of developing, promoting and enhancing economic development and employment in both counties. 
(Res. of 11-19-1998)
Sec. 34-63. - Joint authority. 
The Boards of Commissioners of Lowndes County and Lanier County, Georgia, signed a joint resolution creating a joint authority known as the Lowndes County and Lanier County Development Authority which was activated on March 31, 1995, and was to be governed by O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 62 in the same manner as other authorities created pursuant thereto, except as specifically provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1. 
(Res. of 11-19-1998)
Sec. 34-64. - Inclusion; membership. 
(a)	The Board of Commissioners of Lowndes County, Georgia, the Board of Commissioners of Lanier County, Georgia, the Board of Commissioners of Berrien County, Georgia, the Board of Commissioners of Echols County, Georgia, have each determined that it is in the best interests of the residents of each county governed by these commissions to expand the joint authority formerly created by Lowndes County and Lanier County to also include the counties of Berrien County, Georgia, Echols County, Georgia, Clinch County, Georgia, Brooks County, Georgia and Cook County, Georgia. 
(b)	The authority created and activated under this article by the former action of Lowndes County, Georgia, and Lanier County, Georgia, is, by the resolution stated in section 34-63, amended and supplemented to include Berrien County, Georgia, Echols County, Georgia, Clinch County, Georgia, Brooks County, Georgia, and Cook County, Georgia. The joint authority shall be known as the South Regional Joint Development Authority. The amended joint authority shall consist of 15 members who are residents of either Lowndes County, Georgia, Lanier County, Georgia, Berrien County, Georgia, Echols County, Georgia, Clinch County, Georgia, Brooks County, Georgia, or Cook County, Georgia as follows: Two members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Lowndes County, Georgia; two members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Lanier County, Georgia; two members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Berrien County, Georgia; two members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Echols County, Georgia; two members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissions of Clinch County, Georgia; two members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Brooks County, Georgia; and two members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Cook County, Georgia; and the fifteenth member shall be appointed by the concurrent action of the Board of Commissioners of each member county. The respective terms of the members shall begin as follows: 
(1)	The first member appointed by the board of commissioners of each county shall be appointed for a term of two years. 
(2)	The second member appointed by the board of commissioners of each county shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
(3)	The member appointed by the joint action of the board of commissioners from each county shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
Thereafter, upon expiration of such terms, successors shall be appointed for a term of three years by the political body who appointed the member whose term is expiring. All members who have served on the authority shall be eligible for reappointment to succeed themselves if they are reappointed by said political subdivision and any member not replaced at the end of his or her term shall continue to serve until such time as the county appointing him or her has acted to replace him or her. Should any member resign, or be unable to serve, or move beyond the boundaries of the county appointing such member, his or her successor shall be appointed to serve his or her remaining term by the political subdivision who originally appointed the member being removed. 
(Res. of 11-19-1998; Res. of 9-12-2005)
Sec. 34-65. - Adoption. 
The resolution stated in section 34-63 was adopted by the joint action of the Board of Commissioners of Lowndes County, Georgia, the Board of Commissioners of Lanier County, Georgia, the Board of Commissioners of Berrien County, Georgia, and the Board of Commissioners of Echols County, Georgia, during their respective monthly meeting as is set out by the chairman's signature for each respective county. 
The amendments to the above-mentioned resolution were adopted by the joint action of the Board of Commissioners of Lowndes County, Georgia, Board of Commissioners of Lanier County, Georgia, the Board of Commissioners of Berrien County, Georgia, the Board of Commissioners of Echols County, Georgia, the Board of Commissioners of Clinch County, Georgia, the Board of Commissioners of Brooks County, Georgia, and the Board of Commissioners of Cook County, Georgia during their respective monthly meeting as is set out by the chairman's signature for each respective county. 
(Res. of 11-19-1998; Res. of 9-12-2008)
Secs. 34-66—34-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COASTAL PLAINS AREA PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 34-101. - Findings. 
The following findings apply pursuant to this article: 
(1)	It appears to be advantageous to the welfare of the county that a comprehensive and continuous planning program be undertaken. 
(2)	The county commissioners of roads and revenues need an area planning commission to assist in guiding and accomplishing a coordinated and harmonious development of the county and the coastal plains of the state which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development. 
(Res. of 6-3-1963)
Sec. 34-102. - Establishment. 
The county commissioners of roads and revenue, in cooperation with the governing authorities of other area counties and municipalities, establish the coastal plains area planning and development commission to be governed by the provisions of this article. 
(Res. of 6-3-1963)
Sec. 34-103. - Membership. 
The coastal plains area planning and development commission shall consist of two members from each of the counties participating in the area planning commission. Of the two members from each county, one shall be appointed by the governing authority of the municipality wherein the county is located (or by the governing authorities of participating municipalities within such county) and the other shall be appointed by the governing authority of such county, except in a county which does not have an active, incorporated municipality in which case the governing authority of the county shall appoint two members. 
(Res. of 6-3-1963, § 1)
Sec. 34-104. - Term of office. 
The term of office for all members of the coastal plains area planning and development commission shall be five years, except that the initial appointments by the county shall be for terms of four years and three years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing authority making the appointment which has become vacant. The appointing authority shall also have the power to remove any member it may appoint for cause, on written charges, after public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Res. of 6-3-1963, § 2)
Sec. 34-105. - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
The coastal plains area planning and development commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its appointive members. The terms of office of the chairman and vice-chairman shall be for one year or until reelected or until their successors are elected. The commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an employee of the commission. The commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the chairman or board may determine, shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, fundings, and determinations, which record shall be public record. The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work. In the performance of its duties, the planning commission may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, or local public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations, may spend such funds, and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. It may make expenditures for the purchase of required equipment and supplies. The expenditures for the commission, exclusive of gifts to the commission and contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the participating governing authorities. 
(Res. of 6-3-1963, § 3)
Sec. 34-106. - Powers and duties. 
It shall be the function and duty of the coastal plains area planning and development commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the development of the entire coastal plains area of the state and each political subdivision therein. In general, the commission shall have such powers and duties and responsibilities as set forth in state law. 
(Res. of 6-3-1963, § 4)
Chapter 38 - ROADS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any resolution or ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county saved from repeal, § 1-14(a)(6); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; manufactured homes, ch. 30; planning and development, ch. 34.
State Law reference— State, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; authority to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4).

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HAULING AND LOGGING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-31. - Scope. 
This article shall cover any person who uses a county right-of-way in carrying out its business by loading, transporting, or unloading materials of any nature whether on the road surface or a county right-of-way or crossing the unpaved portion of the right-of-way, including ditches or embankments. 
Sec. 38-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access site means any temporary roadway, drive, structure, fill or device, existing or constructed, that is used or employed for the purpose of crossing, travel upon or use of county road rights-of-way. 
County right-of-way means the shoulder, front slope, ditch, drain and back slope, facility or any appurtenance of any county road. 
County road means any county-owned or county-maintained highway, road, street, avenue, drive, detour or other way open to the public and intended or used for the passage of motor vehicles. 
Harvester means any person involved in loading and hauling pulpwood, stone, fill dirt, or construction material or logging and timber operations coming under the provisions of this article. 
Heavy equipment machinery and vehicles means any and all devices in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn, including, but not limited to, semitrailers, trailers, tractors and truck tractors; provided, however, that vehicles in use immediately for the control or extinguishing of wild fire shall be exempt from this article. 
Loading and unloading shall be defined by their everyday meaning but also shall include any activity known as harvesting or mining of any product or material. 
Operations means those activities contemplated by this article, including the loading or transporting of raw materials such as stone, timber, pulpwood, fill dirt, sand and construction material. 
Operator means any person, and the officer's agents, and employees thereof, carrying out the activities contemplated by this article. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 38-33. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to a fine and/or injunctive relief or any other legal procedure authorized by law. Any fine imposed shall be as provided in section 1-19. 
Sec. 38-34. - Inspection of site. 
Upon completion of operations under this article, the operator shall give written or oral notification to the commissioners' office. The site shall be inspected by a county official from the commissioners' office or road department. This official shall provide notice of release of liability to the operator within ten days of notification of completion. 
Sec. 38-35. - Exemptions. 
Small and limited operations of less than three tons in load less than 48 hours in duration and using existing driveways may be exempted from the bonding requirements of this article within the reasonable discretion of the designated county official. 
Sec. 38-36. - Liability. 
Any provisions of this article notwithstanding, an applicant or operator shall be liable to the county for the full amount of any damages caused by such operations, the amount of bond notwithstanding. 
Sec. 38-37. - Arbitration. 
If the parties cannot agree on the amount of damages, then the applicant shall have the right to request arbitration in writing. The county shall choose one arbitrator and the operator shall choose the second, both of whom shall be residents of the county. Together, the two designees shall choose a third arbitrator who shall be a registered forester residing in the county or a county contiguous thereto. Within 30 days of their designation, such arbitration panel shall review the damages and render a decision which shall be subject to appeal to the county superior court. 
Secs. 38-38—38-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 38-61. - Loading sites. 
All harvesting, grading or loading shall be conducted at a loading site off of county rights-of-way and behind the established ditch line of county roads. 
Sec. 38-62. - Ditches. 
All ditches shall be kept clear of all debris or residue at all times to allow for proper drainage. Culverts shall be installed at temporary entrances, as needed, to facilitate proper drainage flow. The designated county official shall notify the operator of the requirement for a culvert based on good engineering and driveway maintenance practices. 
Sec. 38-63. - Warning signs. 
Any person operating on county rights-of-way shall be required to post warning signs at least 500 feet on both sides of a temporary driveway adequately warning oncoming traffic of persons, vehicles, equipment or machinery entering the roadway. 
Sec. 38-64. - Roadway. 
County roads shall be kept serviceable and open at all times for school buses, emergency vehicles, mail carriers and traffic of the general public. No equipment shall be parked on county roads. 
Sec. 38-65. - Adjacent properties. 
The operations will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the means of ingress and egress from the affected and adjacent properties. 
Sec. 38-66. - Removal of debris. 
(a)	All individual property owners are prohibited from depositing all logs, limbs and other clearing debris deposited by hired logging firms clearing their individual properties in all county ditches and rights-of-way. 
(b)	Should such debris be identified and not removed by the property owner, the county will remove such debris with the owner being billed for the expense to remove such clearing debris. 
Secs. 38-67—38-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TIMBER HARVESTING 

Sec. 38-76. - Notification required. 
(a)	The timber harvesting contractor shall give one day telephone notice and three-day written notification, via e-mail, via mail, or via in person, to the county administrator of Echols County, or his/her designee, of moving in equipment or cutting any trees, which are to be removed from the land where said trees are standing. 
(b)	If the timber harvesting operator should elect to harvest more acres than the original notification, an additional notification form must be transmitted to the county administrator pursuant to the timeframe set out in subsection (a). 
(Ord. of 2-5-2007)
Sec. 38-77. - Procedure and issuance and use of permits. 
(a)	Upon proper notification permits shall be issued by Echols County without cost or fee. 
(b)	The county administrator or his/her designee shall have the authority to suspend timber harvesting operations should the said operations have detrimental affect on the county's infrastructure. Notwithstanding, any damage to the county's infrastructure shall be repaid to the county's satisfaction by the timber harvesting operator at no cost to the county as soon as practical, not to exceed ten days from notification. 
(c)	The timber harvesting operator shall be responsible for ensuring no limbs, trucks, equipment or brush resulting from the harvesting operation shall encroach on the county's right-of-way. 
(d)	The timber harvesting operator must notify the county administrator within 24 hours of when operator moves off of the tract temporarily, when the operator returns to the tract and when the harvesting operation is completed. 
(Ord. of 2-5-2007)
Sec. 38-78. - Compliance and penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate provisions of the division shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00 per day for each day of such violation for a first offense. If violation is willful then the civil penalty shall be $250.00 per day. A second or subsequent offense shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000.00 per day, until the violation is corrected. 
(Ord. of 2-5-2007)
Sec. 38-79. - Enforcement. 
This division shall be enforced by the county administrator or his/her designee. Citations for violations may be issued by the county administrator or his/her designee, including any certified county law enforcement officer acting under the authority of the Echols County Sheriff. Citations for violations shall require appearance before the magistrate court of Echols County. 
(Ord. of 2-5-2007)
Chapter 42 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 26.
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2).

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Adoption of solid waste management plan. 
The Echols County Solid Waste Management Plan, in its form approved by the state department of community affairs and on file in the office of the county clerk, is adopted by reference. 
(Res. of 6-3-1994)
Secs. 42-2—42-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 42-91. - Littering prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast, or deposit upon any highway, alley, or any yard or premises, public or private, any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers, rubbish, bottles, or any other form of litter or waste whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 5-8-1995, § 1)
Sec. 42-92. - Waste disposal generally. 
(a)	The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposition of garbage and refuse on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter at any place in this county including, without limitation, any public or private property in this county or any waters in this county unless such litter originates in this county, and: 
(1)	The property is designated by the board of commissioners or its duly designated agent for disposal of litter and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)	The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or
(3)	The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare and not otherwise in violation of law. 
(Ord. of 5-8-1995, § 2)
Sec. 42-93. - Transporting litter. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle in the county hauling wet or moist waste that leaks, flows freely or spills from such vehicle. 
(b)	Any litter or waste hauled on a moving vehicle shall be covered or secured in such a manner that litter will not blow or escape from such vehicle while moving or parked on public streets or roadways in the county. 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 46. 
Sec. 42-94. - Regulation of garbage or litter containers or receptacles. 
(a)	All garbage or litter containers or receptacles shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for garbage and litter disposal. 
(b)	Persons using garbage or litter containers or receptacles shall deposit all authorized garbage and refuse in the container or receptacle. 
(c)	No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in any garbage or litter container or receptacle. 
(d)	No person shall set fire to the contents of any garbage or litter container or receptacle.
(e)	No dead animals shall be deposited in any garbage or litter container or receptacle.
(f)	No person shall deposit large noncompactible articles in garbage or litter containers or receptacles such as stoves, refrigerators, bed springs or tires, large tree limbs, air conditioning units or similar items. 
(g)	No one shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any garbage or litter container or receptacle. 
(h)	No person shall disturb or scatter litter in and around garbage or litter containers or receptacles. 
Sec. 42-95. - Scavenging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than designated employees in performing their normal duties, to rummage through, separate or remove any object placed in or upon such garbage container. 
(Ord. of 5-8-1995, § 3)
Sec. 42-96. - Defacing containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint upon, deface or in any way cause any damage whatsoever to any garbage container or receptacle placed upon the premises for the collection of garbage. 
(Ord. of 5-8-1995, § 4)
Chapter 46 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Defect in vehicle or load, § 22-40; abandoned motor vehicles, § 22-141 et seq.; transporting litter, § 42-93.
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga.Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ 3(a)(4); traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; certain powers preserved to local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 46-2. - Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages in vehicles. 
(a)	As used in this section, the term "open containers" means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from, or the seal of which has been broken. 
(b)	It is unlawful and punishable as provided in this section for any person to possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage while operating a vehicle in the county or while a passenger in or on a vehicle being operated in the county. 
(c)	An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger and is not located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk, or other locked nonpassenger area of the vehicle. 
(d)	An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of a passenger of a vehicle if the container is in the physical control of the passenger. 
(e)	This section shall not apply to:
(1)	A passenger of a vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to state law. 
(2)	A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to state law or any other state. 
(3)	A passenger of a self-contained motor home which is in excess of 21 feet in length.
(f)	Any person, operator of a vehicle, or passenger who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1989)
Sec. 46-3. - Parental responsibility. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, such minor to violate any provision of this chapter or state law regarding the operation of vehicles. 
Sec. 46-4. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the roads of the county may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the sheriff may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them, shall be liable therefore as for other violations of this chapter. 
Secs. 46-5—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 46-31. - General speed limit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or portion of a street in the county at a rate of speed greater than 30 miles per hour unless another speed limit is posted or otherwise designated for such street or portion of a street. 
Sec. 46-32. - Maximum speed limits on specific streets. 
The board of commissioners may alter the maximum speed limits established by section 46-31 on any street or portion of any street within the county in accordance with the provisions of state law. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion of a street, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. 
Sec. 46-33. - Traffic, speed zones; signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)	Upon approval of the board of commissioners, the sheriff is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices the following: 
(1)	Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(2)	Other safety zones for pedestrians.
(3)	Traffic lanes.
(4)	Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones.
(5)	Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices.
(6)	Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the county. 
(b)	All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this section for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the county. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this section shall be official traffic control devices of the county. 
(c)	The county clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate official map setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic control devices. The map and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by the board of commissioners and the map shall be known as the official traffic control map of the county. An official copy thereof shall be kept in the office of the county clerk, shall be available to the public, and copies certified by the county clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device. 
(d)	No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(e)	Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this section shall be a violation of this section. 
Sec. 46-34. - Speed detection devices. 
(a)	The county is authorized to use speed detection devices for the purpose of traffic control on the roads and streets in the county. 
(b)	Such speed detection devices shall be used only for the purpose of public safety and traffic control, and shall not be used for the purpose of raising revenue. 
Sec. 46-35. - Covering of loads. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this county unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the county. 
Sec. 46-36. - Parking in deceleration or acceleration lanes prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park any automobile, truck, bus, truck tractor, trailer, tractor, trailer combination, motorcycle, moped, or other motor vehicle within or upon the deceleration or acceleration lanes lying in the county. 
(b)	Deceleration and acceleration lanes shall be defined for the purpose of this section as those strips of pavement lying adjacent to and to the east of the northbound lanes of traffic and adjacent to and to the west of the southbound lanes of traffic which are not part of the regular roadway but afford access into and out of the driveways and side roads along the highway. 
(c)	Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a violation of a county ordinance and shall be prosecuted in the municipal court. A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Special Acts and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 