THE CODE OF THE CITY OF DARIEN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DARIEN, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
David Bluestein 
Mayor 
____________ 
W. Joel Williams 
Lauretta Sams 
Kelly Spratt 
Eunice Moore 
City Council 
____________ 
C. Brett Cook 
City Manager 
____________ 
Gary Moore 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Colleen Jolley 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Darien, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1998 Code, as supplemented through the Cultural and Heritage Tourism (CHT) District Ordinance adopted by the city council on November 21, 2006. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1998 Code, as supplemented by any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Lisa Stevens, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Brett Cook, City Manager, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City of Darien, Georgia, readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Darien, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Darien, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Darien, Georgia. 2007. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the city, as adopted by 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 824). Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication, preclearance under the federal laws and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Darien, in McIntosh County, Georgia, is reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and is constituted and declared to be a body politic and corporate under the name and style "City of Darien," Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. References in this charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Darien. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in a manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk of the city and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Darien, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace but such earlier maps shall be retained in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 1.12. - Municipal powers. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. Said powers shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this paragraph; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq.] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such license fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 22-2-1 et seq.] or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefitting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, or prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, to provide for the enforcement of such standards and to prohibit the commission of nuisances in the city and provide punishment therefore, to summarily abate any nuisance by any necessary and proper means to accomplish the purpose whenever in their judgment, such nuisance is injurious to the health, comfort, or convenience of the inhabitants, either with or without complaint against it; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, electrical, and communication distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, public grounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, other public utilities, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 22-2-1 et seq.] or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right of way of any street, road, alley, or walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city, for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer and water fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system and to charge for water as well; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of any intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs or similar conveyances. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(42)  Development agreements. The Darien City Council shall have authority to enter into development agreements with any owner or developer of property that requires the owner or developer to install infrastructure or other improvements beneficial to existing or future residents, that provides for other actions which furthers the public interest or sets out the regulations that will apply to a development which is phased over time. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(3) ; Ord. of 2-17-2009(1)) 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 2.10. - Mayor and city council creation; composition; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. 
(b)  The mayor shall serve for terms of four years and the terms of councilmembers shall be for four years. No person shall be eligible to serve as councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the district in which they are seeking the post for six months immediately preceding the election. Any person running for the post of mayor must have lived in the city for one year immediately preceding the election. Each such person shall continue to reside within the city during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. No person's name shall be listed as a candidate on the ballot for election for either mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file a written notice with the clerk of the city that he or she desires his or her name to be placed on the ballot as a candidate either for mayor or councilmember. No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file the notice within the time provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code." 
Sec. 2.11. - Elections. 
(a)  At any election, all persons who are qualified under the Constitution and laws of Georgia to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia and who are bona fide residents of the city shall be eligible to qualify as voters in the election. 
(b)  All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)  For the purpose of electing members of the council, the City of Darien is divided into two council districts, District 1 (formerly South Ward) and District 2 (formerly North Ward), and each such district shall have numbered Post 1 and 2. District 1 (formerly South Ward) and District 2 (formerly North Ward) shall be as depicted on the map attached hereto as Exhibit A and which is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof. District 1 shall consist of the following census tracts: 
VTD: 1911771—DARIEN 
1036 1037 1039 1068 1069 1070 1083 1097 1098 1099 1100 1101 1116 1117 1118 1121 1126 1130 1131 1132 1133 1134 1135 1136 1137 1138 1139 1140 1141 1142 1143 1144 1145 1146 1147 1148 1149 1150 1151 1152 1153 1154 1156 1157 1158 1159 1160 1161 1162 1163 1164 1165 1166 1167 1168 1169 1170 1171 1172 1173 1174 1175 1177 1178 1179 1184 1185 1188 1189 1190 1191 1202 1203 1204 1207 1208 1209 1210 1212 1213 1215 1216 1217 1225 1226 1227 1228 2111 2142 2143 2144 2145 2147 2148 2149 2150 2151 2152 2153 2154 2155 2156 2157 2158 2159 2160 2161 2162 2168 2169 2179 2180 2181 2182 2183 2184 2185 2186 2187 2188 2189 2190 2191 2192 2193 2194 2195 2196 2199 2200 2201 2202 2203 2204 2205 2206 2207 2208 2209 2210 2211 2212 2213 2214 2215 2216 2217 2218 2219 2220 2221 2222 2223 2224 2225 2226 2227 2228 2230 2233 2236 2237 2238 2239 2240 2242 2243 2244 2246 2247 2248 2249 2250 2251 2252 2253 2254 2257 2260 2261 2262 2263 2264 2277 2287 2302 2305 2306 2314 2315 2316 2317 2319 2323 2324 2326 3034 3035 3036 3037 
VTD: 191271 - NORTH DARIEN 
3004 3022 3024 3025 3026 3039. 
District 2 shall consist of the following census tracts: 
VTD: 1911771 - DARIEN 
1111 1112 1113 1114 1115 1119 1120 1122 1123 1124 1125 1127 1128 1129 1192 1193 1194 1195 1196 1197 1198 1199 1200 1201 1205 1206 1214 2163 2164 2165 2166 2167 2170 2171 2172 2173 2174 2175 2176 2177 2178 3028 3029 3030 3031 3032 3033 3041 3042 3043 3044 3045 3046 3047 3048 3049 3050 3051 3052 3053 3054 3055 3056 3057 
VTD: 191271 - NORTH DARIEN 
1034 1049 1050 1051 1052 1053 1057 1060 1069 1071 1072 1086 1087 1088 1089. 
(d)  Municipal general elections for the City of Darien shall be conducted on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year. Newly elected officials shall take office the first non-holiday after January 1. The mayor and council shall serve until their respective successors are qualified and elected. 
(e)  The mayor of the City of Darien shall be at least 21 years of age at the time of qualification and be elected by the registered voters within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)  (1)  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, that if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 2.13. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Sec. 2.14. - Election by majority. 
The candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Sec. 2.15. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance and in accordance with Chapter 35 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.]. 
Sec. 2.16. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which that person is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of that person or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to that person's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which that person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which that person has a financial interest. 
(b)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who has any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that person shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Except as authorized by law, no member of the city council shall hold any other elective or other city employment during the term for which that person was elected. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person holding employment on the effective date of this charter. 
Sec. 2.17. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, a councilmember, city attorney, city clerk, or any other official hereinafter deemed an appointed officer provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating section 2.16 of this charter or any express prohibition of this charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of any officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished: 
(1)  By the vote of three councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected office is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of McIntosh County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of McIntosh County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 2.18. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.19. - General power and authority. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this charter. 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT, GENERAL AUTHORITY, AND ORDINANCES 

Sec. 3.10. - Organization. 
(a)  The city council shall hold an organizational meeting at the first regular meeting in January following an election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the charter and ordinances of the City of Darien; and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of (insert mayor or councilmember) during my continuance therein, so help me God." 
(b)  The mayor shall appoint at the first council meeting of the year the councilmember with the most seniority to hold the position of mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during any disability or absence of the mayor. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. The city council shall by majority vote elect a presiding officer from its number for any period in which the mayor pro tempore is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor following the call of the meeting to order by the clerk. Such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 3.11. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1] or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 3.12. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
(c)  Robert's Rules of Order shall determine the order of business at all meetings of the Darien City Council and any committees appointed by the council or the mayor. 
(Ord. of 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 3.13. - Quorum; voting. 
This section has been deleted in its entirety and the provision of Code section 2-33 of the General Code of Ordinances of the City of Darien shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 3.14. - Ordinances. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Darien hereby ordains . . ." and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 3.16 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 3.15. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.16. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 3.17. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of Section 3.14 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 3.18 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 3.18. - Codification of ordinances. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Darien, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the code. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 3.19. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall set his or her compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of that person's executive and administrative qualifications. 
Sec. 3.20. - Removal of city manager. 
(a)  The city council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, he or she may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the city council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)  If the city manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the city manager has requested a public hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the public hearing. 
(b)  The city manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
Sec. 3.21. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the manager shall designate a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or his or her disability shall cease. 
Sec. 3.22. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his or her charge by or under this charter. The city manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Subject to the provisions of section 4.10(e) of this charter, to appoint and, when he or she deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers he or she appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  To direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  To attend all city council meetings and have the right to take part in discussion, but the city manager may not vote; 
(4)  To see that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  To prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)  To submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  To make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  To keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as he or she deems desirable; and 
(9)  To perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 3.23. - Council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.17 of this charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 3.24. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes, and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; and 
(5)  Appoint such committees and committee chairpersons of the city council as he or she shall deem reasonable and necessary; and 
(6)  Vote in case of a tie. The mayor shall also be allowed to vote if the governing body is not in full attendance at a meeting and a third affirmative vote is required to pass a motion. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 4.10. - Department heads. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties of and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his or her department or agency. The city manager may allow directors to appoint and remove personnel within their respective departments; however, at any time the city manager can suspend this practice. 
(e)  All directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be appointed by the city manager, with the consent of the mayor and council. The city manager may suspend, with pay, directors under his or her supervision and the city manager shall give written notice of such action and the reason therefor to the director involved and to the city council. With the consent of the mayor and council, the city manager may remove or suspend, without pay, directors under his or her supervision and the city manager shall give written notice of such action and the reason therefor to the director involved and to the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 4.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, and such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. The process for removing board members shall be the same as referred to in Section 2.17 of this charter. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 4.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, who shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall have actively practiced law for at least one year. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city attorney. 
Sec. 4.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-4A, § I, 8-15-2016) 
Sec. 4.14. - Treasurer. 
The city manager shall appoint a city treasurer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes to the city. The city treasurer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. The City Clerk and City Treasurer can be the same person. 
Sec. 4.15. - City auditor. 
The city manager shall appoint with confirmation of the city council a city auditor to perform the duties of an auditor or accountant. 
Sec. 4.16. - Position classification and pay plan. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. The city manager shall apply the pay plan to city employees. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 4.17. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall present to the city council for approval rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and applications of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notice as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE V. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 5.10. - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Darien, Georgia. 
Sec. 5.11. - Judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, and shall not have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  (1)  A judge may be removed during his or her term of office by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the city council for: 
a.  Willful misconduct in office; 
b.  Willful and persistent failure to perform duties; 
c.  Habitual intemperance; 
d.  Conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice which brings the judicial office into disrepute; or 
e.  Disability seriously interfering with the performance of duties, which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character. 
(2)  Removal proceedings pursuant to subsection (1) of this charter provision may be initiated only by written petition setting forth the grounds for removal of a judge signed by one or more members of the city council. Upon submission of the petition to remove the judge to the city manager, the city council may consider the petition and determine if the petition relates to and adversely affects the administration of the office of the judge and the rights and interests of the public. If it is determined at a public meeting by a majority vote of the city council that there is an adverse impact, the judge may be suspended immediately and without further action for up to 60 days pending the final determination pursuant to subsection (4) of this c[section]. A judge suspended pursuant to this subsection shall continue to receive the compensation from his or her office until the final determination on the petition or expiration of the suspension. 
(3)  If by the expiration of the suspension period no formal resolution of the petition has been made, the judge shall be reinstated. 
(4)  Removal proceedings shall consist of an open and public hearing held by the city council, provided that the judge against whom such charges have been brought shall be furnished a copy of the charges at least ten days prior to the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall determine whether or not to remove the judge from office. The right of certiorari from the decision to remove a judge from office shall exist, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a Judge of the Superior Court of McIntosh County. 
(5)  This provision shall not affect the power and authority of the judicial qualifications commission to discipline, remove, or cause the involuntary retirement of judges. 
(6)  Any vacancy in a judgeship created by the removal of a judge pursuant to this charter provision may be temporarily filled by the city manager for a period not longer than 90 days by any individual qualified by law to serve as a municipal court judge. If after the conclusion of the removal proceedings, including the appeal period, there is a vacancy for such judgeship, the city council may appoint a judge in the same manner as set forth in this charter. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take the following oath, given by the mayor, or in his or her absence, the city clerk, "I will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of municipal court judge to the best of my ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. I will support and defend the charter of the City of Darien as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(Ord. of 7-21-2009(1); Ord. No. 2016-2A, § I, 8-15-2016) 
Sec. 5.12. - Convening of court. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 5.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or 30 days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing, as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(i)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 5.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of McIntosh County, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 5.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in total the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation taxes and business license fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice [or] offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individual or corporation that transacts business in this city or that practices or offers to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess, charge, and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. Fees incurred by the city in abating any nuisance shall be considered a special assessment against the property upon which the nuisance(s) are found and may be charged against said property and the owner thereof upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2009(1)) 
Sec. 6.17. - Other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fas. ; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - Borrowing. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Loans. 
The city may obtain loans in accordance with state and federal laws. 
Sec. 6.22. - Accounting and budgeting. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.23. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvement program, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.24. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or she may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.25. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than June of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.23 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.26. - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.27. - Changes in budget. 
The city council by majority vote may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes. 
Sec. 6.28. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with his or her recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 3.16 of this charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than June of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his or her recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 6.29. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.30. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 3.14 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.31. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.32. - Sale and lease of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the city manager or mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Rules and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.13. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not [to] be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(d)  Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, the term: 
(1)  "City council" means the members of the city council and the mayor. 
(2)  "Councilmember" means a member of the city council other than the mayor. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Darien, Georgia" and may be so cited. Such Code may also be referred to as the "Code of Darien." 
(Code 1998, § 1-101) 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council: 
(1)  General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(2)  Gender; singular and plural. Every word in any Code provision or ordinance importing the masculine gender shall extend to and be applied to females as well as males; and every word importing the singular number only shall extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; and every word importing the plural number only shall extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
(3)  Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future as well as the past when applicable. 
(4)  Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be expressly declared in the law giving the authority. 
(5)  Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
(6)  Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any Code provision or ordinance or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day be a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday then the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. When any time is expressed in hours the whole of Sunday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
(7)  Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
(8)  Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and," and the word "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
(9)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
(Code 1998, § 1-102) 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this Code shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified. 
Advice and consent. Whenever the term "advice and consent" of the city council is used in this Code, it shall be construed to mean an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire city council. 
City. The terms "the city" and "this city" mean the City of Darien, Georgia. 
City council, council. The terms "city council" and "the council" mean the city council of Darien, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of the City of Darien, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Councilman or councilmember. The term "councilman" or "councilmember" means a member of the city council of Darien, Georgia. 
County. The terms "the county" and "this county" mean the County of McIntosh, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the municipal court of the city. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Governing authority, governing body. The terms "governing authority" and "governing body" mean the mayor and city council of Darien, Georgia. 
Judge or recorder. The term "judge" or "recorder" means the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the City of Darien, Georgia. 
Mayor and council. The term "mayor and council" means the mayor and city council of Darien, Georgia. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Municipality. The term "municipality" shall be construed as synonymous with the term "city," "town," or "municipal corporation." 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the terms "swear" or "sworn." 
O.C.G.A. The term "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner", when applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are hereby adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" means and includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means and includes every species of property except real property, as hereinafter defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used it means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or notice. Reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his or her place of habitation, and to which, whenever he or she is absent, he or she has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his or her residence. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a special or temporary character. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the city seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curblines and improved walkways. 
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. The terms "state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approaches thereto, within the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant", when applied to a building or to land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Titles of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Darien" were added thereto. 
Town. See Municipality. 
Week. The term "week" means a calendar week of seven days. 
Writing or written. The term "writing" or "written" includes printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1998, § 1-103) 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines; history notes and references. 
The headings and catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere captions to indicate the contents of the section or subsection and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section or subsection, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the headings and catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1998, § 1-104) 
State Law reference— Historical notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section. 
(a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
(Code 1998, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amending Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In any case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as the Code and subsequent ordinances omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "The Council of the City of Darien hereby ordains that section ____________ of the Code of ordinances, City of Darien, Georgia, 2007 is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Council of the City of Darien hereby ordains that the Code of ordinances of the City of Darien, Georgia, 2007 is hereby amended by adding a section (or subsection or chapter) to be numbered ____________ which section reads as follows:…." The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, chapters, or provisions sought to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, chapter, or provision number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1998, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 1-107) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty where no penalty provided; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall subject the person committing the violation to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and costs or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment, any or all of such penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the judge of the municipal court. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the city's charter or this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 1-108) 
State Law reference— Maximum sentences and fines which may be imposed for violation of municipal ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code hereby adopted are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code hereby adopted shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code or of the Code hereby adopted, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1998, § 1-109) 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to and existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement, and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ ," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code. 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing employment and personnel policies and procedures; 
(6)  Any right of franchise granted by the city to any person, firm, or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, widening, paving, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefore; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a board of zoning appeals, board of architectural review, or planning commission, including joint commissions; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; 
(14)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city or annexing property to the city; 
(15)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(16)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(17)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, through highways or streets, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or amending the "Water Resources Protection Ordinance," "Subdivisions Regulations," "Development Standards," and/or the "Stormwater Local Design Manual"; 
(19)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; and 
(20)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)  Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-2, 36-35-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Exercise of governmental authority. 
The corporate governmental powers of the city shall be exercised by the mayor and council in the manner provided by the charter and by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 3-101) 
Sec. 2-2. - Code of ethics. 
(a)  Intent. It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(b)  Definitions. Words and phrases used in this section shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
City means the City of Darien, Georgia. 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or mayor pro tem containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any councilmember of the city and any member appointed to any board or commission of the city. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(c)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  No member of the governing authority shall: 
a.  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy his/her favor in the performance of official acts; 
b.  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for him/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; 
c.  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's private gain; 
d.  Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
e.  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; 
f.  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a member of the governing authority; 
g.  Use his/her position to request or require an employee to: 
1.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
2.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
3.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
4.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation; 
h.  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; 
i.  Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself/herself or persons having an interest. 
(2)  Prohibition (1)b of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
a.  An occasional non-pecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
b.  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
c.  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; 
d.  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. 
(d)  Disclosure of conflicts of interest. An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he/she has reason to believe may be affected by his/her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or oral statement 30 days (or as soon as the member of the governing authority has knows of such conflict) prior to the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he/she has at the time such matter is presented to mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he/she has an interest. 
(e)  Disqualification. A member of the governing authority shall disqualify himself/herself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he/she has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(f)  Prohibited contracts. 
(1)  The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
a.  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
b.  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
c.  Contracts entered into in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6. 
d.  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency. 
e.  Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority, or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city manager following disclosure. 
(g)  Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governing authority. The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding 12-month period a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. 
(h)  Complaints. Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the member of the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro-tem. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall appoint three members of council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. 
(i)  Board of ethics. 
(1)  Composition of the board of ethics: 
a.  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subsections (i)(1)b and (i)(1)c. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
b.  The mayor and councilmembers shall each designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such Board of Ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
c.  The city manager shall maintain a listing of these qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. 
d.  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The Governing Authority of the City shall provide meeting space for the Board of Ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the City, the City shall provide the Board of Ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(2)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
a.  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
b.  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; 
c.  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this section and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
d.  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this section; 
e.  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this section; 
f.  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; 
g.  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(j)  Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. The board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(k)  Penalty and member rights. 
(1)  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this section shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. 
(2)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least 10 business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to attend the hearing, to present evidence and testimony, to assert any further allegations or defenses regarding the complaint, to confront and cross-examine anyone who would testify in favor of or in defense of the complaint. The board of ethics may receive and rule on the admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as it may deem advisable. The board of ethics shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this section. Instead, the rules of evidence of an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(l)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this Section. 
(2)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of McIntosh County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Code 1998, § 3-102; Ord. of 5-1-2007) 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest for public officials, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-20 et seq. 
Sec. 2-3. - Administrative policy and procedures. 
(a)  Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the charter, and this Code, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the city manager. 
(b)  Department heads. All department heads shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular fields and inaugurate, with the approval of the city manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Submit quarterly and annual reports of the activities of their respective departments to the city manager; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the city manager; 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the city manager, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
(c)  Departments. Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the city manager, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
(d)  Records. All municipal records, except those which by order of a state court or by law are prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by any citizen of the state during the hours of operation of the administrative service prescribed in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Operation of administrative service. All units in the administrative service shall: 
(1)  Office hours. Be open between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays and shall be closed on Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays. 
(2)  Make daily deposit. Make a daily deposit with the city treasurer of any monies received directly from the public. 
(3)  Payment of monies. Pay out monies belonging to the city only in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Code 1998, § 3-103) 
Sec. 2-4. - Purchasing procedures and policies. 
(a)  Applicability. No person shall create, or cause to be created, any verbal or written commitment for supplies, materials, equipment, services, or contracts of any kind in behalf of the city except in accordance with the procedures contained in this section. 
(b)  Fiscal authority. Except as provided in this section, the city manager, shall have the exclusive power and responsibility to make purchases of all supplies, equipment and materials required for public purposes for the city. Unless otherwise specified by state law or ordinance or resolution of the city council, the mayor or city manager may sign all necessary contracts for work or labor to be done, or material or other necessary items to be furnished for the benefit of the city. 
(c)  Additional fiscal authority. Subject to the requirements of this section, the city manager, or a department supervisor as designated by him/her may act as purchasing authority for the city. 
(d)  Purchase order requirements. The issuance of a purchase order is not required when the total amount of a purchase of goods or services, or any verbal or written commitment for city expenditures, does not exceed $50.00, however: 
(1)  All purchases pursuant to this section must be specifically authorized by the city manager or a department supervisor designated by him/her. 
(2)  Except as provided in this section, the following procedures apply to purchase or any verbal or written commitment for city expenditures of the city manager or a department supervisor designated by him/her. 
a.  Expenditure of more than $50.00 up to and including $1,000.00 requires the approval, by signature, of the city manager or a department supervisor designated by him/her. 
b.  Expenditure of more than $1,000.00 requires the approval, by signature, of the city manager. 
c.  Expenditure not appropriated in the city budget for the current fiscal year requires majority approval of the city council before it may be undertaken by the city manager. 
(e)  Emergency procedures. An emergency purchase, or commitment for goods or services, shall be defined as a procurement necessary when the need for such a purchase or commitment creates an immediate and serious need that cannot otherwise be met through normal procurement procedures. If a department supervisor, or his authorized representative, authorizes or makes a purchase or creates a commitment for expenditures of city revenues as provided by this emergency procedures subsection, that department supervisor or representative must notify the city manager and city council at the next regularly scheduled or emergency council meeting. The department supervisor or representative must state the nature of the emergency on the purchase order form and attest to that fact by signature. 
(f)  Multiple purchases. Multiple purchases in amounts of less than $50.00 for the same goods, services or contracts shall not be made for the purpose of circumventing the purchasing procedures of the city. 
(g)  Competitive purchasing. Except for purchases of government surplus property, written quotations must be obtained from at least two vendors when the sum of the purchase of goods, services or contracts is greater than $2,000.00. 
(h)  Local vendors. In order to stimulate business and economic activities within the city, purchases for goods and services shall be made from city merchants whenever their quotations are as low or lower than any other quotations received. Computations of procurement costs (travel expense, personnel time, shipping charges, etc.) may be taken into consideration when determining the lowest cost. 
(i)  Exemption. The requirements set forth in this section do not apply to expenditures for: 
(1)  Utilities; 
(2)  Insurance; 
(3)  Lease purchase payments; 
(4)  Membership dues; 
(5)  Refunds of overpayments; 
(6)  Petty cash purchases; and 
(7)  Costs associated with state and/or federal requirements. 
(Code 1998, § 3-104) 
Sec. 2-5. - Oaths. 
All city officials and police officials required by charter or some other provision of law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths: 
"I, ____________ , do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Charter and ordinances of the City of Darien; and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of (insert mayor or councilmember) during my continuance therein, so help me God." 
(Code 1998, § 3-105) 
Sec. 2-6. - Bonds. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the mayor and council may require any department head, city official, or employee, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the mayor and council. Said bond shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of said duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations, or unlawful expenditures in office. Said surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the mayor and council. The premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1998, § 3-106) 
Sec. 2-7. - Banks and banking. 
(a)  Competitive bids for banking services. The City of Darien shall solicit proposals for the service of providing of checking account services at least every three years by bid, request for proposal or other means the city manager deems expedient. All responses to such solicitation shall include information on proposed costs for such services. The city council may select the winning bid or proposal for those services based upon the best interests of the city, not limited to consideration of costs only. The city council may also continue the arrangement with the then current provider of those services and may reject all bids or proposals and seek new bid or proposals. 
(b)  Opening and closing accounts. Consistent with any decisions (if any) of the city council made pursuant to this code section, the city manager shall have the authority to open or close bank accounts. 
(c)  Persons authorized to sign on accounts. All checks drawn on any bank account of the City of Darien must have the signatures of any two of the following three persons to be valid: City manager, mayor or city clerk. 
(Ord. of 8-18-2009(1)) 
Secs. 2-8—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-31. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings on the third Tuesday of each month at 5:00 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the council; provided, that the mayor may convene the council whenever in his judgment it may be necessary. The date and time of any regular meeting may be changed by the Mayor upon written notice mailed to the council members at least five days prior to the previously set date and time of the meeting, provided, however, that no meeting may be held more than two weeks earlier or later than originally scheduled. The notice of change in the date of a regular meeting shall contain the reason for the change. The summons for all special and emergency meetings shall specify the cause thereof, and no other business shall be transacted. All meetings at which official actions are to be taken shall be open to the public and held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each member of the city council to attend each meeting of the city council, unless he is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. It shall also be the duty of the city clerk/treasurer and chief of police to attend all council meetings. 
(Code 1998, § 3-201; Ord. of 5-19-2009(1)) 
State Law reference— Meetings of political subdivisions, departments, agencies, etc., to be open to public, notice of meetings and agenda, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-32. - Standing committees. 
The following shall be the standing committees of the city council as appointed by the mayor: 
Intergovernmental Relations 
Ethics 
Economic Development 
Environmental Concerns 
Affordable Housing 
Facilities 
(Code 1998, § 3-202; Ord. of 4-15-2008, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-33. - Rules for the conduct of business. 
(a)  Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk or his deputy shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(b)  Call to order. All meetings of the council shall be open to the public. The mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special, or called meeting; and shall immediately call the council to order provided that a quorum is present. A quorum shall consist of the mayor and two councilmembers. 
(c)  Order of business. Following the invocation, pledge of allegiance, roll call and call to order, the business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: 
(1)  Approve agenda; 
(2)  Approval of minutes of previous meeting; 
(3)  Public hearing (if any); 
(4)  Visitor's presentations; 
(5)  Unfinished business; 
(6)  New business; 
(7)  Council report; 
(8)  Mayor's report; 
(9)  City manager's report; 
(10)  City attorney's report; 
(11)  Executive session (if any); 
(12)  Adjournment. 
(d)  Reading of minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a councilmember, such minutes may be approved without a reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. No substantive change shall be made except upon motion for consideration. 
(e)  Reports by committees. Any business coming before the city council concerning the subject matter of which any standing or special committee has jurisdiction, may be referred to the proper committee for investigation and report. It shall be the duty of each standing or special committee, whenever required by the mayor, to examine any matter referred to such committee, and make a report thereof at the next regular meeting of the city council, or show good cause why no report is made. Such reports shall not be in writing unless so directed by the presiding officer. Each standing committee shall examine into the condition of the matters within its jurisdiction, and make such reports and recommendations from time to time as may be necessary. 
(f)  Manner of addressing the council. No member, while the city council is in session, shall speak on any subject unless recognized by the presiding officer. Every speaker shall address the chair, and no member shall interrupt anyone who is speaking, except to call him to order or for explanation. No member shall speak more than twice upon the same subject without permission from the presiding officer. 
(g)  Limitations on addressing council. Any person not a member of the city council who desires to address the council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer so to do, and then shall give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and direct his remarks to the council as a body rather than to any particular member, limiting such remarks to ten minutes unless additional time is granted by council. 
(h)  Ordinances, resolutions, contracts, and inter-local agreements. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts, and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced, and adopted in the following manner: 
(1)  Preparation. All ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council, or requested by the mayor, or prepared by the city attorney on his own initiative. 
(2)  Administrative staff approval. All ordinances, resolutions, and contract documents shall, before presentation to the council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney or his authorized representative, and shall have been examined and approved for administration by the city manager or his authorized representative where there are substantive matters of administration involved. All such instruments shall have first been referred to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction of the administration of the subject matter of the ordinance, resolution, or contract document would devolve and be approved by said department head; provided, however, that if approval is not given, then the same shall be returned to the city manager with a written memorandum of the reasons why such approval is withheld. In the event the questioned instrument is not redrafted to meet a department head objection or objection is not withdrawn and approval in writing given, then the city manager shall so advise the council and give the reasons advanced by the department head for withholding approval. 
(3)  Introduction and adoption. 
a.  Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council, except that the mayor or city attorney may present ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects to the council, and any councilman may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters, or subjects be adopted. All ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council must be made in writing, seconded, and read by the clerk before debate shall be permitted. 
b.  All ordinances shall have two separate readings. 
c.  No ordinance shall embrace more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title, and no ordinance, or section thereof, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed, and when practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
d.  An ordinance, resolution, or contract document shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives the affirmative vote of a majority of the whole council. For the purpose of tallying such vote an abstention shall be deemed a negative vote. 
(4)  Effective date. Ordinances shall take effect upon adoption, unless otherwise specified. 
(i)  Recording vote. The yeas and nays of the members present shall be recorded in the minutes on any question taken. 
(j)  Questions of order. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any councilman who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the city council in the manner provided by Robert's Rules of Order for appealing decisions of presiding officers. 
(k)  Executive session. The city council may, at any time, upon call therefor by the presiding officer or upon motion duly carried by a councilmember, meet in executive session. Attendance at such session shall be limited to the mayor and members of the council and such invitees as shall be invited with the unanimous consent of the mayor and council. 
(1)  Executive sessions of the city council may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the council is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. 
(2)  The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the councilmembers present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session shall be maintained by the city clerk. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the council may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(l)  Accounts against the city. All accounts against the city shall be given to the clerk at least two days before the regular meetings, and shall be registered by the clerk. 
(m)  Ties. The mayor shall vote when members may be equally divided, when he shall have the deciding vote, excepting always in balloting for officers, when he shall vote as other members. 
(n)  Petitions and applications. All petitions and applications shall be read and referred to the appropriate committee, and no action shall be taken until said committee has considered and reported on same. 
(o)  Expenditures by committees. Expenditures by committees shall follow the approval procedures established by section 2-4 pertaining to purchase procedures and policies. 
(p)  Alterations of rules. Any changes, alterations, additions, or deletions of these rules shall be offered at least one meeting prior to its discussion, and except for changes to subsection (c), can only be adopted by a vote of two-thirds of the members present. Amendments to subsection (c) can be made by the affirmative vote of three members as required in section 3.13 of the Darien City Charter. 
(Code 1998, § 3-203; Ord. of 4-15-2008, § 2-33; Ord. of 4-19-2011) 
Sec. 2-34. - Compensation. 
(a)  The salary of mayor and council shall be affixed at the following: 
Mayor ..... $7,200.00 annually. 
Councilmember ..... $4,800.00 annually. 
(b)  Elected officials shall be paid once per month. 
(c)  Mayor and councilmembers shall receive $50.00 per month to reimburse for cell phone expenses related to city business. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, 8-21-2012) 
Secs. 2-35—2-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MAYOR 

Sec. 2-56. - Duties. 
The mayor shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Presiding at meetings. To preside at all meetings of the city council, but the mayor shall not be allowed to vote at such meetings except in the case of a tie vote by the council on any question, or in cases where action requires three votes; 
(2)  Appointment of standing committees. To appoint at the first meeting of each year, or as soon thereafter as expedient, standing committees for that year; but the mayor may at any time alter the committees and make such changes as the interest of the city may require; 
(3)  Executing legal documents. To sign and execute all contracts, deeds, and bonds of the city when required to do so under state law or when duly authorized by the council. 
(Code 1998, § 3-302) 
Secs. 2-57—2-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-88. - Established; removal. 
(a)  There is hereby established the position of city manager, who shall serve as the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The position shall be appointed by the city council. The city manager shall serve for an indefinite term and at an amount of compensation as set by the city council. 
(b)  The city manager may be removed from office pursuant to the procedures established under state law and the Charter of the city. 
Sec. 2-89. - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under the Charter of the city. The city manager shall have all of the powers and duties established by the Charter of the city, as well as any further responsibilities as designated by the city council which are not inconsistent with or contrary to those enumerated in the Charter of the city. In addition, except as otherwise provided by the Charter of the city or by law, the city manager or his designee shall also have the responsibility to direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city in the absence of a supervisor, director, or head of such department, office, or agency of the city. The city manager shall set all salaries for those salaried employees or positions of the city subject to the budget approved by the council. The city manager shall have the authority to manage all city-owned property, including, but not limited to, the authority to propose such property for annexation into the city. The city manager shall have the authority to negotiate, offer and pay salary and benefits for employees to be paid upon separation from city employment subject to availability of budgeted funds. 
Sec. 2-90. - Refunds. 
The city manager shall have the authority to issue refunds for all taxes, license fees, or other payments which have been paid to the city including all penalties or interest arising therefrom where the reason for the claim for refund is based on an obvious clerical error or is otherwise authorized by law. In disputed cases where there is no obvious error, the approval or disapproval of such claims is reserved for the city council. In considering such refund claims the city manager shall comply with all applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2008(1), § 2-90) 
Secs. 2-91—2-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY CLERK AND TREASURER 

Sec. 2-118. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city clerk/treasurer shall give a good and sufficient bond, payable to the city council, such bond to be fixed and approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1998, § 3-401) 
Sec. 2-119. - Duties as city clerk/treasurer. 
(a)  The city clerk/treasurer shall have duties as specified by the city manager which shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  To receive all money due the city council, including taxes, and pay out the same only upon orders of the city manager; 
(2)  To keep a book of accounts showing all money received on behalf of the city and the source and disposition thereof, which book shall be open for inspection by the public and city councilmen; 
(3)  To maintain a uniform system of accounts and keep such other records and accounts as may be required by statute or ordinance; and 
(4)  To furnish the council with monthly statements detailing all receipts and payments of funds for the quarter. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the authority to further change the duties and responsibilities of the city clerk/treasurer as the city manager shall deem necessary for the benefit of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 3-402) 
Secs. 2-120—2-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local governments may provide by ordinance or resolution for such administrative officers, bodies, or agencies as may be expedient for the efficient exercise of their zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2. 

Sec. 2-137. - Planning commission. 
The Darien Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission, is hereby created and established as authorized by the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, p. 420 (Act No. 358 as amended) and said planning commission shall be organized and empowered as follows: 
(1)  Membership. The planning commission shall consist of five members beginning March 1, 2008, who shall be residents of the City of Darien, Georgia, appointed by the mayor and council of the city. The terms of the members shall be for four years, except that in the appointment of the members in 2008, the first one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, the second member shall be appointed for a term of two years, and the third member shall be appointed for a term of three years, and the remaining two members shall be appointed for terms of four years each. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and city council who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(2)  Organization, rules, staff and finances. The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the mayor and council. 
(3)  Powers and duties. From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then said planning commission shall have all the powers, duties, and responsibilities set forth in the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, p. 420 (Act No. 358 as amended). 
(Code 1998, § 3-501; Ord. of 4-17-2007(2)) 
Secs. 2-138—2-158. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PERSONNEL POLICY 

Sec. 2-159. - Personnel management. 
The employment rules and regulations for employees of the city, as well as the personnel classification and pay plans, shall be as set forth in the employee manual created by the city manager, or his/her designee, and approved by the mayor and council. A copy of the employee manual shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk and made available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
Secs. 2-160—2-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BUDGET[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-187. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30. 
(Code 1998, § 4-201) 
Sec. 2-188. - Procedures for adoption of budget. 
The municipal budget shall be adopted and amended by ordinance passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the city council. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Preparation. The proposed municipal budget shall be prepared by the city clerk and presented to the city council no later than 30 days prior to the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year. 
(2)  Public budget hearing. The city council shall hold a public budget hearing prior to final adoption of the proposed budget. Said hearing shall provide an opportunity for all interested citizens to provide oral and written comments. At least ten days prior to the budget hearing the municipality shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the jurisdiction of the governing authority setting forth the date, time and place of the hearing. The publication notice shall also include a summary of the proposed project. 
(3)  Amendments. 
a.  The city council may amend the budget, except that no proposed amendment shall be effective without such hearing if it shall: 
1.  Add a new item of appropriation in an amount in excess of one percent of the total amount of appropriations as stated in the initially adopted budget; 
2.  Increase or decrease any item of appropriation by more than 25 percent; or 
3.  Increase the amount needed to be raised by taxes by more than five percent. 
b.  Notice of hearing on any amendment shall be advertised at least three days before the date set therefor. The publication shall include the time, place and location of such hearing and state the availability of the proposed amendment details. 
(4)  Adoption. The municipal budget shall be adopted not later than 30 days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. Upon adoption, the budget shall constitute an appropriation for the purposes stated therein and an authorization of the amount to be raised by taxation for the purpose of the municipality. 
(Code 1998, § 4-202; Ord. of 8-18-2009(2)) 
Sec. 2-189. - Form and content of the budget. 
The municipal budget shall be prefaced by a clear general summary of its contents and shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. Separate items shall be included for at least the following: 
(1)  Administration, operation, and maintenance expenses of each department or office of the city, including a breakdown for salaries and wages for each such unit; 
(2)  Interest and debt redemption charges; 
(3)  Proposed capital expenditures, detailed by departments and offices when practicable; 
(4)  Cash deficits of the preceding year; 
(5)  Contingent expenses in an amount not more than three percent of the total amount of administration, operation, and maintenance expenses; and 
(6)  Such reserves as may be deemed advisable by the city council. 
The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of anticipated revenue. 
(Code 1998, § 4-203) 
Sec. 2-190. - Capital program. 
A five-year program may be submitted to the city council at the same time that the budget and budget message are introduced for approval. Such capital program shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken for the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
(Code 1998, § 4-204) 
Sec. 2-191. - Transfer of appropriations. 
The mayor with the advice and consent of the council may at any time during the fiscal year transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department or office, and the city council may by ordinance transfer part of all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or office to another, except that no appropriation for debt service or capital improvements may be reduced or transferred during any fiscal year, and under no circumstances may the expenditures exceed the total of the budget. 
(Code 1998, § 4-205) 
Sec. 2-192. - Emergency appropriations. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the city council may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a budget, for a purpose which was not foreseen at the time of the adoption thereof, or for which adequate provision was not made therein. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property, or the public peace, and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues or surplus. If there is no surplus, then temporary borrowing in notes may be made, provided that any such borrowed amounts are included as an appropriation in the next succeeding year's budget. 
(Code 1998, § 4-206) 
Sec. 2-193. - Lapse of appropriations. 
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the next succeeding year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
(Code 1998, § 4-207) 
Sec. 2-194. - Publication of financial statement. 
Within six months after the close of the fiscal year, a statement of revenues and expenditures that fairly represents the financial condition of the city and that shows all municipal accounts as of close of such preceding fiscal year shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. 
(Code 1998, § 4-208) 
Sec. 2-195. - Notice of budget availability. 
Within 30 days of adoption of the budget, a notice shall be published advising of the availability of the budget for public inspection. 
(Code 1998, § 4-209) 
Sec. 2-196. - Balanced budget requirement. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(b), the budget of the city shall be balanced. Such balance is achieved when the sum of estimated net revenues and appropriated fund balances is equal to appropriations. 
(Code 1998, § 4-210) 
Chapter 6 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 6-1. - Findings. 
(a)  It is the finding of the city council that public nudity (either partial or total) under circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called nude bars or establishments offering so-called nude entertainment or adult entertainment in conjunction with the sale of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. 
(b)  Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public indecency and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with the concentration of adult entertainment are depreciation of property values in neighborhoods surrounding nude bars or adult entertainment establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burdens on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described in this subsection and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of adult entertainment establishments in particular areas. 
(c)  Other negative effects which are found by the city council are the apparent connection of these establishments to organized crime and illegal drug sales; the potential spread of communicable diseases to law enforcement personnel who answer calls at adult establishments and to patrons of such establishments; and the potential proliferation of adult entertainment establishments after the initial siting of an adult entertainment establishment in a particular neighborhood. 
(d)  The city council, therefore, finds that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals and preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, and parks to prevent the adverse impact of adult entertainment establishments. Furthermore, the city council finds that the prohibition of live nude conduct in establishments licensed to serve alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare by furthering legitimate governmental interests, such as reducing criminal activity, protecting against property devaluation and deterioration, and eliminating undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and allow and/or encourage nudity, and that such prohibition will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech. To the end, this chapter is hereby enacted. 
(Code 1998, § 16-201) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Business establishment means a business within the incorporated area of the city where alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises pursuant to a license issued by the governing body. 
License means a license for the sale for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages issued by the governing body. 
Licensee means any person to whom a license for sale for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages has been issued by the governing body, including the officers and agents of the licensee. 
Live means any activity which is carried on by actual living persons in the physical presence of patrons. 
Live entertainment means entertainment for the benefit of patrons which is carried on in the actual physical presence of such patrons, including, but not limited to dancing. 
Mainstream performance house means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which regularly features live performances such as plays or concerts which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or display or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities and where such depiction, if any, is only incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. 
Person includes any human being. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed, including the sidewalk serving area or outside, open air or patio type serving area on the private property of an establishment. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; cleft of the buttocks; or any portion of the female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intercept a point above the top of the areola, or any portion of the areola, or any simulation thereof. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; 
(5)  Excretory functions as part of or in conjunction with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition. 
(Code 1998, § 16-202) 
Sec. 6-3. - Conduct prohibited. 
The following types of entertainment, attire, and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve, or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within the city: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person live, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume, or clothing, as to expose any portion of his or her specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her specified anatomical areas or where such person performs acts of specified sexual activities or acts which simulate specified sexual activity, as defined herein. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct proscribed in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house or museum which derives less that 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1998, § 16-203) 
Sec. 6-4. - Fines and punishment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any acts prohibited hereby and any person so doing shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit any conduct prohibited hereby which he knows or has reasonable cause to know is taking place on the premises. Any licensee so permitting shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(c)  The license of any licensee shall, upon his conviction of a violation of any provision in this chapter, be forthwith revoked. 
(Code 1998, § 16-204) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Animal means any nonhuman living creature, domestic or wild. 
At large means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner, a member of his immediate family, or some other person, either by leash, cord, or other holding device. 
Dangerous animal means any wild mammal, reptile, or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature, or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters; and any domestic mammal, reptile, or fowl which, because of its size, vicious propensity, or other characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters. 
(Code 1998, § 15-101) 
Sec. 10-2. - Dangerous animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the city. Police officers shall be authorized to use such force as is necessary to prevent any such dangerous or vicious animal from causing harm to any person or property. 
(Code 1998, § 15-102) 
Sec. 10-3. - Health regulations incorporated. 
All rules and regulations of the county board of health and the state department of human resources presently existing or as adopted in the future pertaining to rabies control and vaccination are incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth herein. 
Secs. 10-4—10-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 10-25. - Dog control officer. 
The code enforcement officer is hereby designated as the dog control officer. 
Sec. 10-26. - Vaccination and dog tags required. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to keep or harbor any dog in the corporate limits of the city unless: 
(1)  Such dog shall have been vaccinated against rabies in such manner and at such intervals as shall be necessary to prevent the incidence of such disease; and 
(2)  Such dog wears a dog tag evidencing the rabies vaccination. 
(Code 1998, § 15-201) 
State Law reference— Governing authorities of municipality are authorized and required to require regulation or licensing of animals in the control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3. 
Sec. 10-27. - Running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone knowingly to permit any dog owned by him or under his control to run at large within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 15-202) 
State Law reference— Unlawful to allow dangerous dog to roam outside of a proper enclosure without a muzzle and restraint by a leash held by a responsible person, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-2026. 
Sec. 10-28. - City dog pound and confinement of certain dogs. 
There may be a city dog pound erected and maintained as directed by the mayor and city council and operated by employees of the city for the purpose of impounding dogs found in the city in violation of this article. It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the policemen of the city and such other employees of the city as may be directed by the mayor and council to take up and impound any dog found running at large within the corporate limits of the city. Any dog so taken up shall be delivered to the city dog pound and kept there until claimed by the owner or other person in control or disposed of under the further provisions of this chapter. The owner or claimant shall pay the fees for impounding as hereinafter prescribed upon return of his dog. 
(Code 1998, § 15-203) 
Sec. 10-29. - Procedure from and after impoundment, disposition of dogs not redeemed. 
(a)  Immediately upon the taking up and impounding of any dog, it shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designated agent to notify the owner or person in charge of the dog. If the dog's owner is not known, a notice will be put on the bulletin board at the door of the county courthouse and the door of the city hall stating the date and fact of impoundment, and in any event the notice given or posted shall state that if the dog is not claimed and the fees and expenses of impounding paid within 20 days, the dog will be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
(b)  In the event any dog thus impounded is not redeemed by the owner or person in control within the time prescribed above, such dog shall be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of as directed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1998, § 15-204) 
Sec. 10-30. - Other regulations regarding vaccinations. 
If at any time the mayor and council shall decide that the provisions of this chapter requiring annual vaccination of dogs against rabies are insufficient for the protection of the citizens against the incidence of this disease or other disease, the mayor and council may by simple resolution prescribe other more frequent intervals for vaccinations or other inoculations. Notice of such additional requirements shall be given by notice published in the official newspaper of McIntosh County for two weeks and by written notice to owners or persons in control of each dog. Thereafter, such new requirements shall be in effect and have the same force as if originally set out herein. 
(Code 1998, § 15-205) 
Sec. 10-31. - Interference with police officers and city employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, obstruct or impede any police officer or other employee of the city designated by the mayor and council or the chief of police in carrying out and enforcing the provisions of this chapter or to release any dog which has been taken up or impounded under the provisions of this chapter without making claim for said dog and paying the fees and expenses of impounding and keeping the dog as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 15-207) 
State Law reference— Unlawful to interfere with or hinder dog control officer in the lawful discharge of his official duties, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-6. 
Sec. 10-32. - Penalties. 
The provisions of this chapter making it unlawful to keep or harbor any dog in the city without complying with the provisions of this chapter; making it unlawful to knowingly permit any dog to run at large in the city; making it unlawful to interfere with any officer or employee of the city in carrying out the provisions of this chapter; and any other act or failure to act declared herein to be unlawful are hereby declared to be penal in nature; and any person found to be in violation of any of such provisions may upon conviction in the municipal court of the city be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 15-208) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-2025; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-2026. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Introduction. 
(a)  Purpose. The building regulations and building contractor certification process as herein set forth have made for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, convenience and prosperity of the citizens of the city. The regulations and requirements provided by this chapter have been designated to protect the interests of the residents and property owners of the city and promote equity in the provision of city services. 
(b)  Scope. This chapter: 
(1)  Regulates the construction of buildings and structures and the persons who provide construction services for a fee; 
(2)  Creates a mechanism for regulating persons who provide construction services for a fee and establishes the rules for construction; 
(3)  Defines certain terms used herein; 
(4)  Provides for the method of administration, appeal and amendment, enforcement, duties and the provision of penalties for violation. 
(c)  Conflict. Where the provisions of this chapter are in conflict with other ordinances, the most restrictive provisions shall be enforced. 
(Code 1998, § 18-101) 
Sec. 14-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions are given in addition to those given in the IBC and IRC: 
Beginning of construction means one day after a building permit is issued, whether or not actual work has been initiated; the beginning date for construction. 
Building official or inspector means the designated representative of the city charged with the authority to enforce within the city limits the provisions of the building and construction codes and render interpretations of these same codes consistent with the intent and purpose of the codes. 
Certificate of occupancy means a certificate of occupancy is granted by the building inspector prior to the connection of permanent electric service. 
Code enforcement officer or official means the designated representative of the city charged with the responsibility of inspecting and reviewing health and environmental matters throughout the city, including, but not limited to, building and construction concerns. 
Contractor means any person desiring to engage in the business of building, gas, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, sign, or swimming pool contracting within the city limits. 
General contractor means any contractor that uses subcontractors or employs more than two other persons in the construction work projects conducted in the city. 
Individual contractor means a contractor that does not subcontract on any of his or her work projects and employs no more than two additional persons in his or her work projects conducted in the city. 
Stop work order means a citation issued by the building inspector to immediately halt construction activities on a site. 
(Code 1998, § 18-102) 
Sec. 14-3. - Violation and enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement officer. The city manager shall provide for the enforcement of this chapter by appointing the building official, who shall, jointly with the code enforcement officer, have the right to withhold building permits. The building official or agent thereof shall also have the right to notify the chief of police in the event that any individual is in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Any person violating the conditions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 18-110) 
Secs. 14-4—14-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING INSPECTOR AND CODE ENFORCEMENT STAFF 

Sec. 14-23. - Appointment of building inspector. 
The inspections required within the city shall be administered by the city manager and conducted by the building inspector or agent thereof who shall have the power to enforce his/her duties as stated in this chapter. The actual inspection of a building as it pertains to this chapter shall be conducted by the building inspector, or his designated qualified and certified inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 18-103) 
Sec. 14-24. - Duties. 
The city code enforcement shall be conducted by the code enforcement officer, code enforcement staff, and the building inspector. The building inspector shall conduct inspections and oversee all general code enforcement actions. The code enforcement officer and staff, as well as the building inspector, shall act as the city's representatives while conducting the following duties: 
(1)  To enforce the city's technical codes. 
(2)  To approve or disapprove within a reasonable time the building permit applications, and plans, specifications, etc., filed with the clerk's office. 
(3)  To answer questions relative to this chapter. 
(4)  To issue permits and collect fees. 
(Code 1998, § 18-104) 
Secs. 14-25—14-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL CODES AND STANDARDS 

Sec. 14-52. - Adoption of International Building Code. 
The city adopts by reference the requirements of the International Building Code (IBC), 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected to or attached to such buildings or structures. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International Residential Code (IRC), 2006 edition. New editions of both the IBC and the IRC are promulgated by the ICC every three years and will be automatically adopted by the city upon publication. A copy of each will be maintained in the office of the building inspector and will be available for review by the public during normal business hours. 
Sec. 14-53. - Revisions. 
The following sections of the International Building Code are hereby revised to reflect specific design criteria for this locality: 
Section R101.1. Insert "the City of Darien." 
Table R301.2(1). Insert: 
Ground snow load: Zero. 
Wind speed: 130 mph. 
Seismic design category: B. 
Subject to damage from: 
Weathering (concrete): Negligible. 
Frost line depth: 12" below undisturbed ground surface. 
Termites: Very heavy. 
Winter design temp: Use 97.5% values from appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 
Ice barrier underlayment required: No. 
Flood hazards: See FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map dated June 3, 1988 for zone V and A locations. 
Air freezing index: 50 (cumulative degree days below 32F). 
Mean annual temp: 67.5F. 
Note: All footnotes to table R301.2(1) apply. 
Sec. 14-54. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-55. - Adoption of NFPA Life Safety Code and NFPA 1 Uniform Fire Code. 
The city hereby adopts by reference the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Life Safety Code, 2009 edition and NFPA 1 Uniform Fire Code, 2009 Edition. A copy of each will be maintained in the office of the building inspector and will be available for review by the public during normal business hours. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009(2)) 
Secs. 14-56—14-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITTING AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 14-80. - Permits required. 
All permits issued by the building inspector for construction in the city shall be prominently displayed in full view from the nearest public right-of-way at the site of the construction for which the permit is issued. 
(1)  Building permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, repair, remove or demolish a building, swimming pool, manufactured home or structure, or to commence same without first making application to the building inspector and obtaining the required permit for the work. 
(2)  Electrical permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any electrical work or wiring which is regulated by this Code, or cause any such work to be done without first making application to the building inspector and obtaining the required permit for the work. 
(3)  Gas permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, enlarge, alter, repair, move or replace a gas system, the installation of which is regulated by this Code, or cause any such work to be done without first making application to the building inspector and obtaining the required permit for the work. 
(4)  Mechanical permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, enlarge, alter, repair, move, or replace a mechanical system, the installation of which is regulated by this Code, or cause any such work to be done without first making application to the building inspector and obtaining the required permit for work. 
(5)  Plumbing permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any plumbing work with any sewer, sanitary or storm, septic tank or sewage disposal system of any kind, or install fixtures or appliances in new or existing systems, structures or premises, or repair, or add to any existing plumbing which is regulated by this Code, or cause any such work to be done without first making application to the building inspector and obtaining the required permit for the work. 
(6)  Compliance. No permit listed under this section shall be issued or renewed by the city until the applicant or permittee demonstrates compliance with all provisions of this Code, city ordinances, and state and county laws, rules and/or regulations. 
(7)  Exemptions. For normal maintenance and repair related to upkeep of existing buildings, structures, electrical, gas, plumbing, conditioned air and low voltage systems, it will be the final decision of the building inspector as to the need of a permit for repairs. 
(Code 1998, § 18-106) 
Sec. 14-81. - Building permit, other requirements. 
(a)  Building permit required. Application for a building permit must be made by the owner, or his agent, accompanied by two sets of plans or blueprints; together with specifications of the work to be done. All applications for a building permit for building a new building or any additions must be accompanied by a plan showing size of the lot and portion of the lot to be built on and shall show that the lot has been surveyed by a licensed surveyor, or that the lot stakes have been placed in position in accordance with such a survey. No work of any nature shall be started until a building permit has been issued. A permit must be secured for all new construction, all alterations and all repairs. No permit shall be issued until the prescribed fees for same have been paid. The permit fees shall be established as by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. All permit fees are nonrefundable. 
(b)  Restrooms, waste containers required. All construction sites are required to have restroom facilities as well as sufficient containers for collecting all waste and debris created from the construction activities. No inspection shall be conducted until the applicant has provided proof of compliance with these requirements. If during construction such facilities are not provided on site, the building inspector will issue a stop work order until such compliance is achieved. 
(c)  Right to appeal. Any applicant for a building permit shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and council should the building inspector refuse to approve the issuance of a permit. 
(d)  Time limitation. Construction must begin within 180 days from the date of permit issuance, otherwise the permit is null and void. 
(Code 1998, § 18-107) 
Sec. 14-82. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in occupancy or the nature of the use of a building or part of a building until after the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. Permanent electrical service shall not be connected or reconnected until the certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(b)  Temporary occupancy. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. A fee as required in this chapter must be paid prior to issuance of each temporary certificate of occupancy. Permanent electrical service may be connected at the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Existing buildings. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building inspector and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with this Code for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building inspector, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of this Code for such occupancy, and the appropriate fees as required have been paid, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(d)  Change of occupancy. No change of occupancy or use shall be made in a building hereafter erected or altered that is not consistent with the last issued certificate of occupancy for such building, unless a permit is secured. In the case of an existing building, no change of occupancy that would bring it under some special provision of this article shall be made, unless the building inspector finds, upon inspection, that such building conforms substantially to the provisions of the law with respect to the proposed new occupancy and use and issues a certificate of occupancy thereof. The use of a building shall not be deemed to have changed because of temporary vacancy or change of ownership or tenancy. 
(Code 1998, § 18-108) 
Secs. 14-83—14-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION 

Sec. 14-108. - Regulation of contractors. 
(a)  Registration required. Any person desiring to engage in the business of building, gas, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, sign, or swimming pool contracting within the city, shall first make application for and obtain the proper license from the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Annual registration for contractors. Registration for contractors in the city must be renewed annually. The term of the registration shall correspond to the city's fiscal year. When applying for registration, the following information is required: 
(1)  Contractor documentation required; proof of state certification. Any electrical, plumbing, conditioned air, gas, or low voltage contractor requesting registration in the city shall provide proof of state licensing showing that they have passed the required competency examination and are licensed to engage in the type of work for which they are applying and under what classification they are licensed. 
(2)  List of subcontractors. All subcontractors associated with the registered contractor must be listed in the registration file for the registered contractor. Any electrical, plumbing, conditioned air, gas, or low voltage technician subcontracting with a contractor requesting registration in the city shall provide proof of state licensing showing that they have passed the required competency examination and are licensed to engage in the type of work for which they are applying and under what classification they are licensed. 
(Code 1998, § 18-109) 
State Law reference— Municipality has authority to implement and enforce requirement of a locally issued contractor's license, O.C.G.A. § 43-41-7(c). 
Secs. 14-109—14-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSE NUMBERING 

Sec. 14-130. - Designation of street numbers. 
Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public and private streets shall be assigned by the city building inspector or his designee. 
(Code 1998, § 22-100) 
Sec. 14-131. - Posting of designated street address. 
(a)  The owner or occupant or person in charge of any dwelling or building to which a number has been assigned will be notified in writing by the city clerk of the number assigned to the same. 
(b)  Within 60 days after the receipt of such written notification from the city clerk, the owner, occupant or person in charge of a dwelling or building to which a number has been assigned shall affix the number, of a minimum of three inches in size, to the dwelling or building in a conspicuous manner in a conspicuous place on the main dwelling or building. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of such owner, occupant or person in charge thereof upon affixing the newly assigned number to remove any different number that might be mistaken for or confused with the newly assigned number. 
(d)  Each principal building shall display the assigned number to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance shall display a separate number. 
(Code 1998, § 22-102) 
Sec. 14-132. - New structures. 
(a)  House numbers will be assigned by the city building inspector to each proposed lot or tract on the surveyor's copies of the final subdivision plats at the time plats are submitted. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued until the dwelling or building address is determined and a number has been assigned. No certificate of occupancy of any principal building erected or repaired will be issued until the proper house number has been assigned and displayed. 
(Code 1998, § 22-103) 
Sec. 14-133. - Point of beginning numbering. 
(a)  Dwellings and buildings shall be numbered north from the Darien River bank at the southern extremity of the city, and east and west starting at North Way/Walton Street. 
(b)  A house number shall be allowed for every 60 feet of street front with numbers assigned to each 60 feet of corner lots on both street frontages, however, numbers shall be assigned only to the frontage on which a dwelling or building faces the street. 
(c)  The dwellings or buildings shall be numbered using the decimal system, that is 100 numbers to each block. 
(d)  The north-south streets shall be numbered with even numbers on the east side of the streets and odd numbers on the west side of the streets. 
(e)  East-west streets shall be numbered with even numbers on the north side of the streets and odd numbers on the south side of the streets. 
(Code 1998, § 22-105) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESS LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to collect licensing fees within corporate limits, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(b)(2); authority of municipality to charge occupation tax, regulatory fees and administrative fees for investigating and inspecting businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-19. - Application. 
(a)  Each and every person, firm, or corporation transacting or offering to transact any business or working at or offering to work at any trade, occupation, or profession within the limits of the city (except attorneys at law and others who are exempt by law) shall obtain a license to transact such business, trade, occupation or profession to be issued by the city manager in accordance with further provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No business license shall be issued or renewed by the city until the applicant or permittee demonstrates compliance with all provisions of this Code, municipal ordinances, and state and county laws, rules and/or regulations. 
(Code 1998, § 17-101) 
Sec. 18-20. - Term of license. 
Licenses to be issued shall authorize the carrying on of a particular business, trade, occupation, or profession for a period of a calendar year beginning January 1, and expiring at midnight, December 31 of the year for which granted. Any new business shall obtain a license before beginning business. Any person licensed under this article or any previous licensing ordinance shall renew their licenses on or before January 15 of each year. 
(Code 1998, § 17-102) 
Sec. 18-21. - Fees and procedures for issuance. 
At the time of application for a license, the applicant shall pay to the clerk and treasurer of the city all license fees as hereinafter provided. License fees shall be set in November of each year by the mayor and council in regular meeting. License fees shall be fixed for each business, trade, occupation, or profession for the succeeding year, subject to review by the incoming mayor and council at any regular meeting held in January of the succeeding year, in those years in which an election for a mayor and council is held. Licenses issued during November of the year before the incoming mayor and council take office shall be deemed valid licenses, but the fee paid therefor may be reduced or increased by the mayor and council. Once a license fee has been set by the mayor and council in accordance with the provisions of this section, the same shall remain in effect for future years until changed by a valid action thereon by the mayor and council under the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1998, § 17-103) 
Sec. 18-22. - Fees for businesses, trades, occupations not included in the general schedule. 
The mayor and council may, at any regular meeting, by a simple resolution fix a license fee for any business, trade, occupation or profession not included in the general schedule. Also, the mayor and council may, in exercise of sound discretion, fix special combination license fees for particular business establishments engaged in a variety of activities so long as the total fee bears a reasonable relationship to the individual license fees set for specific activities. 
(Code 1998, § 17-104) 
Sec. 18-23. - Transfers. 
No license granted to any person for any particular business, trade, occupation or profession, as provided for in any of the preceding sections, shall authorize any such person to carry on any kind of business at his place of business other than that for which it is specifically granted; nor shall it authorize such person to carry on or conduct his said business at any place other than the one for which the license was granted. Licenses may be transferred in the event of the sale of a business, provided approval of the city manager is first obtained. 
(Code 1998, § 17-105) 
Sec. 18-24. - Exemptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to transact any business or work at or offer to work at any business, trade, occupation or profession within the city limits (except those exempt by law) without first having obtained a license therefor under the provisions of this chapter; except any person, firm, or corporation holding a license which expired on December 31 of a given year, shall not be considered to be violating this chapter by continuing to do business on or after January 1 of the succeeding year provided license for the succeeding year is properly obtained and the license fee paid on or before January 15 of such succeeding year, except for whiskey or other alcoholic beverage licenses which must be obtained and license fee paid on or before their expiration date of December 31 of each year. 
(Code 1998, § 17-107) 
Sec. 18-25. - Penalties. 
(a)  If any person, firm or corporation embraced in this article shall fail or refuse to obtain a license and pay the license fee therein required of them for the year for which the same is required within the time required, he, she or they shall be notified by the chief of police to take out and pay for a license instanter, and upon failure to comply, shall be guilty of a breach of this chapter, and upon conviction before the city court, shall be required to at once take out and pay said license tax, and shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(b)  For all said sums, the clerk shall issue an execution against said delinquent and against his, her, or their property and place same in the hands of the chief of police for levy and sale under the same rules as govern the levy and sale under tax executions. 
(Code 1998, § 17-109) 
Sec. 18-26. - Proration of fees/taxes. 
Any new applications for an alcoholic beverage license received or occupational tax for a business beginning after July 1 of any year shall pay one-half of the annual fee or tax for a license or tax payment for the remaining portion of that year. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 18-27—18-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 18-54. - License required. 
Each brewer, wholesale dealer, and retail dealer of malt beverages, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-42, each person engaged in the business of retailing wine, and each manufacturer, wholesale distributor and retail distributor of distilled spirits doing business within the city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1998, §§ 17-202(a), 17-203(a), 17-204(a)) 
Sec. 18-55. - Annual license fees established by ordinance. 
The annual business license fees for malt beverage brewers, retail dealers, and wholesale dealers, retail wine distributors, and distilled spirit manufacturers and distributors whose places of business are located within the city shall be set by ordinance or resolution of the city council and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1998, §§ 17-202(b), 17-203(b), 17-204(b)) 
Sec. 18-56. - Publication of notice of application for license. 
No application for a license for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages or distilled spirits or the retail sale of wine within the city shall be acted upon by the city council until after notice has been run in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the regular meeting at which such application is to be presented and considered. Such notice shall contain the name and the applicant and the location of the proposed business, and shall be run at the applicant's expense. 
(Code 1998, §§ 17-202(c), 17-203(c), 17-204(c)) 
Sec. 18-57. - Factors for council consideration. 
In deciding whether to grant or deny the application for a license to sell malt beverages, distilled spirits, or wine at retail, the mayor and council shall be guided by the same considerations as those applied in granting or denying a license for the sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1998, §§ 17-202(d), 17-203(d), 17-204(d)) 
Sec. 18-58. - No change of location. 
A license issued under the provisions of this section shall permit the sale or manufacture of malt beverages or distilled spirits or the retail sale of wine only on the premises described in the application. 
(Code 1998, §§ 17-202(e), 17-203(e), 17-204(e)) 
Sec. 18-59. - Fees. 
The following license fees are hereby established: 

 
As used herein, the term "beer" shall also include malt beverages. The term "package sales" means sales in unbroken containers or packages not for consumption on the premises. 
Sec. 18-60. - Consumption on premises. 
It shall be a violation for any licensee to permit any alcoholic beverage to be consumed in or on the licensed premises unless he has a license permitting such consumption. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a violation of these ordinances for the holder of a package sales license to permit a customer or potential customer to taste wine at no cost to the customer or potential customer. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009(3)) 
Secs. 18-61—18-64. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Alcohol Regulations 

Sec. 18-65. - Licenses for establishments selling alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  All of the definitions set out in Sec. 3-1-2 of O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2), as now contained in said section, and as the same may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted as definitions for the same terms or similar terms used by this chapter. 
(b)  Except as may be otherwise provided by ordinance or by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the manufacture, distribution or sale, at wholesale or retail, of alcoholic beverages in the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license from the governing authority, and it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in manufacture, distribution or sale, at wholesale or retail of alcoholic beverages in the corporate limits of the city after his said license has been revoked or suspended under the further provisions of this Code. 
(c)  No new license for the manufacture, distribution or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued until the governing authority has conducted a public hearing thereon. 
(d)  In the granting, refusal, suspension, or revocation of licenses pertaining to alcoholic beverages, the governing authority shall act in accordance with the following guidelines and other specific rules and regulations as set out in this Code: 
(1)  Each alcoholic beverage license shall be issued for conduct of business at a specific location and shall not be transferred to any other location except as may be hereinafter provided in this Code. 
(2)  Each alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to a specific person and shall not be transferable to another person except as hereinafter provided. 
(3)  No beverage license shall be issued for conduct of business at a location where conduct of the particular business at such location would be in violation of the state law as the same now exists or as hereafter adopted or would be a violation of the zoning regulations of the city. 
(4)  All alcoholic beverage licensees shall abide by all state laws relating to alcoholic beverages, and failure to comply with such state laws or with any ordinance of the city pertaining to alcoholic beverages shall be grounds for refusal, suspension, or revocation of licenses in accordance with the further provisions of this Code. 
(5)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to any person who: 
a.  Is under 21 years of age. 
b.  Has been convicted of any felony or has been convicted of a violation of any law or ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages or any law or ordinance pertaining to dangerous drugs or controlled substances (as defined under law of the state) within a period of five years previous to the time of application for license or the time the license is issued, whichever is greater. 
c.  Is not a resident of the state at the time the license is to be issued, except that if license is applied for in the name of a foreign corporation qualified with the secretary of state to do business in the state, the designation of a registered agent in the state by such corporation shall satisfy the requirement as to residence. 
d.  Who does not maintain a telephone at the place licensed. 
(e)  In deciding whether or not to issue an alcoholic beverage license in the first instance, the governing authority, in addition to the above rules, may consider the following factors and may refuse to issue a license in its discretion where issuance of the particular license for a particular location would be likely to cause traffic congestion, noise pollution, unsanitary conditions or unusual law enforcement problems. 
(f)  If at any time while an alcoholic beverage license is in effect, the holder of such license shall be convicted of a felony or cited for any violation of the laws of this state pertaining to dangerous drugs or controlled substances, or of the provisions of this Code relating to alcoholic beverages, or if such license holder should place himself in such circumstances as would have been grounds for refusal of a license in the first instance, the license of such person shall be subject to suspension or revocation by action of the governing authority under the further provisions of this Code. 
(g)  All decisions of the governing authority approving, denying, suspending, or revoking alcoholic beverage licenses shall be in writing, the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant or holder of the license. 
(h)  Upon timely application, any applicant or license holder aggrieved by the decision of the governing authority shall be afforded a hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(Code 1998, § 17-106) 
Sec. 18-66. - Procedures regarding issuance, revocation, suspension of alcoholic beverage licenses. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain an alcoholic beverage license shall make written application by completing and filing a form of application to be provided by the city clerk. 
(b)  The application to be made shall provide for setting forth the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  Licenses being applied for. 
(3)  Location in the city where the business is to be conducted. 
(4)  Name and address of a person who is to be considered as the person in control of the conduct of the business and who will be on the premises during the time the business is open except for temporary absences for which he will designate a substitute. 
(5)  Number of persons to be employed at the business. 
(6)  A statement to the effect that the person to be in control and the principal owners of the business have not been convicted of a felony or of a violation of the laws of this state or any other state or city ordinance pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages nor of any such law or ordinance pertaining to the sale or use of dangerous drugs or controlled substances within a period of five years preceding application for license. 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any principal owner of the business has ever had an alcoholic beverage license revoked or suspended for cause. 
(8)  Any other information which the governing authority may reasonably require of the applicant to show whether or not the applicant is entitled to the license applied for under the laws of the state and ordinances of the city. 
(c)  The application shall have appended thereto, or as a part thereof, an oath which shall be taken and subscribed by the applicant before an officer of the state authorized to administer oaths that the facts stated in the application are true. 
(d)  The willful furnishing of false or misleading information by the applicant as to a material matter in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license under the procedures hereinafter set out in this Code or under any other provision of state law. 
(e)  All applications for new alcoholic beverage licenses shall be accompanied by cash or certified check for the payment of the license fee prescribed by the governing authority for the license applied for, which funds shall be refunded if the initial licensing is not approved. The amount of the license fee shall be set by ordinance or resolution of the city council and made available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(f)  The city clerk shall present all completed applications for alcoholic beverage licenses to the governing authority at its next regular meeting after the application has been received. If the application is received 20 days before a scheduled regular meeting, the mayor in his discretion may set the date for public hearing at the time of said next regular meeting and may direct the clerk to publish any required notices at the expense of the applicant. Where the application is not received 20 days before a regularly scheduled meeting, or, where a hearing has not already been set under the above provisions, the governing authority shall fix the date for a hearing subsequent to the next regular meeting. The expense of any publication required by this hearing shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code 1998, § 17-108) 
Sec. 18-67. - Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for any holder of an alcoholic beverage license with a Sunday sales endorsement to sell alcoholic beverages on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. to 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total gross income from rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the package sales by retailers of wine/beer/distilled spirits on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m., if such Sunday sales of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits are approved by a majority of the voters of Darien in a referendum called for that purpose. 
(Code 1998, § 17-110; Ord. of 8-21-2007(4); Ord. of 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 18-68. - Sanitary conditions. 
All premises used for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages or distilled spirits or the retail sale of wine shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. 
(Code 1998, §§ 17-202(f), 17-203(f), 17-204(f)) 
Sec. 18-69. - Hours of sale. 
It shall be unlawful to sell malt beverages, wine, or distilled spirits except during those hours authorized for the sale of alcoholic beverages. In the absence of an ordinance or resolution of the city council establishing authorized hours for sale of malt beverages, wine, or distilled spirits, such hours for sale shall be in accordance with those enumerated under state law. 
(Code 1998, §§ 17-202(g), 17-203(g), 17-204(g)) 
Sec. 18-70. - Furnishing alcoholic beverages to minors, intoxicated persons and habitual drunkards. 
It shall be unlawful for persons to furnish, or cause to be furnished, or to permit any person in his employ to furnish alcoholic beverages to any minor, to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or to any habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to such person. 
(Code 1998, §§ 17-202(h), 17-203(h), 17-204(h)) 
Secs. 18-71—18-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND LIFE INSURERS 

Sec. 18-75. - Financial institutions business license tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, and state building and loan associations at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined under state law. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this chapter shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(b)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of the Department of Banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth under state law. The tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. The due date of taxes levied by this chapter shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1998, § 17-205) 
State Law reference— Municipalities authorized to levy and collect a business license tax from depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Sec. 18-76. - Life insurer license fees. 
(a)  Basic fees. There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each life insurer doing business within the city in the amount to be set by council and which is consistent with state law. For each separate business location, in excess of one, not covered by subsection (b) of this section, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount to be set by council and which is consistent with state law. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated under state law. 
(b)  License fee for life insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits, or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of a life insurer for life insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee to be set by council and which is consistent with state law, per location for each year. 
(c)  Life insurance agency license fees; independent life insurance agencies, brokers, etc. not otherwise licensed. There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) of this section, in the amount to be set by council and which is consistent with state law, for each such location within the city. 
(d)  Due date for license fees. License fees imposed in sections 18-71 and 62-8 shall be due and payable on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1998, § 17-206) 
State Law reference— Designated classes of insurance, O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5; municipalities authorized to impose and collect certain license fees upon insurance companies for the privilege of engaging in the business within municipal jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
Secs. 18-77—18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSE REGULATIONS, TAXES, AND FEES 

Sec. 18-81. - Carnivals, tent shows, exhibitions, exhibits, circuses, and other public exhibitions. 
(a)  Permit and license required. It shall be unlawful for any person to show, exhibit, or offer to show or exhibit to the public any carnival, circus, tent show, exhibit, stage show, minstrel show, moving picture, or other form of exhibition or amusement whereby the public is likely to congregate within the city until such person, firm, corporation, or combination of persons shall first obtain a license and permit to operate or offer to operate such attraction. 
(b)  Health department permit; time frame. Before a license shall be issued to any person, for the showing of or offering to show any of the things or attractions stated in this section, such person shall exhibit to the clerk of council a permit duly signed, issued and delivered to such applicant for license by the county health department of which said permit shall be in writing and shall bear a date of less than ten days prior to the time application is made. 
(c)  Council authorized to revoke license. The council is hereby authorized and empowered to prohibit any of the shows, circuses, exhibits and attractions that are herein mentioned in this article, when in their opinion it would be likely if such attractions, exhibits, carnivals, shows, and other exhibitions mentioned herein should continue to operate in said city, to spread any infectious or contagious disease, and upon their written opinion that such attraction of exhibition, carnival, circus, tent show, or other form of attraction is likely to spread such disease, the license issued shall be immediately revoked, without further notice than having the chief of police or his deputy to deliver to the person who is apparently in charge a written notice that such license is revoked. 
(d)  License fee. A license fee shall be charged and such charge shall be set by council based upon the type of exhibition for which the license is issued. The amount of the charge for differing types of exhibitions shall be available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(e)  Duration of license. The licenses set forth in this section shall be issued at said stated sums for a period of one week. If the licensee desires an additional period of time for the exhibition, then at the end of the one week term of the original license, he may apply for an additional one week license by submitting a new application which shall conform in all respects to the original application and the requirements thereof. 
(f)  Penalties for violation. Any person who shall operate, show, exhibit, or offer to do so, without complying with the terms, conditions, rules, and regulations herein set out, or in anywise violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall severally be guilty of a breach of the peace as well as doing business without a license, and shall for each offense be, upon conviction in the mayor's or police court, punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 17-201) 
Sec. 18-82. - Handbills, pamphlets, circulars, advertisements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to distribute any handbill, pamphlet, circular or advertisement on the public streets or sidewalks of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in accordance with the further provisions hereof. 
(b)  Any person desiring to distribute writings as described in subsection (a) of this section shall apply to the clerk of the city during established hours for the keeping open of said office and shall state the time and places where the distribution is to be made and present the city clerk with a copy of the matter to be distributed. 
(c)  The city clerk shall have no discretion as to the issuance of a permit but shall be required to issue the permit forthwith. Any person who shall distribute such writings as herein described without first obtaining the permit herein provided for shall, upon conviction in the municipal court for the city, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 16-111) 
Sec. 18-83. - Itinerant dealers. 
It shall be unlawful for any itinerant dealer or trader to expose or offer his goods for sale or inspection before taking out and paying for the license tax required. Any person convicted under this section shall be liable to a fine not exceeding the amount of the license tax, and to take out a license instanter. 
(Code 1998, § 16-121) 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Management and supervision. 
The responsibility for the management, operation, maintenance, and general supervision of all municipal cemeteries shall be vested in the department of public works. 
(Code 1998, § 19-101) 
Sec. 22-2. - Superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(a)  Appointment. The superintendent of public works shall appoint a superintendent of municipal cemeteries, which officer shall be subject to removal at any time by the superintendent of public works. 
(b)  Duties. The superintendent of municipal cemeteries shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To look after and take proper care of all municipal cemeteries and see that no lot in any cemetery is used or occupied in violation of this chapter or of any rule or regulation promulgated by the mayor and council; 
(2)  To keep full and detailed accounts of the receipts and expenditures on account of the municipal cemeteries, and at least once a month to turn over to the city treasurer all monies collected on such accounts; and 
(3)  To see to the digging of graves and to the proper interring of the dead when called upon to do so. 
(Code 1998, § 19-102) 
Sec. 22-3. - Purchase and conveyance of lots. 
(a)  Lot valuation. The department of public works shall place a value upon all unsold lots in the municipal cemeteries, and shall record such valuations on an official map or plan for each cemetery, which maps shall be kept on file, open to public inspection, in the office of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(b)  Method of purchase. Any person desiring to purchase an easement in a particular lot for the purpose for which it is intended, shall be permitted to do so upon payment of the price fixed. 
(Code 1998, § 19-103) 
Sec. 22-4. - Restrictions on use. 
(a)  Enclosures. No curbing, fencing, or enclosure of any sort shall be erected on, in, or around any burial lot in the cemetery, but the city reserves the right to erect curbing along the walks and driveways if it so desires. 
(b)  Plantings. The planting of flowers and shrubs or any other effort to improve or beautify any lot within a municipal cemetery shall be done only after the plans for such work shall have been submitted to the department of public works and approved thereby. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the decoration or adornment of any gravesite with potted or cut flowers or plants. 
(c)  Stones and monuments. Owners of cemetery lot easements shall have the right to erect proper stones or monuments marking the burial site, except that no slab shall be set other than in a horizontal position and flush with the ground. 
(1)  Headstones shall not exceed two feet in height above the ground and 18 inches in width and shall be set in a solid concrete foundation. 
(2)  Monuments of cut stone or marble shall not exceed ten feet in height and the erection of same must be authorized and supervised by the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(d)  Mausoleums. Mausoleums may be placed on the burial lots designated on the plat of a municipal cemetery as "memorial lots," by the holders thereof, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Before erecting any mausoleum, the holder of such lot shall furnish complete plans and specifications to the city clerk for submission to the department of public works, together with application for permission to construct; and no mausoleum shall be erected until such application is approved. 
(2)  A mausoleum shall be situated from the front line of the lot on which it is placed at a distance not less than the depth of the structure itself, and from all other sides of the lot at a distance equal to the greatest height of the structure. 
(3)  No bodies shall be placed in any such mausoleum except in sealed caskets and in hermetically sealed compartments. 
(Code 1998, § 19-104) 
Sec. 22-5. - Regulations. 
(a)  Trees and shrubs. No tree or shrub shall be planted, removed, cut down, or destroyed within the borders of any burial lot, walks, or lawn spaces, without the consent of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(b)  Injury to monuments. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface, or in any manner injure any monument, enclosure, mausoleum, or ornament thereof within any municipal cemetery. 
(c)  Discharging firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any gun, pistol, or other firearm within any municipal cemetery except at a funeral ceremony. 
(d)  Depositing offensive matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any part of any cemetery for any land adjoining it any dead carcass or any putrid or offensive matter whatever. 
(e)  Disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself or herself in a boisterous or disorderly manner within the perimeter of any municipal cemetery. 
(f)  Entering cemeteries at night. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any municipal cemetery or walk upon or across any such cemetery between sunset and sunrise without the written consent of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(g)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to post any advertisement or sign, or to solicit any work in a municipal cemetery. 
(h)  Unauthorized interments. It shall be unlawful for any person to inter any dead body in any part of a municipal cemetery without the express authorization of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(i)  Disinterment. Disinterments shall be made only when authorized by the mayor and council and the county board of health. 
(Code 1998, § 19-105) 
Sec. 22-6. - Authority of the city to regulate; liability. 
(a)  The mayor and city council reserve to themselves and their successors in office the right to alter, amend, modify, or add to the rules, regulations, conditions, and restrictions herein set forth at any time it is deemed advisable to do so in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  There shall be no liability whatsoever, either tort or contractual, on the part of the city, or its officials or officers (or their successors in office), or its agents or employees, to any purchasers of any lots in the cemetery, or to any person holding under them, or to the family or relatives of any person buried in the cemetery, or to any person or the family of such person who has erected any monument, marker, or mausoleum therein, by reason of any act or acts, thing or things, omission, negligence, or otherwise relating to the cemetery. In accepting any conveyance of any burial lot, each purchaser agrees that all provisions of this chapter are valid and that he and his heirs and assigns shall hold such lot subject to all the provisions of this chapter and subject to all amendments hereto made by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1998, § 19-106) 
Chapter 26 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cities authorized to establish municipal courts, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I; cash bonds in cases involving offenses against municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-10; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Judge's term; expiration thereof. 
The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. The term of the judge shall be for a period of four years, and shall expire upon the judge being removed from office by the mayor and council or until another judge is appointed at the end of the current judge's term. 
Sec. 26-2. - Bailiff. 
(a)  The bailiff of the municipal court shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(b)  The duties of the bailiff shall consist generally of seeing that the courtroom is in proper condition for sessions of court, of assisting in keeping order while court is in session, and of doing such other acts of assistance as may be required of him by the judge of the court and the city clerk. 
(Code 1998, § 5-101) 
Sec. 26-3. - Record of cases. 
A record of all cases heard in the municipal court for violation of this Code or other municipal ordinances shall be kept in a suitable bound volume by the city clerk. Such record shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final disposition of the case, and the date of final disposition. 
(Code 1998, § 5-102) 
Sec. 26-4. - Service of summons. 
(a)  Any person charged with violating any city ordinance shall receive notice by service of a summons as herein provided. Such summons may be issued by any city law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer, or other city official when so designated by the judge. The summons shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, and the day, hour, and place of trial, requiring the accused to appear before the judge of the municipal court to answer the accusation made. Service of the summons shall be made by any city law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer, or other city official when so designated by the judge, either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his dwelling, house, or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion therein, or by delivering a copy of the summons and complaint to an agent designated by appointment or by law to receive service of process. 
(b)  In the case of a summons issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons may be directed to an unknown person as owner of an automobile designated in the summons and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. 
(Code 1998, § 5-103) 
Sec. 26-5. - Failure to obey summons or subpoena. 
Any person who fails to appear at the time and place set out in any summons or subpoena served upon him shall be guilty of contempt of court and upon conviction thereof shall be punished for same. 
(Code 1998, § 5-104) 
Sec. 26-6. - Arrest and bond. 
When a police officer has arrested any person for violation of any provision of this Code or any municipal ordinance and a trial cannot be had immediately, the clerk of the municipal court may take a cash bond not exceeding the maximum fine for the offense, or a bond with a good security, for the appearance of such person before the judge of the municipal court. If such person fails or refuses to give a bond, the officer may confine him or her in the city jail until a trial can be held. 
(Code 1998, § 5-105) 
Sec. 26-7. - Forfeiture of bond. 
Upon the failure of a person to appear in the municipal court at the time and place fixed by the summons, the judge of said court shall enter a judgment of forfeiture on any cash bond, or, in the case of a security bond, shall pass a rule requiring the principal and surety on such bond to show cause on the date named therein, which date shall not be less than ten days from the passage of such ruling, why he should not be required to pay the amount of said bond. If no sufficient cause is shown, the judge shall enter the judgment against the principal and surety for the amount of the forfeited bond and shall direct the city clerk to issue execution thereon. 
(Code 1998, § 5-106) 
Sec. 26-8. - Court costs. 
The costs which shall be charged against a defendant in the municipal court in the event of his conviction shall be established as by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council, made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk, and be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1998, § 5-107) 
Sec. 26-9. - Collection of fines. 
When directed by the judge of the municipal court, the city clerk shall issue executions for fines imposed by said court, including the costs, which executions may be levied upon any goods or chattels, lands or tenements of the person so fined. 
(Code 1998, § 5-108) 
Sec. 26-10. - Solicitor. 
The city manager shall select and appoint on behalf of the city a qualified attorney to serve as solicitor in the municipal court of the city. The duties of the solicitor are: 
(1)  To attend each session of the municipal court unless excused by the judge thereof and to remain until the business of the city is disposed of; 
(2)  To aid the municipal court judge in organizing the court as he may require; 
(3)  To draw up all indictments or accusations, when necessary; 
(4)  To attend before the appellate courts when any ordinance violation case emanating from the municipal court of the city is tried, to argue the same, and to perform any other duty therein which the interest of the city may require; 
(5)  To advise law enforcement and code enforcement officers concerning the sufficiency of evidence, warrants, and similar matters relating to the investigation and prosecution of Code violations; 
(6)  To represent the city prosecuting all charges brought or initiated by any city employee acting in the course of his or her employment with the city; 
(7)  To perform such other duties as are or may be required by law or which necessarily appertain to their office. 
The appointment shall be made for a term consisting of one calendar year or portion thereof. The compensation and other terms of employment shall be set forth in a contract between the city and the solicitor. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2008(2), § 26-10) 
Sec. 26-11 - Deputy municipal court judge. 
The deputy municipal court judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. The term of the deputy municipal court judge shall be for a period of four years, and shall expire upon the deputy municipal court judge being removed from office by the mayor and council or until another deputy municipal court judge is appointed at the end of the current deputy municipal court judge's term. The deputy municipal court judge may be removed from office as set out in section 5.11 of the Darien City Charter. The deputy municipal court judge shall be assigned work from time to time by the municipal court judge with the consent of the city manager. Compensation of the deputy municipal court judge shall be set by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2009(2)) 
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Expenses. 
Such funds as are necessary for the conduct of elections and for the performance of the duties that are specified by this chapter shall be budgeted and approached annually, and from time to time. 
(Code 1998, § 2-101) 
Sec. 30-2. - Contract for the conduct of city elections. 
The Darien City Council may authorize McIntosh County or the Board of Elections and Registration of McIntosh County or both to conduct elections of the City of Darien pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 21-2-45 upon such terms as the Darien City Council may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. of 7-21-2009(2)) 
Secs. 30-3—30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 30-21. - Challenge of registration. 
Any elector of the municipality shall have the right to challenge the registration of any person whose name appears on the registration list in the manner set forth below: 
(1)  Appeal to registrar. Any challenge of a person's right to register shall be made in the first instance to the registrar, who shall upon hearing the evidence decide whether to affirm or reverse the original decision. 
(2)  Appeal to superior court. Any person asserting a challenge under this section shall have the right to appeal from the decision of the registrar to the superior court. Said appeal must be filed in writing within ten days from the date of the decision complained. The decision of the registrar shall remain in force until such time as the appeal is decided. 
(Code 1998, § 2-201) 
Sec. 30-22. - Permanency of registration. 
Registration of an elector will remain permanent if the elector votes in at least one election every three years. If such person does not vote in at least one general or special election or primary in a three-year period and does not specially request continuation of his registration, then the elector's name will be removed from the registration list and he shall be required to reregister in the manner provided for original registration. 
(Code 1998, § 2-202) 
Sec. 30-23. - Absentee registration. 
Absentee registration shall not be allowed in any municipal primary or general or special election held in the city. 
(Code 1998, § 2-203) 
Secs. 30-24—30-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CANDIDATES 

Sec. 30-50. - Notice of candidacy. 
Each candidate desiring to have his name placed on the ballot for an office to fill in a municipal general or special election shall file personally, or by his agent, notice of his candidacy in a manner and accompanied by the documents and information required by state law. 
(Code 1998, § 2-301) 
Sec. 30-51. - Qualification fees. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election shall be set by the council. Such fee shall be paid to the municipal election superintendent at the time of filing such notice of candidacy. 
(Code 1998, § 2-302) 
Sec. 30-52. - Campaign financing disclosures. 
All candidates for municipal public office shall keep all such records and file all such reports as are required by state law. 
(Code 1998, § 2-303) 
State Law reference— Financial disclosure statements for candidates generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-50 et seq. 
Secs. 30-53—30-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VOTING 

Sec. 30-78. - Election officials. 
(a)  Appointment. The following election officials shall be appointed by the mayor and council and shall receive such compensation as is provided by the same: 
(1)  Municipal election superintendent; 
(2)  Chief manager; 
(3)  Two assistant managers; 
(4)  Clerks, as necessary. 
(b)  Qualifications and powers. The municipal election superintendent and all poll officers shall meet such qualifications and exercise all such powers and duties as are provided in Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1998, § 2-401) 
Sec. 30-79. - Election districts. 
There shall be two election districts within the corporate limits of the city, to be designated District 1 (formerly known as "South Ward") and District 2 (formerly known as "North Ward"). 
(Code 1998, § 2-402) 
Sec. 30-80. - Absentee ballots. 
Absentee ballots shall be used in all municipal elections and such use shall be governed by state law. 
(Code 1998, § 2-405) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
Secs. 30-81—30-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IMPEACHMENT AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 30-106. - Grounds for removal. 
The mayor or any councilman shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any qualifications of law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating any express prohibition of the municipal charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by charter or by law. 
(Code 1998, § 2-501) 
Sec. 30-107. - Recall elections. 
Any election to remove an elected official from city office shall be conducted according to state law. 
(Code 1998, § 2-504) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 21-4-1 et seq. 
Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-1. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management or civil defense means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions for which military forces or other state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, disasters, energy emergencies, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, consequence management functions to include victim services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1998, § 6-101) 
Sec. 34-2. - Office of the Darien-Mcintosh County civil defense coordination. 
In agreement with the governing officials, there is hereby established the Darien-McIntosh County Civil Defense Office. The mayor with concurrence of other city officials shall nominate, for appointment by the governor, a coordinator of civil defense for the city and the county. When appointed, the civil defense coordinator is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to civil preparedness. 
(2)  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city departments and agencies, the city plan for emergency functions set forth in this chapter. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the city and thence to the state civil defense director for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the civil defense office in carrying out the day-to-day administration of the Darien-McIntosh civil preparedness and disaster program including the rendering of required reports to the state civil defense office. 
(5)  To render reports such as financial, daily activity, etc. as required by governing officials in keeping with good business practices. 
(6)  To procure, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the Darien-McIntosh Emergency Operating Center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the Darien-McIntosh Emergency Operating Center staff during periods of a declared emergency, under the supervision of city governing officials. 
(Code 1998, § 6-102) 
Sec. 34-3. - Darien-Mcintosh Civil Defense Organization. 
The Darien-McIntosh Civil Defense Organization shall be established around existing city departments and agencies, and the emergency functions listed in this chapter are assigned as follows: 

 
Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing the plan for their assigned emergency function. Such plans will be submitted through the civil defense coordinator to the mayor and governing officials for approval. 
(Code 1998, § 6-103) 
Sec. 34-4. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, an actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city and the county, the mayor and the governing officials of the city may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws, and regulations relating to civil defense and to assume direct operational control over all civil defense resources. 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any property for the protection of the public. 
(3)  To sell, lend, give, or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the city; to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 6-104) 
Sec. 34-5. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Code 1998, § 6-105) 
Sec. 34-6. - Penalties. 
Any violation of any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1998, § 6-106) 
Sec. 34-7. - Liberality of construction. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Code 1998, § 6-107) 
Sec. 34-8. - Postdisaster debris collection. 
(a)  In the event of a natural or manmade disaster that has been declared a public emergency, under this chapter or Georgia Law, by the mayor or other authorized official, the city may exercise its authority to implement the measures set forth herein. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the authority and responsibility to protect the public health and safety. The city manager shall have the authority to remove debris which poses an immediate threat to life, public health and safety, significant damage to improved public and private property, and the economic recovery of the town. 
(c)  The city is hereby authorized to enter upon and remove debris from public and private roads, rights-of-way, storm drainage easements, and ingress/egress easements within town limits, including private communities, for the purposes of emergency vehicle travel, stormwater conveyance, protecting public health and safety, facilitating response and recovery operations, and for any other purpose the city manager determines is necessary to remove an immediate threat to life, public health and safety, significant damage to improved public and private property, and the economic recovery of the town. 
(Ord. No. 2016-001Z, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Chapter 36 - FIRE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 36-1. - Created; commanding office; purpose. 
There is hereby created a department of the city government to be known as the fire department, the commanding officer of which shall be the fire chief. The purpose of the fire department shall be the prevention and extinguishment of fire and the protection of life and property within the limits of the city and such other areas as may be designated by the chief of the fire department, subject to approval of the city manager. 
Sec. 36-2. - Composition. 
The fire department, either fulltime, volunteer, or any combination, shall consist of a fire chief, fire marshal, and such subordinate officers and firefighters as may from time to time be provided for by the city manager following budgetary authorization by the city commission. 
Sec. 36-3. - Rank. 
Following the fire chief in rank shall be the fire marshal, the captain, the lieutenants, the training officer, and the firefighters, in order of seniority in each group. 
Sec. 36-4. - Fire chief. 
(a)  Appointment. The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be the department head of the fire department, subject always to the orders of the manager and to the regulations of the city commission. 
(b)  Oath. Prior to entering upon the discharge of his duties, the fire chief shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by this Code. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The fire chief shall be responsible for and have control over the fire department and all fire apparatuses belonging to the city and shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To see the proper and speedy extinguishment of all accidental or intentionally caused fires; 
(2)  To see to the enforcement of the fire prevention code adopted by the commission; 
(3)  To keep or cause to be kept adequate records of all fires, inspections, equipment, fire prevention efforts, and other activities of the department; 
(4)  To submit a monthly written report to the commission on the activities of the department; 
(5)  To establish rules and regulations, subject to approval by the city commission, and governing the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care and management of the fire department; 
(6)  To investigate the causes of all extended or destructive fires occurring within the city; and 
(7)  To educate the public on fire safety. 
(d)  Resignation, removal, death, disability. In the event of resignation, removal, death, or disability of the fire chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been appointed. 
Sec. 36-5. - Fire marshal. 
(a)  Appointment. The fire marshal shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be assistant department head of the fire department, subject always to the orders of the fire chief and the city manager. 
(b)  Oath. Prior to entering upon the discharge of his duties, the fire marshal shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by this Code. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The fire marshal, in the absence of the fire chief or under his guidance, shall be responsible for and have control over the fire department and all fire apparatuses belonging to the city and any duties required therein, along with the following duties: 
(1)  Enforcement of such regulations as specified in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4, through the authority having jurisdiction assigned to the office of the city fire marshal. 
(2)  Conduct occupancy inspections and fire safety inspections within all buildings outlined in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4. 
(3)  Plan and specifications review of all new construction as specified in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4. 
(4)  Conduct fire cause and determination investigations of all extended or destructive fires occurring within the city. 
(5)  Issue citations in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4 as well as this Code, as amended from time to time. 
(d)  Vacancy; role of fire chief. The fire chief will perform the duties and have the powers of fire marshal if the position of fire marshal is vacant. 
Sec. 36-6. - Firefighters. 
(a)  Qualifications. Any person employed or accepted as a volunteer firefighter shall satisfy the qualifications imposed by the Georgia Firefighters and Standards Act (O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.). 
(b)  Oath. Prior to entering upon the discharge of their duties, all firefighters shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by this Code. 
(c)  Duties. It shall be the duty of all firefighters to become familiar with and proficient in the handling of all the apparatuses of the fire department, to be prepared at a moment's notice to respond to all alarms of fire, to observe all rules and regulations of the fire department established by the fire chief, and to obey all orders of the commanding officer at all fires. 
Sec. 36-7. - Fire station inspections. 
Each fire station and its equipment shall be examined regularly. Such inspections shall be rigidly made and shall ensure that all apparatuses are maintained in excellent working condition at all times and are ready for immediate service, and that all fire stations and surroundings are in a clean and sanitary condition. 
Sec. 36-8. - Persons permitted on or using equipment. 
No person other than a member of the fire department shall be permitted to ride upon the firefighting apparatus in going to or returning from fires. Furthermore, no person other than a member of the fire department shall be permitted to use or tamper with the firefighting equipment of the city unless directed to do so by the fire chief, fire marshal, or the city manager. 
Sec. 36-9. - Command at fires. 
In case of fire, the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire in the best manner possible. Such commanding officer may cause buildings to be removed, torn down, or destroyed when such acts are necessary for the protection of other property and for the prevention of the spread of the conflagration. 
Sec. 36-10. - Use of equipment outside city limits. 
Upon the orders of the fire chief or the city manager, members of the fire department are authorized to go outside the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of extinguishing fires or rendering aid to other fire departments, or for rendering aid in the case of accidents. 
Chapter 38 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that historic/aesthetic resources of Darien are among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people. 
(b)  In order to provide a uniform process for providing guidance to owners of historic property in making material changes through the approval of certificates of appropriateness. 
(c)  In order to stimulate revitalization and reinvestment in the central business district and residential areas of the city and to protect and enhance local and historic/aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business. 
(d)  In order to enhance the opportunities for federal tax relief of property owners under relevant provisions of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-514) allowing tax investment credits for rehabilitation of certified historic structures. 
(e)  The mayor and city council hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, and works of art having a special historic/aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 21-101) 
Secs. 38-2—38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 38-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the Darien Historic Preservation Commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historical property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Building official means the building official of the city. 
Commission means the Darien Historic Preservation Commission. 
Designated district or site means a historic district or historic property. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior or a building or other structure, including but not limited to the kind of texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of the site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, works of art or a combination thereof which exhibit a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the mayor and council. 
Historic property means an individual structure, site, or work of art which exhibits a special historical, architectural or environmental character as designated by the mayor and council. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a property within a designated district or site and may include any one of the following: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade and existing building or structure of a historic property, including any of its architectural elements or details. 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a building or a structure. 
(3)  Commencement of excavation. 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way. 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure. 
(6)  The construction or removal of exterior environmental features. 
(Code 1998, § 21-1001) 
Secs. 38-22—38-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DARIEN HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 38-46. - Created. 
There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be: "Darien Historic Preservation Commission," (hereinafter referred to as the "commission"). 
(Code 1998, § 21-201) 
Sec. 38-47. - Commission position within the city government. 
(a)  The Darien Historic Preservation Commission shall be considered a part of the planning functions of the city. 
(b)  The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council, who shall be residents of the city, who demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. 
(c)  Members shall serve three-year terms. 
(d)  Members do not receive a salary although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(Code 1998, § 21-202; Ord. of 4-17-2008(3), § 38-47) 
Sec. 38-48. - Statement of the commission's powers. 
The Darien Historic Preservation Commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare an inventory of all property within its respective jurisdiction having the potential for designation as historic property. 
(2)  Recommend to the mayor and city council specific places, sites, buildings, works of art and districts to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts. 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Recommend to the mayor and city council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, or work of art as an historic property or as an historic district be revoked or removed. 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city. 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the "Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976" (Georgia Laws 1976, p. 1181). 
(7)  Conduct an educational program on historic properties located within its historic preservation jurisdiction. 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the local governing body or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources. 
(9)  Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired. 
(10)  Submit to the Historic Preservation Section (HPS) of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) a list of historic properties or historic districts designated, and provide the HPS whatever information is needed to nominate these to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the Darien Historic Preservation Program. 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; the commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent. 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property, and acquire and sell historic properties. The commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent. 
(14)  Review and make comments to the state historic preservation office concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the mayor and council enter into agreements to do the same. 
(Code 1998, § 21-203) 
Sec. 38-49. - Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. 
(a)  The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this chapter. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(b)  The latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall determine the order of business at all meetings. 
(Code 1998, § 21-204) 
Sec. 38-50. - Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. 
The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall insure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. The commission will not financially obligate the city without approval of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1998, § 21-205) 
Sec. 38-51. - Records of commission meetings. 
A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Code 1998, § 21-206) 
Sec. 38-52. - Conflict of interest. 
At any time the commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, the member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
(Code 1998, § 21-207) 
Secs. 38-53—38-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND HISTORIC PROPERTY 

Sec. 38-78. - Mandate and powers. 
(a)  Survey of historical resources. Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources: The commission shall have the authority to compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. Information gathered previously in National Register nominations and in earlier surveys may be used. 
(b)  Recommendation for designation as historic. Commission's power to recommend districts and property to city council for designation: The commission shall present to the mayor and council recommendations for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(c)  Formal recommendation reports; contents. Preparation of a report on proposed historic districts and historic properties: The commission shall prepare formal reports when recommending historic districts or properties for designation. These reports shall consist of three parts: 
(1)  A list of property classifications as outlined in this article. 
(2)  A physical description. 
(3)  A description of the cultural, architectural, and/or historic/aesthetic significance of the historic district/property. 
These reports will be used to educate the public and provide a permanent record of local designation. A nomination to the National Register of Historic Places and a list of property classification may suffice as one of these reports. 
(Code 1998, § 21-301) 
Sec. 38-79. - Designation of historic districts. 
(a)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, works of art, or a combination thereof, which satisfies one or more of the following: 
(1)  Has special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest. 
(2)  Is important to the history of the city, the county, the state, or the coastal area. 
(3)  Has a majority of structures which are 50 years old or older. 
(4)  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city. 
(b)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be specified on tax maps and on the official zoning map. These boundaries will be included in the separate ordinance designating local historic districts, and boundaries specified in legal notices shall coincide with the boundaries finally designated. 
(c)  Evaluation of properties within designated historic districts. Areas within historic districts shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Historic (more than 50 years old and a contribution to the district). 
(2)  Nonhistoric (less than 50 years old yet possessing architectural character). 
(3)  Intrusions (buildings of any age which detract from the historical character of the district). 
(d)  Affirmation of existing zoning. This historic preservation chapter is not a use ordinance. Any zoning laws currently in existence in the city or passed in the future will not be affected by this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 21-302) 
Sec. 38-80. - Designation of historic property. 
(a)  Criteria for selection of historic property. A historic property is a structure, site, work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, the county, the state, or the coastal area, for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era. 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style. 
(3)  It is a place or structure 50 years old or older associated with an activity, an event, or person of historic or cultural significance to the city, the county, the state, or the coastal area. 
(4)  It is a property of historic/aesthetic interest that pertains to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, the county, the state, or the coastal area. 
(b)  Boundaries of a historic property. Boundaries of a historic property shall be specified on tax maps and located on the official zoning map. 
(Code 1998, § 21-303) 
Sec. 38-81. - General matters affecting the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(a)  Application for designation of historic district and landmarks. 
(1)  Historic district. A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Historic property. A historical society, property owner or neighborhood association may apply to the commission for designation. 
(b)  Required public hearings and notifications. 
(1)  The commission and the city shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance for designation. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the legal organ of the city, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. 
(2)  All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A letter sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property, as recorded on the tax rolls in the county tax assessor's office, shall constitute legal notification under this section. 
(c)  Designation and certificate of appropriateness. Any ordinance recommending any property or district as historic for designation shall do the following: 
(1)  Describe each property to be designated. 
(2)  Set forth the names of the owners of the properties to be designated. 
(3)  After designation of the area, a certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the Darien Historic Preservation Commission prior to any material change in appearance to the property. 
(Code 1998, § 21-304) 
Sec. 38-82. - Requirements regarding district boundaries. 
Any ordinance designating any property as a historic property, or as part of a historic district area shall require that the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning maps of the city and kept as public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(Code 1998, § 21-305) 
Sec. 38-83. - Notification of historic preservation section, state department of natural resources. 
(a)  Prior to the recommendation of the designation of any property or district as historic, the commission must submit a report on the historic, cultural, architectural, or aesthetic significance of each place, district, site, building/structure, or work of art to the Historic Preservation Section (HPS) of the state department of natural resources. Thirty days will be allowed to prepare written comments. 
(b)  Once a historic district or historic property has been designated by the mayor and council, the commission shall work with the Coastal Georgia Regional Development Center (CGRDC), Historic Preservation Planner to provide whatever additional information is needed by the HPS to nominate the designated district or site to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(Code 1998, § 21-306) 
Sec. 38-84. - Ordinance for designation recommendations. 
A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made within 15 days following the public hearing, and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(Code 1998, § 21-307) 
Sec. 38-85. - Notification of adoption of ordinances for designation. 
Within 30 days immediately following the adoption of the ordinance for designation, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the mayor and council, which notice shall apprise all owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness for undertaking any material change in appearance of a property which is a part of a designated district or site. 
(Code 1998, § 21-308) 
Sec. 38-86. - Notification of other agencies regarding designation. 
The Darien Historic Preservation Commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation, including the mayor and city council; the office of the building official (inspector) and the zoning official. The commission will also notify individuals and agencies throughout the city, the county, the state, or the coastal area likely to be interested in the ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 21-309) 
Sec. 38-87. - Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. 
If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the Darien Historic Preservation Commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Code 1998, § 21-310) 
Secs. 38-88—38-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - APPLICATION TO PRESERVATION COMMISSION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 38-110. - Approval of alterations to the exterior architectural features of existing buildings in historic districts or historic properties. 
After the designation by ordinance of a historic district or a historic property, no material change in the exterior architectural appearance of any existing building within these areas shall be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless or until application for certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. The certificate of appropriateness will certify that the change in exterior architectural appearance is compatible with the historical features of the building altered and the adjoining properties. 
(Code 1998, § 21-401) 
Sec. 38-111. - Approval of new construction within historic districts or properties. 
The Darien Historic Preservation Commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness to new structures constructed within designated historic districts if these structures conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the design criteria developed by the commission. 
(Code 1998, § 21-402) 
Sec. 38-112. - Guidelines and criteria for certificates of appropriateness. 
When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness to existing buildings, the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation" shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the commission. 
(Code 1998, § 21-403) 
Sec. 38-113. - Submission of plans to commission. 
(a)  In order for an application for a certificate of appropriateness to be reviewed, it must be submitted at least 15 days prior to a scheduled meeting of the commission. 
(b)  An application for certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs or plans as may be required by the commission. 
(c)  Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans for the site. 
(Code 1998, § 21-404) 
Sec. 38-114. - Acceptable commission reaction to application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(b)  The commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in the appearance would have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(c)  The commission may make approval of a certificate of appropriateness conditional upon complying to certain situations which may be listed in the certificate. Such stipulations are to be used only to diminish the adverse impact of the changes in material appearance proposed in the application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Code 1998, § 21-405) 
Sec. 38-115. - Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices and right to be heard. 
At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected materially by the change in material appearance for which the application for certificate of appropriateness has been made and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. All meetings of the commission at which applications for certificates of appropriateness are being discussed shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1998, § 21-406) 
Sec. 38-116. - Interior alterations. 
In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(Code 1998, § 21-407) 
Sec. 38-117. - Technical advice. 
When dealing with technical questions, the commission shall have the power to seek expert advice. 
(Code 1998, § 21-408) 
Sec. 38-118. - Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of an historic property within a designated historic district or site. Evidence of approval shall be a certificate of appropriateness issued by the Darien Historic Preservation Commission. 
(Code 1998, § 21-409) 
Sec. 38-119. - Necessary actions to be taken by the Darien Historic Preservation Commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after so doing. 
(b)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building official, inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(Code 1998, § 21-410) 
Sec. 38-120. - Undue hardship. 
Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications, or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall be a situation not of the person's own making. 
(Code 1998, § 21-411) 
Sec. 38-121. - Issuance of stop work orders as required by the commission. 
The building official shall issue stop work orders for projects within the preservation jurisdiction of the commission upon order of the commission if: 
(1)  Work has begun which requires a certificate of appropriateness without such certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  Work has begun with an expired certificate of appropriateness. 
(3)  It is not done in accordance with an issued certificate of appropriateness. 
In all such cases the owners of the projects involved may apply for a certificate of appropriateness, and upon the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, the stop work order will be removed immediately. 
(Code 1998, § 21-412) 
Sec. 38-122. - Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(Code 1998, § 21-413) 
Sec. 38-123. - Recording of applications for certificates of appropriateness. 
The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and all the commission's proceedings in connection with said applications. 
(Code 1998, § 21-414) 
Sec. 38-124. - Acquisition of property. 
The commission may, where such action is authorized by the mayor and council of the city and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. 
(Code 1998, § 21-415) 
Sec. 38-125. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the mayor and council. The appeal must be applied for within 15 days after notification is sent by the commission. The mayor and city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission if the mayor and council finds the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision by violating procedures set forth in this chapter. Appeals to the mayor and city council may be appealed to a superior court of the county in a manner provided by law for appeals from conviction or ordinance violations. 
(Code 1998, § 21-416) 
Secs. 38-126—38-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEMOLITION OR RELOCATION APPLICATIONS OF A HISTORIC PROPERTY OR PROPERTIES WITHIN A HISTORIC DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-154. - Authority to review demolition and relocation applications. 
The commission shall have the authority to grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness to demolish or relocate a structure within a historic district or on a historic property. 
(Code 1998, § 21-501) 
Sec. 38-155. - Considerations of post-demolition plans. 
The commission shall not grant a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the plans for the building or other development that would replace the structure. 
(Code 1998, § 21-502) 
Sec. 38-156. - Demolition or relocation criteria. 
(a)  The commission shall evaluate the effect the demolition or relocation of a building will have on the historical character of the historic district or historic property affected. If the commission determines that demolition or relocation would have a negative effect, it will deny the certificate of appropriateness unless: 
(1)  The building in question is shown to be incapable of earning an economic return on its value after rehabilitation as determined by the commission with the advice of a qualified real estate appraiser. 
(2)  The building in question is classified as an intrusion. 
(3)  In the case of a nonprofit organization, that organization can prove that the structure cannot be successfully rehabilitated and used by the organization. 
(b)  Whenever a property owner shows that a building is incapable of earning an economic return on its value or be successfully rehabilitated or used, such building may be demolished or relocated, provided, however, that the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall be subject to a delay of demolition or relocation and that notice of the proposed demolition or relocation shall be given as follows: 
(1)  For a building rated historic: 12-month delay. 
(2)  For a building rated non-historic: six-month delay. 
(3)  For a building intrusion: no delay. 
(c)  Notice shall be posted on the premises of the building or structure proposed for demolition in a location clearly visible from the street. In addition, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general local circulation at least three times prior to the date of the permit and the first notice of which shall be published no more than 15 days after the application for a permit to demolish is filed. The purpose of this section is to further the purposes of this chapter by preserving historic buildings which are important to the education, culture, traditions, and the economic values of the city, to allow interested persons, historical societies, or organizations the opportunity to acquire or to arrange for the preservation of such buildings. 
(Code 1998, § 21-503) 
Sec. 38-157. - Emergency demolition permits. 
In the event the building official determines that a landmark or existing building in a historic district poses immediate threat to the safety of the community, he may request an emergency meeting of the commission. At such times the commission may authorize the emergency demolition of such structures. 
(Code 1998, § 21-504) 
Secs. 38-158—38-187. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THE COMMISSION 

Sec. 38-188. - Ordinary repairs. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on an existing building that does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, is excluded from review. 
(Code 1998, § 21-601) 
Sec. 38-189. - Conformity to existing building codes. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of their property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Code 1998, § 21-602) 
Secs. 38-190—38-206. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PENALTY PROVISION 

Sec. 38-207. - Violations. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 21-701) 
Chapter 42 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to prohibit public and private littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building regulations means and includes the building regulations and standard codes heretofore adopted by the city, building regulations in effect in the city prior to such date, and fire regulations in effect in the city. 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated. 
County health officer or official means the official representatives of the county health department charged with the responsibility of inspecting and reviewing health and environmental matters throughout the county which includes, but is not limited to, issues deemed nuisances under state law, the provisions of this chapter, or the ordinances of the city. 
Dwelling, building, or structure means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial, or business uses or intended to be so used and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
Nuisance means anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of a dwelling, building or structure and all individuals, association, and corporations who have interest of record in such dwelling, building or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians, and trustees. 
Public officer means the building inspector, code enforcement officer, city manager, or any other city official who is authorized by law and this Code to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, or any agent of such officer or officers, or any other officer or officers designated by the city manager for purposes of this chapter. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building, or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Unfit building means any dwelling, building, or structure described as follows: 
(1)  Any building which is in violation of any of the provisions of the building, fire, health, sanitation or life safety code, regulation, or ordinance; 
(2)  Any building in which a loadbearing wall or other vertical structural member lists, leans or buckles to such extent as to weaken the structural support of such wall or member below the minimum required by the building regulations; 
(3)  Any building having an improperly distributed load on the floor or roof or some portion thereof; 
(4)  Any building in which there is damage or deterioration of 33 percent or more of the supporting members or 50 percent or more of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls, exclusive of the foundation; 
(5)  Any building with any part thereof so attached as to create a danger that it will fall or cause injury to person or property; 
(6)  Any building which is so dilapidated, decayed, deteriorated, or damaged from any cause or in any manner as to create a danger of injury to person or property; 
(7)  Any building likely to cause injury to person or property because it contains a weakened, defective, or deteriorated footing, foundation, flooring, floor support, ceiling, ceiling support, roof, or chimney; 
(8)  Any building which has visible soil erosion adjacent to or under any structural support; 
(9)  Any building in which any means of egress or portion thereof, including, for example, but not limited to, fire doors, closing devices, stairways, or fire escapes, is in disrepair or is in a dilapidated or nonworking condition or not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic; 
(10)  Any building in which there exists any of the general conditions itemized in O.C.G.A § 41-2-10; or 
(11)  Any building where there is the improper keeping of pets and animals on the premises, and/or the improper disposal of human and/or animal wastes. 
(Code 1998, § 14-201) 
Sec. 42-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(b)  Action pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall not be a bar to enforcement of this chapter by injunction or other appropriate remedy, and the police chief shall have the power to institute and maintain in the name of the municipality any and all such enforcement proceedings. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abridge, limit, or otherwise impair the right of any person to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding for damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property. 
(Code 1998, § 9-104) 
Sec. 42-3. - Working with other officers. 
The city code enforcement officer shall have the authority to work in conjunction with and rely upon the advice, expertise or recommendation of the county health officer, regarding the inspection and review of issues throughout the city deemed nuisances under state law, the provisions of this chapter, or the ordinances of the city. This authority shall include the ability to issue summons or citations for violations of and to enforce the provisions of this chapter, based upon a complaint received from the county health official. 
Secs. 42-4—42-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNFIT BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipality may adopt ordinances requiring the repair, closing, or demolition of dwellings or other structures intended for human habitation which are unfit or imperil the health, safety, or morals of the community, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11. 

Sec. 42-25. - Structures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, operate, create, perform or maintain, after notice, any structure or activity in the corporate limits of the city which constitutes a public nuisance or to do or perform any activity expressly declared in any of the ordinances of the city to be a nuisance per se; and upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, such offender shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 14-203) 
Secs. 42-26—42-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT 

Sec. 42-54. - Abatement of nuisances. 
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the question of the existence of nuisances alleged to exist in the city, and if a nuisance is found to exist, to order its abatement. 
(Code 1998, § 14-204) 
Sec. 42-55. - Procedure for abatement of public nuisances. 
(a)  Investigation and notice of complaint. Upon recommendation of the board of health or the health officer, police officer or employee of the city charged with enforcing the ordinances of the city, or the complaint of any resident of the municipality in writing, as to the existence of anything in the corporate limits of the city constituting a public nuisance, the public officer charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific nuisance. If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies circumstances constituting a nuisance, then the public officer or city attorney shall cause a written notice of the complaint setting out the alleged nuisance to be drawn up and served on the person alleged to be responsible for the nuisance and the owner of the property where the nuisance is alleged to exist, in accordance with the further provisions hereof. For the purpose of this chapter, the person returning such lot for city taxes for the year in which notice is given shall be taken to be the owner thereof. 
(b)  Time-frame for response. The notice shall be directed to the person alleged to be maintaining, erecting, creating or keeping the alleged nuisance and to the owner of the property where the nuisance is alleged to exist; shall set out facts sufficient to show the nature of the alleged nuisance; identify the subject real property where the nuisance is located by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance, and shall give the person to whom the notice is directed notice to abate the nuisance within not more than 30 days from the date of service of the notice or to show cause before the municipal court of the city at a date and time stated, which date shall be not less than 30 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the municipal court, why said alleged nuisance should not be abated. The notice here provided for shall bear teste in the name of the mayor or his designee and be signed by the city clerk. A copy of the notice shall be served instanter upon each person to whom it is directed. 
(c)  Service of notice. The method of service of the notice above provided for shall be as follows: 
(1)  If the person to be served is a resident of the city, by personal service by any police officer of the city. 
(2)  If the person to be served is a nonresident of the city but is a resident of the state, by personal service by any officer of the state authorized to serve process in civil cases under the Georgia Civil Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 9-11-1 et seq.). 
(3)  If the person to be served is a nonresident of the state, by publication of the notice once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper in which the sheriff of the county publishes his legal notices. If the address of the person to be served is known, the clerk of the city shall mail a copy of the notice, as given to the publisher, to the person to be served at his known address within three days of the first publication of the notice. In the case of service by publication, the date of the newspaper in which the last publication appears shall be considered the date of service and the date required for abatement or appearance shall be not less than five days from the date of such newspaper. 
(Code 1998, § 14-205) 
Sec. 42-56. - Proceedings in the municipal court. 
(a)  Juidicial hearing. On the date and at the time set for the hearing before the municipal court, or as soon thereafter as the case can be reached for trial, the judge of the municipal court shall hear and determine the question of whether or not a nuisance exists and whether or not the same has been abated as required by the notice and shall make such further order as may be required by the circumstances under the further provisions hereof. 
(b)  Presentation of witnesses and evidence. The public officer or city attorney shall be responsible for presenting the case on behalf of the citizens by proper witnesses and evidence. The person charged with the nuisance shall be entitled to present witnesses and other evidence as allowed by law. 
(c)  Judicial order. If after hearing the evidence the acts complained of shall be adjudged a nuisance, the judge of the municipal court shall issue an order upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing, stating either of the following: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property; or 
(3)  If abatement of the adjudged nuisance does not involve the above circumstances, then abatement of the same within a reasonable time as set by the court. 
(d)  Failure to comply. If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to abate the nuisance, or vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, and do not seek an injunction under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13, the public officer may cause such nuisance to be removed or such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished; and the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
The amount of the cost of removing the nuisance or demolition in general, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(Code 1998, § 14-206) 
Sec. 42-57. - Other procedure for abatement of nuisances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 42-1, 42-2, 42-25, 42-54, and 42-55, where a nuisance complained of consists of acts expressly declared to be unlawful and to constitute nuisances under any other ordinance of the city, proceedings in the police court may be by summons as for the violation of any city ordinance, and upon conviction in the municipal court, the person convicted shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 14-207) 
Secs. 42-58—42-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities authorized to enact ordinances for removal of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 42-90. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disabled, wrecked, junked, or abandoned motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license plate or plates, and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, or discarded. 
Sec. 42-91. - Prohibited conduct. 
No person shall park, store, place, or allow to remain on the public streets, alleys, or other public places in the city, or in the open upon private property, unless necessary for operation of a business enterprise lawfully situated upon such private property, any disabled, wrecked, junked, or abandoned motor vehicle or parts of motor vehicles, or other major appliances, machinery or other junked objects, and the parking, storing, placing, or allowing to remain upon such designated places of such disabled, wrecked, junked, or abandoned property is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1998, § 16-108(1)) 
Sec. 42-92. - Enforcement; notification and hearing; impoundment. 
(a)  Removal and impoundment of vehicles, etc. The city manager or code enforcement officer is authorized to tow away or cause to be towed away or removed any disabled, wrecked, junked, or abandoned motor vehicle or parts of motor vehicles or other major appliances, machinery, or other junked objects found on the public streets, alleys, or other public places within the corporate limits of the city in violation of section 42-91, and to store and impound the same until the expenses of towing and storage shall be paid by the owner of such property. The expense of such towing and storage shall be paid by the owner of such property and such expenses may be assessed against such owner and collected as city taxes are assessed and collected. 
(b)  Notification to remove. Upon notice of the presence in the open on any private property within the corporate limits of the city of any disabled, wrecked, junked, or abandoned motor vehicle or parts of motor vehicles or other major appliances, machinery, or other junked objects in violation of section 42-91, except where necessary in the operation of a business enterprise lawfully situated upon such property, the city manager or code enforcement officer shall at once notify the owner of such premises in writing to relocate such property to an enclosed garage or other building or to remove same from the premises. 
(c)  Failure to comply. Upon the failure of any person to relocate or remove such disabled, wrecked, junked, or abandoned property after notice as provided under state law, the code enforcement officer shall report such failure to the city manager. Upon knowledge of the failure of the person to correct the nuisance within the given period of time, the city manager may then issue a summons or direct the city attorney to issue a summons to the offending property owner requiring him to be and appear before the municipal court to show cause why the existence of such condition on his property should not be abated as a nuisance, as provided under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
(d)  Abatement by authorities; expenses assessed against owner. After such notice and hearing thereon, the mayor and council may properly order the abatement of such nuisance, which order shall be directed to and executed by the chief of police and his deputy, and such order shall include the right to impound and tow away or otherwise remove or destroy the offending property. All of the expenses of the abatement of such nuisance may be assessed against the owner of the property upon which the nuisance was located and may be collected as city taxes are assessed and collected. 
(Code 1998, § 16-108(2)—(4)) 
Sec. 42-93. - Sale and proceeds. 
(a)  Sale of impounded property. The owner of any property impounded under the provisions of this article shall have 30 days from the date the same was impounded to redeem the same by paying the cost of removal and storage. After 30 days from the date of the impounding of any property under the terms hereof, the chief of police, or his designee, may sell or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the procedures in O.C.G.A. § 9-13-140 et seq. and after giving opportunity for competitive bidding. 
(b)  Advance notice to be given. Notice by mail shall be sent at least ten days prior to such disposition to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed. 
(c)  Details of notice. The notice of the sale shall state: 
(1)  The sale is of abandoned property in the possession of the county; 
(2)  A description of the vehicle, including make, model, license number and any other information which will accurately identify that vehicle; 
(3)  The terms of the sale; 
(4)  The date, time, and place of the sale; and 
(5)  Any other information required by state law. 
(d)  Disposition of proceeds. The proceeds of such sale shall be applied first to pay the expenses of sale, towing, removal, and storage, and the balance, if any, paid to the owner of the property, if known. If the owner of such property is not known, then the balance of such proceeds, if any, shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1998, § 16-108(5)) 
Secs. 42-94—42-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AIR QUALITY CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 42-115. - Emissions of gases, vapors, and odors. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, or allow any emissions of gases, vapors, or odors beyond the property line from which such emissions occur to be in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as is or is likely to be injurious to the public welfare; to the health of human, plant, or animal life; or to property; or which interfere with the enjoyment of life and property. 
(b)  Detectable odors emitted from the following sources of emission are hereby declared to be objectionable, provided, however, that this listing shall not be deemed as exclusive: 
(1)  Ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine manufacture; 
(2)  Asphalt manufacture or refining; 
(3)  Blood processing; 
(4)  Bag cleaning; 
(5)  Celluloid manufacture; 
(6)  Coal tar products manufacture; 
(7)  Compost heaps; 
(8)  Crematory; 
(9)  Creosote treatment or manufacture; 
(10)  Disinfectants manufacture; 
(11)  Distillation of bones, coal, or wood; 
(12)  Dyestuff manufacture; 
(13)  Fat rendering; 
(14)  Fertilizer manufacture and bone grinding; 
(15)  Glue or gelatin manufacture; 
(16)  Incineration or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal, or refuse; 
(17)  Oiled rubber or leather goods manufacture; 
(18)  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, or varnish manufacture; 
(19)  Paper and pulp manufacture; 
(20)  Rubber or gutta percha manufacture; 
(21)  Sauerkraut manufacture; 
(22)  Scallop processing; 
(23)  Shoe-blackening manufacture; 
(24)  Soap manufacture; 
(25)  Stockyards; 
(26)  Sulfuric, nitric, or hydrochloric acid manufacture; 
(27)  Tanning, curing, or storage of hides or skins; 
(28)  Tar distillation or manufacture; 
(29)  Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture; and 
(30)  Any other air contaminant discharged into open air of a character and in a quantity which is detrimental to or endangers the public health. 
(Code 1998, § 9-101) 
Sec. 42-116. - Open burning. 
(a)  Generally. Except as provided in subsection (b), no person shall kindle an open fire in any public or private place outside any building. Fires started in violation of this section shall be promptly extinguished by the person responsible for same upon notice by the fire chief or his duly designated agent. During the existence of an air pollution alert, as may be declared by the mayor, all exceptions are void and no open fires shall be kindled. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Open burning may be done under permit as follows: 
a.  Application for burning permits shall be on forms provided by the fire chief; 
b.  No permit shall be issued unless the issuing officer is satisfied that: 
1.  There is no practical available alternate method for the disposal of the material to be burned; 
2.  No hazardous condition will be created by such burning; 
3.  No salvage operation by open burning will be conducted; and 
4.  No leaves will be burned in those areas where provision is made for public collection thereof; 
c.  Any permit issued may be limited by the imposition of conditions to: 
1.  Prevent the creation of excessive smoke; or 
2.  Protect property and the health, safety, and comfort of persons from the effects of the burning; 
d.  If it becomes apparent at any time to the fire chief that limitations need to be imposed for any of the reasons stated in subsection (b)(1)c of this section, the fire chief or his duly designated agent shall notify the permittee in writing and any limitations so imposed shall be treated as conditions under which the permit is issued. 
(2)  Open burning may be done without permit as follows: 
a.  In those areas where provision for public collection of leaves is not made, the opening burning of leaves is permitted; 
b.  In those areas where regular refuse collection is not provided, open burning of ordinary household trash by householders is permitted, provided that: 
1.  The fires are located no closer than 500 feet to any neighboring habitable dwelling or place where people work or congregate; 
2.  Garbage, dead animals, and animal waste are not burned; and 
3.  Materials which create dense or excessive smoke or emissions injurious or noxious to people or property are not burned. 
(c)  Open fires may be set in performance of an official duty of any public officer if the fire is necessary for one or more of the following reasons or purposes: 
(1)  For the prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other means; 
(2)  For the instruction of public firefighters or industrial employees under supervision of the fire chief; or 
(3)  For the protection of public health. 
(d)  Fires may be used for the cooking of food, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(e)  Salamanders or other devices may be used for heating by construction or other workers, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(f)  Fires may be set in the course of agricultural operations in growing crops or raising fowl or animals, provided no nuisance is created. 
(g)  Open fires may be set for recreational purposes, such as campfires, provided no smoke violation or nuisance is created. 
(Code 1998, § 9-102) 
Secs. 42-117—42-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE REGULATION 

Sec. 42-148. - Anti-noise regulation. 
Subject to the provisions of this section, the creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity, or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare is prohibited. 
(Code 1998, § 10-101) 
Sec. 42-149. - Miscellaneous prohibited noises enumerated. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar, or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently out of control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio, phonograph, or any musical instrument or sound device, including but not limited to loudspeakers or other devices for reproduction or amplification of sound, either independently of or in connection with motion pictures, radio or television, in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any person in any hospital, dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity. 
(4)  Pets. The keeping of any animal, bird, or fowl which, by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such a manner as to cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise. 
(6)  Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper municipal authorities. 
(7)  Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any hospital or adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same is in session. 
(9)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument 
or device emitting noise for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, or sale, or display or merchandise, unless a permit for the use of such device shall have been obtained under the regulations hereinafter provided. 
(10)  Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes, unless a permit for the use of such device shall have been obtained under the regulations hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1998, § 10-102) 
Sec. 42-150. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Noise permit. The reasonable use of amplifiers, loudspeakers, drums, or other instrument or device emitting noise for the purpose of any public address or for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale, or display of merchandise shall be permitted providing a permit therefor is secured from the city manager. 
(b)  Application and terms for permit. An application for the use desired shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk, which application shall set out the nature of the noise-making activity, the purpose thereof, the place where the activity is to be carried on, and the dates and hours during which the use is to be made. The city manager shall act upon each application so submitted, and shall, before granting a permit, place such restrictions upon the use as to the extent, hours, and location as to prevent undue annoyance to the public or any resident. Any denial of a permit by the city manager may be appealed to the mayor and city council at the next regularly scheduled council meeting. 
(c)  Violation of terms. It shall be unlawful to use any device or to create any undue noise in violation of the terms of any permit issued under this section. 
(Code 1998, § 10-103) 
Secs. 42-151—42-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRASH, WEEDS, AND LITTER 

Sec. 42-169. - Duties of property owners. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each and every owner of a lot of land whether occupied or unoccupied within the limits of the city to remove therefrom any trash, rubbish or filth that may be thereon and to keep said property free from overgrowth of weeds and underbrush. Allowing any lot of land in the city to grow up in weeds, bushes or other undergrowth or to have thereon trash, rubbish or filth shall constitute the maintaining of a nuisance per se. 
(b)  Every owner or person in charge of any lot of land in the limits of the city located within 200 feet of any human habitation or place of business who shall allow such lot to be in any of the conditions described under subsection (a) of this section, who shall fail or refuse to remedy the condition after notice of such shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 8-110(1), (2)) 
Sec. 42-170. - Prohibited storage of property. 
All nonfunctioning motor vehicles, appliances, machinery or equipment stored, kept or maintained out of doors are declared to be a public health hazard. Any trash, rubbish, garbage or putrescible matter stored out of doors for a period of more than 6 months, whether in a container or not, are declared to be a public health hazard. The placing, keeping or maintaining of any such items on any property out of doors within the corporate limits of the city shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2009(3)) 
Sec. 42-171. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to any motor vehicle, kept, stored or maintained upon private property, which has a current up-to-date motor vehicle license tag thereon, nor shall it apply to any vehicles, appliances or equipment kept and maintained in connection with or as a part of any duly licensed appliance, machinery or automobile repair shop or junkyard. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2009(3)) 
Sec. 42-172. - Administration; notice of violation; appeal. 
(a)  This article shall be administered by the city manager or his designee, and if and whenever it shall appear to the city manager or his designee that it is being violated, he shall issue a citation returnable to the municipal court charging the owner or occupant of the property with a violation of this section. 
(b)  If the owner or occupant of property of which or upon which material is stored has been found in violation of this section two or more times, the city manager may notify, in writing, the owner of the property or the tenant in possession of the land on which the violation exists to abate such violation by removing the material or materials to a conforming location or into some enclosed garage or other storage house, within ten days from the date of such notice. Such notice shall be mailed to the owner or occupant of the property, if known, and placed on or adjacent to the door of any structure on the property in question. 
(c)  Any person disagreeing with the decision of the city manager or his designee under subsection (b) above shall have ten days from the date of the notice in which to appeal the decision of the city manager or his designee to the municipal court, requesting that the municipal court make a determination as to whether or not a violation actually exists, which appeal shall be heard after due notice and as soon as practical, and the decision of the municipal court shall be final. 
(d)  Any person who fails to comply with the notice given by the city manager or his designee in compliance with this section within the ten days after the notice is given or within ten days after the final decision is made by the municipal court (in cases where appeals are filed), shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2009(3)) 
Sec. 42-173. - Removal of nonfunctioning vehicles, appliances, machinery or equipment. 
(a)  After the time provided in section 42-172 for the removal of nonfunctioning motor vehicles, appliances, machinery or equipment has expired, the city manager or his designee may seek an order of the municipal court to permit entry onto the property for the purpose of removing and disposing of the items stored in violation of this section. If the municipal court judge finds that nonfunctioning motor vehicles, appliances, machinery or equipment are stored, kept or maintained out of doors in violation of this section and the requirements of this section have been fulfilled, he/she shall issue an order permitting entry onto the property for the purpose of removing and disposing of the items stored in violation of this section. If the municipal court judge finds that any trash, rubbish, garbage or putrescible matter has been stored out of doors for a period of more than 6 months in violation of this section and the requirements of this section have been fulfilled, he/she shall issue an order permitting entry onto the property for the purpose of removing and disposing of the items stored in violation of this section. No order shall be necessary to remove and dispose of items stored in violation of this section when that property is located on any public street. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee is also directed to remove any abandoned or nonfunctioning motor vehicles, appliances, machinery or equipment from any public street in the city, the expense of which shall likewise be charged to the owner. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2009(3)) 
Sec. 42-174. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article may be charged in the municipal court of the city and punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8 in addition to or instead of any other action set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2009(3)) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROHIBITED CONDUCT 

Sec. 46-19. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Without provocation, use to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; or 
(4)  Without provocation, use obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
(b)  Fighting between two or more persons in which physical contact is made, except that which occurs at boxing exhibitions duly authorized by the city, shall be deemed to be disorderly conduct within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1998, § 16-101) 
Sec. 46-20. - Report of treatment of wounds. 
All physicians, licensed registered nurses employed at the treatment facility, security personnel at the treatment facility, treatment facility superintendents, and all other personnel at the treatment facility who are involved with the care and treatment of patients in the city are hereby required to report to the city police department all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from wounds inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind. Such report may be made in writing or by telephone, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the police department. All reports shall be made within 24 hours after treatment by a physician or after admission to the hospital. 
(Code 1998, § 16-103) 
State Law reference— Reports by physicians and other personnel of non-accidental injuries to patients, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-9. 
Sec. 46-21. - Throwing of missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to throw any stone, rock or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Code 1998, § 16-104) 
Sec. 46-22. - Ball playing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball by throwing, catching, pitching, or batting a ball on any public street, alley, or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 16-105) 
Sec. 46-23. - Drinking in public. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverage from metal cans, glass bottles, plastic bottles, glasses, cups, or any other container on any of the public streets, or on the public sidewalks, or in the public parks, or any other publicly owned spaces in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry about open metal cans, open glass bottles, open plastic bottles, or any other containers containing beer, wine, or any other alcoholic beverage on any of the public streets, or on the public sidewalks, or in the public parks or any other publicly owned spaces in the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated on any street, lawn, square, or in any shop, store, church, or other public place in the city. 
(Code 1998, § 16-107) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 46-24. - Indecent exposure. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any nude or indecent state in any street, lane, square, or any other public place in the city. It shall also be unlawful to make an indecent exposure of his or her body or of any other person's body within the city. 
(Code 1998, § 16-112) 
Sec. 46-25. - Obscene literature. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any obscene or indecent print, literature, pictures, or anything of the kind within the city. 
(Code 1998, § 16-113) 
Sec. 46-26. - Posting bills. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to affix or post up any advertisement, show bill, pictures, or any other like material on any public property within the city limits, except by permission by council. 
(Code 1998, § 16-115) 
Sec. 46-27. - Defacing property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, damage, or cause to be defaced or damaged any public building, wall, fence, tree, or tree box within the city. 
(Code 1998, § 16-116) 
Sec. 46-28. - Driving or riding on sidewalk. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to ride any bicycle or automobile on the sidewalks of the city. It shall also be unlawful to ride any bicycle on the streets of the city without a headlight and reflective markers on the spokes of the wheels. Bicycle riding is authorized on the designated city bike paths. 
(Code 1998, § 16-117) 
Sec. 46-29. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful to throw waste paper, rubbish, trash, or filth of any kind in any of the streets, lanes, or thoroughfares within the city. 
(Code 1998, § 16-120) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to prohibit public and private littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq. 
Sec. 46-30. - Skateboarding or roller skating on public streets. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to skateboard or roller skate on sidewalks, public streets of the city, or the bridge over the Darien River. Skateboarding and roller skate/blades are authorized on the designated city bike paths. 
(Code 1998, § 16-125) 
Sec. 46-31. - Undermining the authority of a municipal police officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to knowingly undermine, impair, or hinder a municipal police officer in the enforcement of the criminal law, the preservation of the peace, or the performance of a governmental function, including service of process. 
(b)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the municipal police officer was acting in an illegal manner, provided that the municipal police officer was acting under the peace officer's official authority. 
(c)  Municipal police officer is defined as a certified law enforcement officer employed by the City of Darien and who meets the qualifications of O.C.G.A. § 35-8-8. 
(Ord. No. 2016-001Y, § I, 11-15-2016) 
Secs. 46-32—46-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINORS 

Sec. 46-69. - Curfew. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor 16 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 9:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours are between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school or church activity; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel, with interstate travel through the city excepted in all cases from the curfew; 
(7)  When the minor is on the property of or the sidewalk directly adjacent to the building in which he or she resides. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit or, by inefficient control, allow a violation of this section by a minor in his or her custody. A first violation of the section shall be punishable by a written warning. Further violations shall be punishable according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 16-205) 
Chapter 50 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  The mayor and city council are enacting this chapter as a result of a workshop conducted by the mayor and council, and review by the mayor and council of the following documents: "Current Issues in Sign Regulation" paper presented at the 46th Annual Institute for City and County Attorneys on September 24, 1999; "Cities Under Siege for Billboard Ordinances" article from the February 17, 2000, issue of Georgia Cities ; and "Sign Ordinance Litigation" paper presented at the Georgia Municipal Association City Attorneys' Seminar on June 25, 2000. The mayor and city council also reviewed model sign ordinances as found on the Georgia Municipal Association's web site. The findings and conclusions of such studies are expressly made a part of this chapter and incorporated in their entirety. 
(b)  The mayor and city council are enacting this chapter to ensure that noncommercial messages are authorized with restriction only as to the size of such signage and to establish reasonable regulations for signage containing commercial messages. The mayor and council find that signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and detrimental to property values and the city's overall public welfare as an aesthetic nuisance. 
(c)  By enacting this amendment, the mayor and council intend to: 
(1)  Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(2)  Further the objectives of the city's comprehensive plan; 
(3)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(4)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
(5)  Maintain the historical image of the city; 
(6)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(7)  Avoid the harmful aspects of the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(8)  Promote economic development; and 
(9)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-101) 
Sec. 50-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggregate sign area means the area of all signs on a parcel, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs. 
Animated sign means a sign with action, motion, or changing colors which requires electrical energy. This definition does not include signs which indicate time, temperature, or date. 
Area of a sign or sign area means the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
Awning sign means a sign located on a roof-like cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign. 
Billboard sign means a stanchion sign with a sign area not to exceed 300 square feet. 
Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas placed back to back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Freestanding sign means a sign securely affixed to a support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, such as monument or stanchion signs. This does not include portable or trailer type signs. 
Illuminated sign means a sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Monument sign means a sign mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to or be a part of or supported by the building in or to which the sign applies. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
Parcel means a separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records. 
Roof sign means a sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building which extends above the immediately adjacent roofline of the building. 
Sign means any display of lettering, logos, colors, lights, or illuminated neon tubes visible to the public from outside of a building or from a traveled way, which either conveys a message to the public, or intends to advertise, direct, invite, announce, or draw attention to, directly or indirectly, a use conducted, or goods, products, services or facilities available, either on the lot or any other premises, excluding window displays and merchandise. 
Stanchion sign means a freestanding sign mounted on one or more poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertisement portion of such structure which rests upon or is supported by such poles. 
Temporary sign means a sign intended to be used for a period of no more than ten days. Exceptions for pennants and similar devices intended for civic purposes may be granted by special permit. 
Wall sign means a sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear or side of the structure. 
Window sign means a sign installed flush with or on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-102) 
Secs. 50-3—50-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITTING PROCESS 

Sec. 50-23. - Permits. 
Except as specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the city without first having obtained a sign permit. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-103) 
Sec. 50-24. - Application information. 
Applications for sign permits required by this chapter shall be filed by the sign owner or the owner's agent with the city clerk. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and a plat map of the property which bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign. 
(2)  The aggregate area for all signs on the parcel. 
(3)  The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(4)  Consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign. 
(5)  Name, address, phone number and business license number of the sign contractor. 
(6)  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected. 
(7)  The distance of the sign from the closest adjacent sign in either direction. 
(8)  The size of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-104) 
Sec. 50-25. - Time for consideration. 
The city shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days from the city's actual receipt of a completed application and a sign permit fee. The clerk shall give notice to the applicant of the decision of the city by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the completed application. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the city fails to act within the 30-day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-105) 
Sec. 50-26. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Notice of due cause. The city shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, incomplete applications, and applications containing any false material statements. Violation of any provision of this chapter will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the clerk shall revoke the permit. Should the city deny or revoke a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's decision to deny or revoke such permit. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and the applicant is granted a public hearing before a hearing officer designated by the city. The applicant will be given ten days written notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the denial of the permit application, or the revocation of a permit. "Due cause" is the violation of the provisions of this chapter, state or federal law, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)  Appeal to city council. An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the hearing officer, to the city council provided that they file written notice of an appeal with the city clerk within ten business days of the hearing officer's decision. Such appeal shall be considered by the council at the next city council meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that notice of appeal is received a minimum of five full business days before the meeting. 
(c)  Appeal to court. In the event an individual whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council, they may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-106) 
Sec. 50-27. - Permit expiration. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed within six months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-107) 
Sec. 50-28. - Fees. 
The cost of a permit shall be assessed per square foot of sign area. The permit fee shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-108) 
Secs. 50-29—50-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50-60. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
(1)  Roof signs. 
(2)  Animated signs. 
(3)  Signs on public rights-of-way other than publicly owned or maintained signs. 
(4)  Window signs which exceed 30 percent of the window area. 
(5)  Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(6)  Signs which simulate an official traffic control or warning sign or hide from view any traffic or street sign, signal or public service sign. 
(7)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing. 
(8)  Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(9)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, post, curb, utility pole, or other structure except as set forth herein. 
(10)  Signs which advertise any activity, service, or product prohibited by the laws or regulations of the United States or the State of Georgia or by the ordinances or resolutions of the city. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-109) 
Sec. 50-61. - Restrictions in residential zoning districts and the Historic Darien District. 
Parcels located in residential zoning districts or the Historic Darien District (HDD) shall not have an aggregate sign area greater than eight square feet. Signs having a height of greater than four feet above the grade level of the adjacent street to which the parcel on which the sign is located shall not be located in the residential zoning districts or the HDD. No signs in a residential zoning district shall have a sign area of greater than 2.5 square feet. The provision of this section shall not apply to that portion of the HDD which lies in a commercial zoning district. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-110) 
Sec. 50-62. - Height requirements. 
The following height requirements shall be adhered to: 
(1)  No sign shall exceed 24 feet in height at the highest point on the sign. 
(2)  Monument signs shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(3)  All sign heights shall be measured from the grade level of the adjacent street to which the property on which the sign is located has access. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-111) 
Sec. 50-63. - General size and location requirements. 
(a)  Freestanding signs. No freestanding sign may be located within 30 feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended. 
(b)  Prohibited locations. No sign shall be located on any building, fence or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Billboard signs. 
(1)  Billboard signs shall not exceed 300 square feet of sign area. Billboard signs shall not exceed 12 feet in height or 25 feet in length. 
(2)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels in commercial or industrial zoning area. 
(3)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels adjacent to designated state or federal highways. 
(4)  No billboard sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of another billboard sign on the same side of a federal or state highway. 
(5)  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet of residential zoned parcels. 
(6)  No billboard sign shall be located within 150 feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however, that such sign may be located within 500 feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery when the sign is separated by buildings or other obstructions so that the sign located within the 500-foot zone is not visible from the public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery. 
(d)  Stanchion signs. 
(1)  Stanchion signs for parcels exceeding three acres shall not exceed a sign area of 150 square feet. 
(2)  Stanchion signs for parcels less than three acres, but equal to or greater than 30,000 square feet shall not exceed a sign area of 90 square feet. 
(3)  Stanchion signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(e)  Monument signs. Monument signs shall not exceed 60 square feet of total area, which shall include signage and structure. 
(f)  Wall and awning signs. 
(1)  Wall and awning signs shall not project above the parapet wall. 
(2)  Wall signs shall not project beyond the building face. Awning signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than four feet. 
(3)  Wall and awning signs shall not exceed a sign area of 300 square feet or ten percent of the wall face, whichever is less, on each street facing wall. 
(4)  The maximum wall or awning sign height shall be ten feet. 
(5)  Wall signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(6)  Each building tenant shall be limited to one wall or awning sign on each street facing wall. 
(g)  Maximum aggregate sign area. Parcels may contain more than one sign, provided that: 
(1)  Parcels exceeding three acres shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area for the entire parcel of 300 square feet. 
(2)  Parcels less than three acres but greater than 30,000 square feet shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area for the entire parcel of 180 square feet. 
(3)  Parcels less than 30,000 square feet in size shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area for the entire parcel of 100 square feet. 
(4)  These limits shall not include the area of any wall signs or billboard signs located on the parcel. 
(5)  These limits shall include the area of all freestanding signs on the parcel. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-112) 
Sec. 50-64. - Illumination. 
Illumination for signs shall not cast light on adjoining property or shine in such a manner as to cause traffic interference. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-116) 
Sec. 50-65. - Noncomforming signs; temporary signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs, which met all legal requirements when erected, may stay in place, provided that the owner of the nonconforming sign or his designee registered the sign with the city within the time period originally given for such registration in the ordinance enacting this provision. Such registration shall contain the information as required by this chapter and shall specify the sign being registered as nonconforming and shall state that the sign was completely installed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The payment of a fee is not required for the registration of a nonconforming sign. Nonconforming signs shall be permitted until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or unsightly. 
(2)  The sign has been damaged to the extent that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign. 
(3)  Ninety days has expired from the effective date of the ordinance from which this provision was enacted without the sign being registered. 
(b)  No structural repairs, change in shape, size or design, shall be permitted except to make a nonconforming sign comply with all requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign may not be replaced by another nonconforming sign. 
(d)  The following types of signs or advertising devices shall be permitted only by issuance of a special permit allowing usage of this type of advertising for a period not exceeding ten consecutive days. No such special permit shall be issued for the same premises at less than four-month intervals. All signs or advertising devices must be set back at least ten feet or out of the right-of-way, whichever is greater. A fee shall be charged for each special permit. The fee shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(1)  Air- or gas-filled balloons or other devices which have a capacity for air or gas which does not exceed three cubic feet. 
(2)  Streamers or pennants. 
(3)  Flags or banners, maximum size of 32 square feet, except official flags of the United States, State of Georgia, McIntosh County, and City of Darien not to exceed three in number. 
(4)  Searchlights and similar devices. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-113) 
Editor's note— The ordinance enacting § 23-113 of this chapter required the owner of a nonconforming sign to register it with the city within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance, which was February 20, 2001. 
Secs. 50-66—50-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCES, EXEMPTIONS, AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 50-87. - Variances. 
Where a literal application of the terms of this chapter, due to special circumstances, would result in an unusual hardship in an individual case, a variance may be granted by the city council where all the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Exceptional conditions pertaining to the property where the sign is to be located as a result of its size, shape, or topography, which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area. 
(2)  The applicant would be deprived of rights that are commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(3)  Granting the variance would not confer on the applicant any significant privileges which are denied to others similarly situated. 
(4)  The exceptional circumstances are not the result of action by the applicant. 
(5)  The requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to allow the applicant to enjoy the rights commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(6)  Granting of the variance would not violate more than one standard of this chapter. 
(7)  Granting the variance would not result in allowing a sign that interferes with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-114) 
Sec. 50-88. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Signs erected by a public officer in the performance of his duties, including but not limited to public notices, safety signs, danger signs, traffic and street signs, memorial plaques, and historical markers shall be exempt from the provision of this chapter. 
(b)  The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of section 50-23 and shall not count towards the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in section 50-63(g): 
(1)  Nonilluminated signs, having a sign area of less than 2.5 feet, provided they are not located in the public right-of-way. Such signs in commercial and industrial zoned parcels shall be limited to four times a year for a period of ten days at a time. Each period of display shall be separated by at least 30 days. 
(2)  Window signs installed for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. However, such signs shall not exceed 30 percent of the available window space. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-115) 
Sec. 50-89. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator or his or her designee. The city streetscapes committee is also empowered and authorized to enforce this chapter in any manner as requested by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The city may, after due notice, issue a citation to any permittee for any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. Such due notice shall be in writing, shall specify the sign and location, and shall state that the sign has not been properly maintained. The city shall give the permittee ten days to rectify the condition or remove the dilapidated sign before issuing a citation. 
(c)  The city may issue a citation for violation of this chapter by any sign erected, altered, converted, or used in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. Trial shall be had in the municipal court. Each day shall constitute a separate offense, in the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
(e)  In addition to the remedies provided for herein, the zoning administrator or his designee may institute an injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent any unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, or use to correct or abate such violation, or may pursue other remedies available at law or in equity. If the zoning administrator or his designee removes a sign as required by this chapter and the owner refuses to pay the expenses related to such removal, all expenses of such removal and disposition of the sign, including legal and attorney's fees, may be assessed against the owner and may be collected as city taxes are assessed and collected. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001, § 23-117) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2020 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter is to provide for the protection of the public health by prescribing the manner of storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of residential and industrial waste, rubbish, garbage, and refuse. 
(Code 1998, § 8-101) 
Sec. 54-2. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Collection means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collection and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing, or disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal, including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design, and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location or land area where the final deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Hazardous waste means solid waste, or a combination of solid wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create environmental pollution or nuisance. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, offal, hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use in accordance with an approved plan. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid commercial and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Sanitary landfilling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials. 
Solid waste means any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities. This term does not include solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits under 33 USC 1342, or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (68 Stat. 923). 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposing of solid wastes, or any combination thereof. 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
(Code 1998, § 8-102) 
Sec. 54-3. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. The city manager, code enforcement officer, or superintendent of public works shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. In the exercise of his solid waste management duties, said director shall: 
(1)  Supervise the collection of solid waste, including the operation and maintenance of equipment and the supervision of personnel; 
(2)  Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Limitations of authority. All regulatory actions of the director of public works shall be subject to the review of the mayor and council. 
(c)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or a fee charged by the director of public works shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and council, which body may, upon hearing, confirm, modify, or revoke such requirement or fee. 
(Code 1998, § 8-103) 
Secs. 54-4—54-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 54-25. - Pre-collection. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the city, except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth herein or under the express prior approval of the director of public works. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The director of public works by written notice shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such solid waste accumulation to remove same. Failure to remove such accumulation within two weeks of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject to penalties hereinafter set forth. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues. 
(b)  Containers. 
(1)  Garbage containers shall be provided by the owner or occupant of each residence or establishment sufficient in number to accommodate such waste generated by the residence or establishment between collections. Containers shall be of durable metal or plastic, watertight, nonabsorbent, rust-resistant, rodentproof, and able to be easily cleaned. They shall be equipped with handles and tightly fitted covers and shall have a capacity of not less than 15 gallons nor more than 30 gallons, except the bulk containers of a type accepted by the director of public works as suitable for mechanical collection by publicly owned equipment used for such collection may be used. Containers failing to comply with these provisions or which have defects causing them to scatter waste upon the ground during collection or causing them to hamper or to injure the persons collecting waste shall be promptly replaced. 
(2)  Disposable paper or plastic bags of a type, size, and material designed for solid waste disposal may be used to contain refuse for storage and collection, provided they are unbroken, sealed, and loaded in such manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. 
(3)  All commercial dumpsters that are visible from a public right-of-way must be screened from the view of casual passersby traveling on said public right-of-way. 
(c)  Rubbish. Rubbish may be stored for collection in paper-board boxes or other throwaway containers strong enough to retain the waste; loose paper or cuttings shall be tied in bundles. Rubbish containers or bundles shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight. Limbs or cuttings shall not exceed four inches in diameter nor four feet in length. Rubbish containers or bundles shall be placed for collection beside the solid waste containers. 
(d)  Placement. On days designated as collection days for the respective routes by the director of public works, garbage and/or rubbish shall be placed for collection on the curb or beside the roadway in front of the residence or establishment owning same, or if the property abuts on an alley, at the rear of the property, but not in the gutter or in the street or alley in such manner as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(e)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner or authorized collection personnel shall sift the contents of or remove anything from containers, boxes, or bundles containing garbage or rubbish. 
(f)  Garbage containers. 
(1)  Each garbage customer of the city shall establish upon the property served by the water meter registered in his name a suitable container for deposit of garbage and trash generated upon the property served by such water meter, and all garbage and trash generated from uses conducted on such property shall be deposited therein. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any resident of the city to deposit household or business garbage or trash in any garbage receptacle or container in the city other than the one serving the property at which he resides or where the garbage or trash is generated, established as above provided. 
(Code 1998, § 8-104) 
Sec. 54-26. - Collection. 
(a)  Frequency. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected from residential premises at least twice weekly. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected from commercial and business establishments in congested areas as determined by the public works department. 
(b)  Limitations. 
(1)  Industrial waste, large animals over 30 pounds or waste from construction, demolition, landscaping, or processing operations will not be collected, transported, or disposed of by public facilities; but such waste collection, transportation, and disposal shall be by the owners and/or generators of such waste or animals. 
(2)  It shall be a violation of these regulations to place or to cause to be placed in any container, box, or bundle, or otherwise for collection, any hazardous waste of any kind except upon specific prior arrangement with the director of public works. 
(c)  Collection vehicles. Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be kept clean and in good repair. They shall be constructed in such a manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked, or blown from the vehicle. They shall be readily identifiable by letters not less than three inches high and easily legible, painted on the door of the vehicle cab or in an equally conspicuous place showing the owner's name, telephone number, state permit number, truck number, and rated load capacity in cubic yards. The rated load capacity shall be specified by the director of public works following his measurement of the load-carrying portion of the truck body. 
(d)  Private contractors. No person other than employees of the city shall collect, transport, or dispose of solid waste for pay in the city without having prior approval from the city manager. 
(Code 1998, § 8-105) 
Sec. 54-27. - Disposal. 
All disposal of solid waste shall be at disposal sites operated in accordance with state laws and with rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources, and at no other place. Municipal waste shall be disposed of in the disposal site operated by the county. 
(Code 1998, § 8-106) 
Sec. 54-28. - Fees. 
Monthly charges for public collection and disposal of solid waste shall be determined by council. 
(Code 1998, § 8-107) 
Sec. 54-29. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished according to the general penalties described in the section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 8-108) 
Sec. 54-30. - Billing. 
(a)  Against whom levied. Every water customer residing in the city, as evidenced by a water meter standing in the name of such person, firm, or corporation, shall be responsible for payment of a garbage collection fee for collection of garbage generated on the premises connected to his water meter. 
(b)  Rate of fee. A monthly charge for garbage collection shall be assessed against every water customer of the city in accordance with uniform rates now in force for property of the type served by each water meter, whether business or residential, and in accordance with such other or different rates as may be established by the mayor and city council from time to time for similar properties or classes of property. 
(c)  Billing. The charge for garbage collection as established under provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall be billed to each water customer, monthly, along with the water bill for the property. 
(d)  Discontinuance of service. If the person, firm or corporation in whose name the water meter is recorded shall fail to pay the garbage collection fee along with the water bill, garbage collection as well as water service to the property served by the water meter shall be discontinued in accordance with the time schedule then in effect for discontinuing service for nonpayment of water bills. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter respecting deposit of garbage and trash generated on his or their property or property in his custody and control shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 8-109) 
Chapter 58 - STREETS, CURBS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City has power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 58-19. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Public streets. All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks, and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the director of public works, which officer shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this Code and all ordinances of the city relating to such public ways. 
(b)  Property between sidewalks and streets. All persons who own real estate in the city which abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved shall be required to keep that portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curbline of the adjoining street and upon which his real estate abuts, in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other things which would mar or detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property line and the curbline of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts shall keep such grass properly mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of their property, then this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession or control of same. 
(Code 1998, § 14-101(1), (2)) 
Sec. 58-20. - Defacing, sidewalks, streets and curbs; obstructions; unlawful deposits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street, or curb in the city by painting any signs thereon, whether for commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk or drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way any newly laid street, sidewalk, or curbing pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, or maintain any obstruction on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, except as may be provided in this chapter or in the ordinances and laws of the city. 
(c)  Deposits and discharges onto streets and sidewalks. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal, or property. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk, or other organic material. 
(Code 1998, § 14-101(3)—(5)) 
Sec. 58-21. - Duty to report defects. 
It shall be the duty of every city officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or discharge, in or on any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk, or other public way of the city to report the same to the director of public works as soon as possible. 
(Code 1998, § 14-101(6)) 
Sec. 58-22. - Private use; encroachment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use any street, sidewalk, or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, or to erect any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley, or other public way, without having first secured a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 14-101(7), (8)) 
Sec. 58-23. - Openings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk, or alley without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the director of public works. 
(Code 1998, § 14-101(9)) 
Sec. 58-24. - Street construction and improvements. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way, or to repair the same, without having first obtained a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Bond. Each applicant for a permit to construct or improve any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way shall be required to file a bond in the amount set by council, with surety to be approved by the city council, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss or damage caused by, or resulting from, the work undertaken. 
(c)  Specifications. 
(1)  Generally. All street and sidewalk pavements and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the specifications established or approved from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Curb ramping. The standard for construction of curbs on each side of any city street, or any connecting street or road for which curbs have been prescribed, shall be not less than one ramp per lineal block giving on the crosswalks at intersections. Such ramps shall be at least 40 inches wide and so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically handicapped persons. 
(d)  Barricades. Any person, firm, or corporation laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk, or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(Code 1998, § 14-102) 
Secs. 58-25—58-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC WORKS PERMITS 

Sec. 58-52. - Driveways and curbs. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade any driveway, curb, or curb cut on the public streets without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Fees. The permit for such construction or alterations shall be set by the council and shall be based on the type of surface considered and also by the number of lineal feet to be encompassed by such projects. 
(c)  Bond. The director of public works shall have the authority to require an applicant for a permit hereunder to file a bond with his application conditioned to protect and save harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to any person by reason of the proposed alteration work. 
(d)  Standards for issuance of permit. The city clerk shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds: 
(1)  That the plans for the proposed operation have been approved by the director of public works, to whom such plans shall be forwarded by the city clerk within a reasonable time after receipt thereof; 
(2)  That the work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the city for public work of like character; 
(3)  That the operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the means of ingress to and egress from the affected and adjacent properties; and 
(4)  That the health, welfare, and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(e)  Supervision. All work for which a permit is granted hereunder shall be under the direction and supervision of the director of public works. 
(Code 1998, § 14-103) 
Sec. 58-53. - Procedure for the issuance of permits. 
(a)  Application. Every person required to procure a permit under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or law of this municipality relating to the subject matter of this chapter shall submit a written application for such permit to the city clerk. The written application shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The purpose for which the application is submitted; 
(3)  The nature and location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The estimated cost of the proposed work; 
(5)  The date of commencement and date of completion of the proposed work, and other data or plans as may reasonably be required by the city clerk or the director of public works. 
(b)  Permit fee. Each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by a permit fee, the amount of which shall be set by the council. 
(1)  Issuance of receipts. The city clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a permit, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application. 
(2)  Rebate of fee. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall refund such fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city. 
(c)  Review of application. Upon receipt of the application for a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall forward such application to the director of public works, who shall approve or disapprove such application within seven days after receipt thereof. After indicating approval or disapproval on the application, the director of public works shall return the same to the city clerk. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of an approved application from the director of public works, the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant therefor, which permit shall state the nature of the work to be done or activity to be carried out and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city clerk. 
(e)  Display of permit. It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the permit issued to him in a conspicuous place at the site of the work or activity to be engaged in. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such permit at or about any location not covered thereby, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(f)  Limitation on issuance. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no permit shall be issued to any applicant therefor who has failed to satisfy any bonding requirements imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done or carried out by such applicant. 
(Code 1998, § 14-104) 
Secs. 58-54—58-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES AND OUTDOOR PUBLIC GATHERINGS 

Sec. 58-80. - Permit required for festivals, meetings, parades, demonstrations. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, club, organization, or similar group to hold any festival, meeting, parade, demonstration, or exhibition (hereafter called "the event") on the public streets without the individual or some responsible representative of the organization first applying for a permit from the city manager. 
(b)  Procedures for issuance. The application for permit must be received within 60 days of anticipated date of the event. The application should include in detail all areas to be utilized for the event. Any request for rerouting of traffic, and any other information that might be pertinent to the event should be provided. 
(c)  Issuance standards. 
(1)  No permit shall be issued by the city manager unless: 
a.  Such activity will not unreasonably interfere with the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to the event or the parade route; 
b.  The conduct of the event will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the event location or line of movement of any parade and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection; 
c.  The conduct of the event will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed event or the line of march of any parade and areas contiguous thereto; 
d.  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the location of the event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
e.  The conduct of such event will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to fire or other emergency anywhere in the city; 
f.  The conduct of the event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
g.  The event is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; and 
h.  The applicant agrees to see to the immediate cleaning up of all litter which is left on the streets or other property, public or private, as a result of the activity. It shall be unlawful for any person obtaining such a permit to fail to carry out his agreement to immediately clean up the resulting litter. 
i.  It shall be unlawful for any person in connection with the event to block public streets or right(s) of way unless specifically allowed to do so in writing as a special condition of a permit granted under this section. 
j.  It shall also be unlawful for any person, group, organization or club to charge fees for access to or use of any city right of way or public streets during festivals or other outdoor events unless allowed to do so by a special condition of a permit granted under this section. 
k.  The event organizer shall pay to the City of Darien an event fee of $200.00 per day of the event at the time of making application for a permit in lieu of individual license fees per business or vendor otherwise required under chapter 18. 
(2)  Issuance or denial of permit, reconsideration, special conditions. 
a.  Within 30 days of receipt of the permit application, the city manager shall issue the permit unless it is denied for one or more of the above stated standards; the city manager may request more information from the applicant. If applicant does not provide information the decision to permit or not shall be withheld until requested information is provided. The denial of a permit will be in the form of a written statement containing the reasons for denial. The applicant will be given a copy of the written denial statement by hand delivery or by certified mailing, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the completed application. Within ten days after the statement of denial is received by the applicant, he may request a review of the permit denial by the city attorney. In reviewing the reasons for denial, the city attorney may specify further terms or conditions he or she deems in the best interest of the city as a condition of granting the permit or uphold the determination to deny the permit. 
b.  Special conditions may be granted only by the city council. The city council may consider any request for a special condition only after the city manager finds that the applicant otherwise meets the requirements for a permit. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(Code 1998, § 16-109; Ord. of 6-16-2009; Ord. of 10-20-2009(1)) 
Chapter 62 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(a), (b)(2). 

Sec. 62-1. - Ad valorem tax. 
(a)  Assessment and fair market value. All property subject to municipal ad valorem taxation shall be assessed at 100 percent of its fair market value. The basis for fair market value will be determined for the property by the McIntosh County Tax Assessors for county ad valorem tax purposes. 
(b)  Appeal of assessment. Any taxpayer may appeal from an assessment by the county board of tax assessors to the county board of equalization as to matters of taxability, uniformity of assessment, and value, and the taxpayer or the county board of tax assessors may appeal to the superior court of the county in which the property lies from a decision of the county board of equalization. All such appeals shall be made in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-311. 
(c)  When taxes due and payable. Ad valorem taxes shall become due on December 20 each year and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid within 60 days after said due date. Tax bills showing the assessed valuations, amount of taxes due, tax due dates, and information as to delinquency dates and penalties shall be sent to all taxpayers at least 30 days prior to the due date, but failure to send a tax bill shall not invalidate any tax. Delinquent taxes shall bear interest rates as provided by state law. 
(d)  Failure to pay tax. After the expiration of 60 days from the due date the city shall forthwith issue an execution against any person who has defaulted in the payment of any ad valorem tax to be paid. The execution thus issued shall be a lien on all the property of such person, both real and personal. The city manager may set forth the dates for tax sales anytime after the expiration of the 60-day period. 
(e)  Against whom charged. Taxes are to be charged against the owner of the property, if known, or against the specific property itself if the owner is not known. Life tenants and those who enjoy the use of the property are chargeable with the tax thereon. 
(f)  Exempted property. The following property shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation: 
(1)  All public property; 
(2)  All places of religious worship and places of burial; and 
(3)  All buildings used as a college, university, or other seminary of learning. 
(Code 1998, § 4-101; Ord. of 10-20-2009(2)) 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal power of ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 
Sec. 62-1.1 - Community redevelopment tax incentive. 
(a)  Findings. The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of government by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases the need for such government services. In recognition of such service needs and in order to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VIII of the constitution of the state. 
(b)  Definitions. The following terms, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Blighted as applied to a piece of property means that property is being maintained in a blighted condition. 
Millage rate means only the general millage rate for the city maintenance and operations. 
Public officer means the building inspector, code enforcement officer, city manager, police officer or any other city official who is authorized by law and this Code to exercise the powers prescribed by this section, or any agent of such officer or officers, or any other employee, officer or officers designated by the city manager for purposes of this section. 
(c)  Blighted condition designation. In order for the property in question to be subject to official identification as blighted and subject to increased taxation, the property must be determined to be: 
(1)  Unfit for human habitation or unfit for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or 
(2)  Vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(3)  Constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; and 
(4)  Not a dwelling house which is being used as the primary residence of one or more persons. 
(d)  Procedure for identification of property as blighted. The procedure for official identification of real property as blighted includes: 
(1)  A request from a public officer or at least five residents of the city charging that any building, structure or property meets criteria described in subsections (c)(1), (c)(2), or (c)(3) above. 
(2)  An investigation or inspection by a public officer and determination that the property in question meets the criteria described in subsections (c)(1), (c)(2), or (c)(3) above. 
(3)  A public officer's issuance of a complaint in rem against the property. The complaint shall state which condition(s) under subsection (c) exist on the property and what steps should be taken to remediate the property. 
(4)  A public officer's causing a summons and a copy of the complaint to be mailed on the owner of the property and holder of any security deed if and as identified in Darien ad valorem tax digest for such property. 
(5)  A hearing shall be held in the municipal court upon any complaint issued as provided herein. 
(6)  No property shall be designated as blighted unless the municipal court enters an order that finds the property in question meets the criteria described in subsections (c)(1), (c)(2), or (c)(3) but does not conform to subsection (c)(4) above. This order constitutes official identification of real property as maintained in a blighted condition. 
(7)  If the court finds that the property is blighted, it shall, in the same order, list what must be done to remove the blighted condition designation, and give the owner a deadline in which to finish the work. 
(e)  Imposition of increased tax rate. Property which has been officially designated as blighted shall be subject to an increased rate of city ad valorem taxation equivalent to double (two times) the normal millage rate applied to the property, applied at the time of issuance of the subsequent tax bill, as provided by general law. The increased rate continues to be applied to all subsequent tax bills until the property's designation as maintained in a blighted condition is removed as provided in this section. This increased rate of taxation and the official identification of the property as blighted remain with the property if transferred to another owner. 
(f)  Revenues segregated. Revenues collected from increases in rates of ad valorem taxation shall be segregated and applied to community redevelopment purposes. 
(g)  Remediation. The property in question may be rehabilitated at any time through remedial actions or redevelopment that conforms with the court order listing what must be done to remove the identification of the property as maintained in a blighted condition. Owner may request removal of the property's designation as blighted from the city manager or from the municipal court upon proper proof, including an inspection by a public officer, that the property has been remediated and now conforms with the court order listing what must be done to remove the identification of the property as blighted. The city manager shall be notified in writing 10 days before any hearing in the municipal court. 
(h)  Remediated property tax rate. Property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed as provided in this section will become eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation equivalent to one-half (50 percent) the normal millage rate applied to the property, applied at the time of issuance of the subsequent tax bill, as provided by general law. This decreased rate is applied to one-year's tax bill. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2008(1), § 62-1.1) 
Sec. 62-2. - Malt beverage excise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby levied on the sale of malt beverages in bottles, cans, or other containers, except bulk cartons, a local excise tax at a rate as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1980 et seq. Where malt beverages are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a local excise tax shall be levied at a rate as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The malt beverage excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages in the municipality. 
(c)  Due date and required report. The malt beverage excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of malt beverages sold for the preceding calendar month by size and type of container. 
(d)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Code 1998, § 4-102) 
State Law reference— Imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 
Sec. 62-3. - Distilled spirits sold by the package excise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby levied on the sale of distilled spirits, a local excise tax at a rate as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-1980. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The alcoholic beverage excise tax shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages in the municipality. 
(c)  Due date and required report. The alcoholic beverage excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of alcoholic beverages sold for the preceding calendar month by size of container. 
(d)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Code 1998, § 4-103) 
State Law reference— Imposition of excise tax on distilled spirit sold by the package required, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 
Sec. 62-4. - Wine excise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There shall be set and levied on the sale of wine, a local excise tax on the first sale or use of wine by the package at a rate as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1960. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The excise tax on wine shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer of wine in the municipality. 
(c)  Due date and required report. The wine excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of wine sold for the preceding calendar month by size of container. 
(d)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Code 1998, § 4-104) 
State Law reference— Imposition of excise tax on wine required, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 62-5. - Gross direct premiums tax. 
(a)  Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied for each year an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to the percentage of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, the rate of which shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1(b)(2). The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by this Code. 
(b)  Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. There is hereby levied for each year an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to the percentage of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, the rate of which shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums" as used in this section means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(c)  Due date and required report. The gross direct premiums tax levied herein shall be due and payable on March 1 in each calendar year. Payment shall be made to the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a report showing the names and addresses of the agents representing the insurance company in the city, the classes of insurance written, the premiums received for each class, and such other reasonable information as may be required. The required report shall be made on forms prescribed by the city clerk and made out over affidavit of an officer of the company. Payments shall be deemed delinquent if not received within 45 days from the due date. 
(d)  False information. It is hereby declared to be a violation of this section for any person, firm, corporation, or agents thereof to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any report herein required to be filed. 
(e)  Confidentiality of information. All reports required to be filed under this section shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be used solely by the officers of the city responsible for the administration of this section. 
(f)  Enforcement. The taxes levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of this municipality. 
(Code 1998, § 4-105) 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 62-6. - Public utility franchise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. The council shall have the authority to set and levy a franchise tax on each electric light and power company, gas company, telephone and telegraph company, and other public utilities making use of the streets, alleys, or other public ways or places of the city, for the purpose of rendering utility services. This franchise tax shall be based on a percentage of the annual gross revenue received from residential, commercial, and industrial sales and shall be set by council each year. 
(b)  Due date and required report. The public utility franchise tax shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month following the calendar month in which the utility was provided and the sale was made, and payment shall be accompanied by a report showing the volume of gross sales by service classification (residential, commercial, industrial) for said preceding month. 
(Code 1998, § 4-106) 
Sec. 62-7. - Municipal tax sales. 
(a)  Time, place, and manner of sale. The time, place, and manner of the sale of property, both real and personal, for taxes due this municipality shall be the same as that provided by law for sheriffs' sales for state and county taxes. 
(b)  Sale by parcels. When not impracticable, all property sold for municipal taxes shall be so offered for sale that the smallest amount that will bring the amount of taxes and costs shall alone be sold. 
(c)  Purchase by city. The city treasurer shall attend all sales of property for taxes due the city, and in the event no one person bids for the property put up to be sold for as much as the tax due thereon, the treasurer shall place a bid for such property for the city, and, if the bid is accepted, take custody of the deed for the city. No property so purchased by the city shall ever be sold by the city except at public sale thereof to the highest bidder. 
(d)  Redemption of property sold for taxes. Any person whose property is sold in obedience to an execution issued for the collection of municipal taxes shall have such rights of redemption of said property as are set forth in O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 4 (O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359) and any other provisions of law not inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1998, § 4-107) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359. 
Sec. 62-8. - Occupational tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any person, proprietorship, partnership, individual firm or entity conducting commerce, production, or procurement. 
Fulltime equivalent employee means an individual who works 40 hours or more per week and receives a "W-2" form from an employer. Each fulltime employee equals one fulltime equivalent employee. Parttime employees are calculated as a fulltime position equivalent basis by adding together the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly, taking that sum and dividing it by 40. 
Occupational tax means a tax on all persons, proprietors, partnerships, firms, and corporations engaging in or offering to engage in any trade, business, calling, avocation or profession from a permanent location in the city. 
(b)  Business transactions within the city limits. Each and every person, firm or corporation transacting or offering to transact any business or working at or offering to work at any trade, occupation or profession within the limits of the city (except such as are exempt by law) shall pay occupational taxes annually to the city clerk, after approval by the city manager in certain instances hereinafter provided for, in accordance with further provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Taxes due. Taxes are due on or before January 15 of each year. For new businesses, taxes are due prior to the commencement of any business activity. In the event that any person commences business on any date after the date specified in this section, the tax shall be due and payable 30 days following the commencement of the business 
(2)  Tax rates. 
a.  At the time when occupational taxes are due, the applicant shall pay to the clerk and treasurer of the city an amount as hereinafter provided set by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. In November of each year, the mayor and council in regular meeting, shall set tax rates based upon the number of employees working in the city for each business, trade, occupation or profession to take effect the succeeding year, subject to review by the incoming mayor and council at any regular meeting held in January of the succeeding year, in those years in which an election for a mayor and council is held. Once the occupational tax rate has been set by the mayor and council in accordance with the provisions of this section, the same shall remain in effect for future years until changed by a valid action thereon by the mayor and council under the provisions of this section. 
b.  Rate schedule. 
1.  Before any person shall locate, relocate or operate any business within the limits of the city, such person shall first pay occupational taxes to the city based upon a rate schedule set by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
2.  Exemptions. The following list of occupations are required by state law to either pay a flat rate occupational tax not to exceed $400.00 per state certificate holder to the city or a local occupational tax assessment based on the local government's rate schedule. In the city, such business as listed below may either pay a flat tax of $400.00 per state certificate holder annually or follow the rate schedule as established by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(i)  Lawyers; 
(ii)  Physician licensed under chapter 34 of Title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-20 et seq.); 
(iii)  Osteopath licensed under chapter 34 of Title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-20 et seq.); 
(iv)  Chiropractors; 
(v)  Podiatrists; 
(vi)  Dentists; 
(vii)  Optometrists; 
(viii)  Psychologists; 
(ix)  Veterinarians; 
(x)  Landscape architects; 
(xi)  Land surveyors; 
(xii)  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
(xiii)  Certified Public Accountants; 
(xiv)  Embalmers; 
(xv)  Funeral directors (this does not mean funeral homes); 
(xvi)  Civil; mechanical; hydraulic; or electrical engineers; 
(xvii)  Architects; 
(xviii)  Marriage and family therapists; social workers; and professional counselors; 
(xix)  Dealers of motor vehicles as defined in paragraph (1) of section 10-1-622 (O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622(1)); and 
(xx)  Any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
(3)  Conformance with appendix A, pertaining to zoning. All businesses operating within the city limits must adhere to regulations established in appendix A, pertaining to zoning. No taxes may be paid for a business which does not comply with the zoning regulations. 
(4)  Taxes to be paid before activity commences. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to transact any business or work at or offer to work at any business, trade, occupation or profession within the city limits (except those exempt by law) without first having paid occupational taxes. 
(5)  Enforcement. If any person, firm or corporation embraced in the forgoing sections shall fail or refuse to pay occupational taxes therein required of them the year for which the same is required within the time required, he, she or they shall be notified by the city manager or code enforcement official to take out and pay said taxes, and upon failure to comply, they shall be guilty of a breach of this section, and upon conviction before the city court shall be required to at once take out and pay said tax, and shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. For all said sums the clerk shall issue an execution against said delinquent and against his property and place same in the hands of the chief of police for levy and sale under the same rules as given the levy and sale under tax executions. 
(6)  Jurisdiction. All businesses that have a physical establishment based, owned, leased, or rented in the city limits shall be required to pay an occupational tax proportional to the number of employees, both fulltime and parttime, working at or in combination with such establishment. 
(7)  Appeal. A person that has any business operating within the city limits that feels his occupational tax assessment misrepresents the impact and burden of their business operation on the infrastructure and services provided by the city may be heard before the mayor and council at a regularly scheduled meeting prior to the date for which taxes are due, which is listed in this section. 
(Code 1998, § 17-207) 
Sec. 62-9. - Hotel-motel excise tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this section and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Darien and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the City of Darien is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
City clerk means the duly appointed city clerk of the City of Darien or the clerk's designee. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the operator's prospective tax liability based upon tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truckstop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given a date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this section, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
(b)  Tax rate. For every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city, there shall be paid a tax at the rate of five percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under subsection 62-9(e). 
(c)  Collection of tax by operator. Every operator renting guest rooms in this city shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under subsection 62-9(e). The operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the operator at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(d)  Proceeds of the tax. The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(e)  Exemptions. No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat exempted by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. 
(f)  Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(1)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for each monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. An operator who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed twenty-five percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(3)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(4)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(5)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of fifty percent shall be assessed. 
(6)  Return; remittance; time of filing; operators required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such operator shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(7)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns, for no longer than thirty days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the operator. Such grant may not be applicable for a longer period than 12 consecutive months. An operator granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. 
(8)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(g)  Deficiency determinations. 
(1)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any operator, the clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the clerk's possession or that may come into the clerk's possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by subsection 62-9(f). 
(3)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the operator written notice of the clerk's determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(h)  Determination if no return made. 
(1)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the operator failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 62-9(g)(3). 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by subsection 62-9(f). 
(i)  Collection of tax by city. 
(1)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(2)  Operator selling or quitting business. If any operator liable for any amount under this section sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(3)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this section sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(4)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(5)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the governing authority. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the governing authority, the excess amount paid to the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(j)  Administration of section. 
(1)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax. 
(2)  Records required from operators, etc; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as the clerk may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(3)  Application for sales tax audit reports. Each year, in the month of January, the city clerk shall request in writing from the state commissioner of revenue any reports of sales tax audits conducted of hotels in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
(4)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(5)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this section, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(k)  Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this section is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(l)  Effective date. This section and the tax levied hereby shall become effective on the first day of the second month following its adoption. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2008(2), §§ 63-1—63-12; Ord. of 7-19-2011) 
Editor's note— This ordinance adopted June 17, 2008, enacted provisions intended for use as a new chapter 63, article III, sections 63-1—63-12. Inasmuch as chapter 62 deals with taxation, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as section 62-9. 
Sec. 62-10. - Special assessments for nuisance abatement. 
The city shall have power and authority to enforce, by execution, the collection of any costs of abating nuisances and disposing of them. Said executions shall be issued by the clerk of the city in the name of the city, against the property, and the owner of the material found to constitute the nuisance or the property upon which it was located. The costs shall constitute and be recorded as a special assessment against the property constituting the nuisance or the property upon which it was located and collected as ad valorem taxes due the city after the owner has failed for a period of 60 days to pay any invoice sent to his or her last known address. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2009(3)) 
Chapter 66 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cities are authorized to exercise power over parking facilities and traffic control devices, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4) and (11); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 

Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all words and terms which are specifically defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, shall be construed to have the same meaning as given to said words and terms in said O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, unless otherwise defined herein. 
Sec. 66-2. - Uniform rules of the road. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. O.C.G.A. Title 40, Chapter 6, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road (O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 et seq., 40-6-372—40-6-376), is hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality, with like effect as if recited fully herein. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished according to the following fines: 
(1)  Exceeding the posted speed limit by ten to 14 mph: $165.00. 
(2)  Exceeding the posted speed limit by 15 to 18 mph: $220.00. 
(3)  Exceeding the posted speed limit by 19 to 23 mph: $275.00. 
(4)  Exceeding the posted speed limit by 24 to 34 mph: $325.00. 
(5)  Exceeding the posted speed limit by 35 mph or more: $575.00. 
(Code 1998, § 11-101; Ord. of 4-17-2007(2)) 
Sec. 66-3. - Speed zones. 
By authority under O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(10), in the part of the Uniform Rules of the Road allowing for local authorities to alter lawful speed limits, the following are provisions regulating speed limits on state routes and city streets within the city. 
State Route 25. A speed of 45 mph beginning at the south city limits, Mile Post 2.73, and extending northerly to center of Darien River Bridge, Mile Post 2.85, a distance of 0.12 mile; thence, a speed of 35 mph from center of Darien River Bridge, Mile Post 2.85, to State Route 25 Spur (King George Road), Mile Post 3.02, a distance of 0.17 mile; thence, a speed of 30 mph from State Route 25 Spur, Mile Post 3.02, to Fourth Street. 
Mile Post 3.25, a distance of 0.23 mile; thence, a speed of 35 mph from Fourth Street, Mile Post 3.25, to Archie's Restaurant, Mile Post 3.71, a distance of 0.46 mile; thence, a speed of 40 mph from Archie's Restaurant, Mile Post 3.71, to the north city limits, Mile Post 4.15, a distance of 0.44 mile. 
State Route 25 Spur. A speed of 30 mph beginning at the junction of State Route 25 (Ocean Highway), Mile Post 0.00, and extending easterly to old Fort King George, Mile Post 1.31, a distance of 1.31 miles. 
State Route 99. A speed of 35 mph beginning at the Highway Post junction of State Route 25 (Ocean Highway), Mile Post 3.17, and extending to easterly to Eighth Street, Mile Post 3.65, a distance of 0.48 miles; thence a speed of 40 mph from Lauren Way, Mile Post 3.65, to Pine Street, Mile Post 4.04, a distance of 0.39 miles; thence, a speed of 45 mph from Pine Street, Mile Post 4.04, to the northeast city limits, Mile Post 4.34, a distance of 0.30 mi1e. A speed of 25 mph beginning at Martin Luther King, Jr., Blvd., Mile Post 3.37, and continuing easterly to Mile Post 3.57, a distance of 0.20 miles, when children are present. 
Pine Street. A speed of 35 mph beginning at the junction of State Route 25, and extending easterly to State Route 99, a distance of 0.9 mile. 
Martin Luther King, Jr., Blvd (MLK, Jr., Blvd). A speed of 30 mph beginning at the junction of State Route 99 and extending northerly to Pine Street, a distance of 0.44 mile. 
Black Road. A speed of 30 mph beginning at the junction of Pine Street and extending northerly to the city limits, a distance of 0.3 mile. 
New River Road/Old River Road/C.A. Devillars Street. A speed of 30 mph beginning at the junction of State Route 25 and 9th Street, and extending northerly to the city limits, a distance of 0.6 mile. (Exception: in school zone area where a speed of 15 mph is posted.) 
(Code 1998, § 11-102) 
Sec. 66-4. - Operating certain truck tractors and semitrailers on certain streets prohibited. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park any truck, tractor, or semitrailer on the following streets of the city, to wit: Nevada Street, Alabama Street, Delaware Road, Kansas Street, Ohio Street, Kentucky Road, Florida Street, Utah Street, Vermont Street and Macintosh Drive and Poppell Drive in Darien Heights Subdivision. 
(b)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to vehicles engaged in pickup and delivery to properties located along said streets, nor shall such prohibition apply to vehicles being used for improvement or repair of said streets nor to vehicles of the city or of public utilities supplying services to properties along said streets. 
(Code 1998, § 11-104) 
Sec. 66-5. - Restrictions on parking in residential areas. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful to park any truck of greater than one-ton capacity, any house trailer, tractor, truck-tractor, semitrailer, or trailer on any street of the city in any area of said city zoned R-1, R-MH, or R-2 under appendix A, pertaining to zoning as such zones now exist or may hereafter exist. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the definition of "park" set out in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, it shall not be a violation of this section for a truck greater than one-ton capacity, or a truck-tractor, to park on the public right-of-way at the edge of the public right-of-way in front of and on the side adjacent to a residence while the driver of such truck or truck-tractor is actually engaged in making a social or business call on an occupant of said residence not to exceed one hour in duration. 
(Code 1998, § 11-105) 
Chapter 70 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal power to develop, store, treat, purify, and distribute water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-2020 et seq.; municipal authority to acquire, construct, operate and maintain water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; payment of costs of water, gas, or sewer pipe connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-19. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
Code enforcement office r or official means the designated representative of the city charged with the responsibility of inspecting and reviewing health and environmental matters throughout the city, including, but not limited to, existing and proposed sewer and water facilities. 
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stormwater or surface water. 
County health office r or official means the official representatives of the McIntosh County Health Department charged with the responsibility of inspecting and reviewing health and environmental matters throughout the county which includes, but is not limited to, existing and proposed sewer and water facilities. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Floatable oil or fat means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pre-treatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH means the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwaters, stormwaters, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sewage or wastewater is the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average, 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
Storm drain or storm sewer means a drain or sewer for conveying water or unpolluted water from any source. 
Superintendent means the city manager acting as the superintendent of water and sewer system maintenance of the city, or the person designated and authorized by the city manager to fulfill the requirements of this chapter and be responsible for the operations of the water and sewer systems. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Such term is sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant". 
Water and sewer department means the Darien Water and Sewer Department which is the operating organization working under the policies and direction of the city manager or his designee. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1998, § 13-101) 
Sec. 70-20. - Working with other officers. 
The city code enforcement officer shall have the authority to work in conjunction with and may rely upon the advice, expertise and/or recommendation of the county health officer, regarding the inspection and review of existing and proposed sewer and water facilities throughout the city. This authority shall include the ability to issue summons or citations for violations of and to enforce the provisions of this chapter, based upon a complaint or report received from the county health official. 
Sec. 70-21. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Entering premises. The code enforcement officer, a law enforcement officer, the city manager, or his designee shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Obtaining information. The code enforcement officer, a law enforcement officer, the city manager, or his designee is authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. 
(c)  Observation of safety rules. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this chapter, the code enforcement officer, a law enforcement officer, the city manager, or his designee shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 70-139. 
(d)  Entering property with easements. The code enforcement officer, a law enforcement officer, the city manager or his designee shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1998, §§ 13-701—13-704) 
Sec. 70-22. - Penalties and costs. 
(a)  Notice. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except division 6, shall be served by the city water and sewer department with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Continuation of violation Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be prosecuted by the city water and sewer department for a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8. 
(c)  Costs. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city water and sewer department for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city water and sewer department by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1998, §§ 13-801—13-803) 
Secs. 70-23—70-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 

Sec. 70-44. - Unsanitary disposal of waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste. 
(Code 1998, § 13-201) 
Sec. 70-45. - Disposal of unsanitary or polluted waters. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 13-202) 
Sec. 70-46. - Privies, septic tanks, cesspools. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Code 1998, § 13-203) 
Sec. 70-47. - Toilet facilities. 
The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, are hereby required at the owners' expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(Code 1998, § 13-204) 
Secs. 70-48—70-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 70-68. - Private systems. 
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 13-301) 
Sec. 70-69. - Permit requirement. 
Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system the owners shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city manager or the superintendent as designated by the city manager. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of an amount currently set by the water and sewer department shall be paid to the water and sewer department at the time the application is filed. No permit shall be issued under this article without prior written approval of the private wastewater disposal system by the county health official. 
(Code 1998, § 13-302) 
Sec. 70-70. - Effective date. 
A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(Code 1998, § 13-303) 
Sec. 70-71. - State requirements. 
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of human resources application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of an amount currently set by the water and sewer department at the time the application is filed for residential and commercial service, or as currently set for an industrial building sewer connection shall be paid to the water and sewer department at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1998, § 13-304) 
Sec. 70-72. - Connection to public sewer system. 
(a)  At such time as a public sewer becomes adjacent to or abuts, but is not separated by a public right-of-way, from any property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(b)  Anyone who is required to connect their private wastewater disposal system to the public sewer system pursuant to this article may appeal a decision of the superintendent to the city manager. 
(Code 1998, § 13-305) 
Sec. 70-73. - Sanitary operation of private sewers. 
The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city, and in compliance with the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-2020 et seq. 
(Code 1998, § 13-306) 
Sec. 70-74. - Construction. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Code 1998, § 13-307) 
Secs. 70-75—70-91. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 70-92. - Disturbing public sewers. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(Code 1998, § 13-401) 
Sec. 70-93. - Classes of sewer permits. 
There shall be two classes of sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service, and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial waste. 
In either case, the owners or his agent shall make provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM shall apply. 
(Code 1998, § 13-402) 
Sec. 70-94. - Costs. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owners. The owners shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1998, § 13-403) 
Sec. 70-95. - Separate sewers, exceptions. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(Code 1998, § 13-404) 
Sec. 70-96. - Old building sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 13-405) 
Sec. 70-97. - Construction requirements. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM shall apply. 
(Code 1998, § 13-406) 
Sec. 70-98. - Elevation. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1998, § 13-407) 
Sec. 70-99. - Connection to other buildings and drains. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(Code 1998, § 13-408) 
Sec. 70-100. - Conforming to building codes. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(Code 1998, § 13-409) 
Sec. 70-101. - Inspection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(Code 1998, § 13-410) 
Sec. 70-102. - Excavations. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1998, § 13-411) 
Secs. 70-103—70-132. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DISCHARGES INTO PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 70-133. - Discharging unpolluted waters. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1998, §§ 13-501, 13-502) 
Sec. 70-134. - Waters and wastes not to be discharged in public sewers. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the influent to the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works, or any waters or wastes having pH greater than 9.0. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 1998, § 13-503) 
Sec. 70-135. - Allowable concentrations of certain substances. 
The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to the municipal system to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The superintendent may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if in his opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the superintendent are as follows: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Farenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or in such quantities that the temperature at the treatment plant influent exceeds 104 degrees Farenheit (40 degrees Celsius), unless the plant is equipped to accommodate such heat. 
(2)  Wastewater containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin in excess of current federal and/or state regulations for pre-treatment of industrial wastes. 
(3)  Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or grease in excess of current federal and/or state regulations for pretreatment of industrial wastes. The maximum allowable limit of oil and grease shall be 100 mg/l. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or similar objectionable or toxic substance in excess of current federal and/or state regulations for pretreatment of industrial waste. In addition, specific limitations on inhibitory substances are as follows: 
Chromium less than 0.25 mg/l; 
Copper less than 0.5 mg/l; 
Zinc less than 0.1 mg/l; 
Cadmium less than 0.1 mg/l; 
Lead less than 0.5 mg/l; and 
Nickel less than 0.215 mg/l. 
Industrial dischargers shall meet the stricter of the article limits or the pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide, or any other noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entrance into sewers for their maintenance, inspection and repair. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as defined herein. 
(9)  Any waters or wastes having a five-day BOD in excess of 300 parts per million (mg/l) on a 24-hour composite basis. Discharger of wastes with such excessive BOD shall be subject to a surcharge to user cost to compensate the city for the additional cost of treatment. 
(10)  Waters having suspended solids contents in excess of 300 parts per million (mg/l) on a 24-hour composite basis unless approved by the superintendent. Discharger of wastes with such excessive suspended solids shall be subject to a surcharge to user cost to compensate the city for the additional cost of treatment. 
(11)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(12)  Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other waters or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(Code 1998, § 13-504) 
Sec. 70-136. - Rejection of certain wastes. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 70-135 and which in the judgment of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent will reject the wastes, until such time as pretreatment facilities are installed to produce an acceptable discharge to the public sewers. If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent, and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
(Code 1998, § 13-505) 
Sec. 70-137. - Interceptors. 
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in section 70-135(3), or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means. The means of disposal are subject to review by the superintendent and appropriate regulatory personnel. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Code 1998, § 13-506) 
Sec. 70-138. - Expense of pretreatment and flow-equalizing facilities. 
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1998, § 13-507) 
Sec. 70-139. - Property owner to install structure requirement for gauging and sampling industrial wastes. 
The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appearances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1998, § 13-508) 
Sec. 70-140. - Standard for testing. 
(a)  All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standards Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, duration, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis by the superintendent. 
(b)  All industrial users shall meet pretreatment requirements as specified in 40 CFR 403, entitled, "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," dated January 28, 1981. 
(Code 1998, § 13-509) 
Secs. 70-141—70-163. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE 

Sec. 70-164. - Damaging wastewater facility. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1998, § 13-601) 
State Law reference— Unlawful to damage, injure, or interfere with the property or equipment of municipal utility services, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Secs. 70-165—70-181. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICE, RATES, FEES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 70-182. - Rate schedule. 
The city council shall have the authority to set water rate schedules for all residential, commercial, and industrial users of water under the city water system. This authority extends to all users of the city water system, both within the city limits and outside the city limits. The council shall have the authority to set different rates for residences and businesses, and also for residences and businesses inside the city limits and those outside the city limits. 
(Code 1998, § 12-101; Ord. of 10-18-2005, § 22-21) 
Sec. 70-183. - Charges for initial service; standards. 
(a)  Water and wastewater tap-in fees shall be charged on the basis of residential units or residential equivalent units according to the tap-in fees listed in appendix B to this Code. Any fractional units resulting from the calculation of residential equivalent units shall be treated as a whole unit. In addition to the tap-in fees, installation fees shall be charged in accordance with schedules listed in appendix B to this Code. Installation fees shall cover only connection to existing mains that are adjacent to the location to be served; the actual costs of any extensions necessary shall be charged in addition to tap-in and installation fees. All fees and charges shall be paid by the customer at whose request the connection is made before the issuance of any building permits. 
(b)  The director may authorize licensed master plumbers to install connections to water or wastewater facilities upon written application. Water meters shall be supplied to authorized licensed master plumbers at cost; all other related accessories for water or sewer connections may be supplied to authorized licensed master plumbers. The director shall require payment of installation fees as listed in appendix B to this Code or reimbursement of actual costs for any installations not specifically covered. All work done by other than city personnel shall be done only under the supervision of licensed master plumbers authorized to perform such work. The director shall require that all installation is performed in accordance with specifications and/or standards conforming to sound engineering practices. In the event that such installation is not made in accordance with specifications and/or standards, the director may require the installation to be corrected or removed and reinstalled as necessary. 
(c)  Water installation fees for making taps into the city water mains or water lines and installing water meters or providing water meters for plumbers to install shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council, and available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Sewer installation fees for making connections to the city sewerage system and installing service lines shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council, and available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. Installation fees for meters larger than two inches shall be charged on the basis of reimbursement to the city for all actual costs incurred in making the installation. 
(e)  Installation fees for installations requiring additional facilities including but not limited to manholes or flow metering installations shall be charged on the basis of reimbursement to the city for all actual costs incurred in making the installation. 
(Code 1998, § 12-103; Ord. of 10-18-2005, § 22-21) 
Sec. 70-184. - Deposits. 
(a)  Deposits shall be 2½ times the monthly bill for all services, as estimated by the director using whatever data may be available, with a minimum deposit of $75.00 per unit for water and $75.00 per unit for sewer. 
(b)  Deposits may be waived if evidence is produced that the customer has a good record of payment or that the customer would reasonably be expected to pay all bills promptly. In the event a deposit is waived or is less than 2½ times the monthly bill for all services for whatever reason, and that the customer is delinquent in payment of one or more bills, the deposit for that customer's accounts may be required to be increased to 2½ times the monthly bill for all services. Such increased deposits may be required to be paid in full before reconnection of service. 
(Ord. of 10-18-2005, § 22-21) 
Sec. 70-185. - Late fees and disconnection fees. 
(a)  In the event a utility bill has not been paid by the past due date printed on the bill, the account may be subject to an additional late fee of not more than $5.00. Late fees may be incurred whether or not the service is disconnected. 
(b)  In the event that service has been cut off for nonpayment of a city utility bill or other Wiaction resulting in unauthorized use of city services, service shall not be restored until the unpaid bill and service fees provided by this section are satisfied. Before service is restored, the following service fees shall be paid by the user cumulatively for each action taken to prevent unauthorized use of city services: 
(1)  Turn-on after a delinquent cut-off: $25.00 
(2)  Locking meter: $35.00 
(3)  Removal of meter: $60.00 
(4)  Removal of straight line: $80.00 
(5)  Removal of unauthorized relocated meter: $125.00 
(6)  Cutting off water at main: $300.00 
(c)  Payment of these fees shall not exempt any user from any civil or criminal action resulting from violations of this chapter. 
(d)  In addition to the fees and deposits otherwise provided hereinabove, each applicant for service shall pay in advance an account establishment charge of $15.00 for either new service or transfer of service from one location to another. 
(Ord. of 10-18-2005, § 22-21) 
Sec. 70-186. - Residential equivalent units. 
(a)  A residential equivalent unit is that portion of a user's facility that has an impact on the water and wastewater system equivalent to a single-family residence. The determination of a facility's residential equivalent units shall be based on estimated water consumption as shown in guidelines below or on square footage. Peak water consumption of 300 gallons per day or a floor space of 3,000 square feet, shall be the equivalent of one residential unit. The method which results in the greater number of equivalent residential units shall be applied. The standards in the table below shall be used in the determination of water consumption. If the table does not provide information for a particular application, the estimated water consumption shall be as calculated by the director in accordance with sound engineering practices using information available from the state EPD, USEPA, or standard reference materials commonly used for estimating flows. 

 
(b)  In the event a facility is made up of more than one smaller component facility, the determination of residential equivalent units shall be calculated as the sum of all components' residential equivalent units. 
(c)  Notwithstanding, in a case involving a site utilizing its own private water supply and distribution system to multiple locations, resulting in the production of domestic-type wastewater only, such as employee restrooms and showers, such that reading and maintenance of meters would create excessive costs and hardship in the judgment of the director, the city may bill on flow estimates calculated on the basis of an average flow per employee times the average number of employees at such facility for the recovery of costs of transporting and treating the wastewater. 
(d)  For any water meter used for purposes of irrigation only, the following table shall be used to determine Residential Equivalent Units (REUs) for purposes of establishing fixed charges on monthly bills: 

 
(Code 1998, § 12-103; Ord. of 10-18-2005, § 22-22) 
Sec. 70-187. - Adjustments in billing. 
The director shall be authorized to make equitable adjustments in billings for wastewater services only in cases where leaks in pipes and plumbing facilities result in increased billings without fault on the part of the customer. Such adjustments shall be made based on an average of prior billings only after repairs have been made as certified by a licensed plumber, and shall be limited to three months' billings. 
(Ord. of 10-18-2005, § 22-23) 
Sec. 70-188. - Discontinuance of service. 
(a)  The service under any application or contract may be discontinued for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  For misrepresentation in application as to property or fixtures to be supplied, or the use to be made of the water supply or character of waste discharged into the sanitary wastewater system; 
(2)  For the use of water for any other property or purpose than that described in the application; 
(3)  For willful or negligent waste of water through improper or imperfect service pipes, fixtures, meters, private fire protection systems or otherwise; 
(4)  For failure to protect the connection, service lines and fixtures, or to maintain them in good order; 
(5)  For nonpayment of any account for water or sewer service furnished or of any scheduled fee or charge as required by the provisions of this chapter, rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to the terms hereof, or any amendments hereto; 
(6)  For molesting any service pipe, meter, curbstop, seal, or any other appliance of the water and sewerage department controlling or regulating the water supply; 
(7)  In case of vacancy of premises; 
(8)  For violation of any provisions of this chapter or amendments thereto; 
(9)  For violation of any rules or regulations promulgated by the director, and under authority of the provisions of this chapter or amendments thereto; 
(10)  For turning off or on water at the "water main" or "water connection" or curb stop, by a plumber, owner or other unauthorized person, or for disconnecting or removing the meter, without the prior written consent of the director. Emergency cut-off of such water without damage to any city property shall not be considered a cause of discontinuance of service. 
(b)  The director shall have authority to order the temporary discontinuance of water or wastewater service in any emergency, under exigent circumstances, or whenever such discontinuance is necessary to protect life, health or property or to prevent immediate interference with the city systems. 
(c)  In all other circumstances service shall be discontinued only after five days' written notice delivered to an adult person occupying the premises served or posted in a conspicuous place thereon, stating the reason for discontinuance and informing the user of his right to a hearing before the director upon such user's appearance before the director within such five working days during regular business hours. 
(Ord. of 10-18-2005, § 22-24) 
Sec. 70-189. - Application for water service. 
The consumer shall make application for water service, in person, at city hall. 
(Code 1998, § 12-102) 
Sec. 70-190. - City's responsibility and liability. 
The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in the municipal fee ordinance attached to this Code as appendix B, will be made for a five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee above will be made for a meter of larger dimension. 
(1)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(2)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or back-flow. 
(4)  Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Code 1998, § 12-105) 
Sec. 70-191. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any person or permit any other person to use said water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(1)  Where meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(2)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(3)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer. 
(4)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water for the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Code 1998, § 12-106) 
Sec. 70-192. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days notice must be given in person or in writing, at city hall to discontinue water service or to change up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Code 1998, § 12-108) 
Sec. 70-193. - Meter reading, billings, collecting. 
Bills to customers for water service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at city hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure of water users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment within 20 days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. 
(2)  Nonpayment within 40 days from the date due will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 60 days after original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate agreement, and in such event the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply any water under this agreement. 
(4)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored to the customer liable for usage of the service and payment of the bill only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the mayor and council is made, and a service charge paid for each meter reconnected. Such service charge shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1998, § 12-109) 
State Law reference— Prior customer's debt does not authorize municipality to refuse water service to another customer at location where service debt was incurred, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-17. 
Sec. 70-194. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(Code 1998, § 12-110) 
Sec. 70-195. - Complaints, adjustments. 
If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(1)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test, provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(2)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Code 1998, § 12-111) 
Sec. 70-196. - Water conservation. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Darien through water conservation and water efficiency. The objectives of this section are: 
a.  To regulate outdoor water use in accordance with requirement of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division; 
b.  To mandate that water be used for lawn and landscape irrigation in a manner that prevents waste, conserves water resources for their most beneficial and vital uses, and protects the public health; and 
c.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection; surveillance and enforcement procedures as necessary to ensure compliance with this section. 
(2)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all water customers of the City of Darien as permitted by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) for water withdrawal or for operation of a drinking water system. 
(3)  Definitions. 
Address means the "house number" (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. "Even numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. "Odd numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Administrator refers to city manager. 
Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. 
(b)  Outdoor water use schedule. 
(1)  Outdoor water use schedule during non-drought periods. Outdoor water use during non-drought periods, other than activities exempted in subsectin (d), shall occur only as follows: 
a.  Odd-numbered addresses: outdoor water use is allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
b.  Even-numbered addresses: outdoor water use is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(2)  Outdoor water use schedule during drought response level one. When drought response level one has been declared, outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
a.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
b.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
c.  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing is prohibited. 
(3)  Outdoor water use schedule during drought response level two. When drought response level two has been declared, outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
a.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
b.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
c.  The following uses are prohibited: 
1.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
2.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways except when necessary for public health and safety. 
(4)  Outdoor water use schedule during drought response level three. When drought response level three has been declared, outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
a.  The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday. 
b.  The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday. 
c.  The following uses are prohibited: 
1.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
2.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety 
3.  Filling installed swimming pools except when necessary for health care or structural integrity. 
4.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts. 
5.  Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection. 
6.  Non-commercial fund-raisers, such as car washes. 
7.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
(5)  Restriction during drought response level four. When a drought response level four had been declared, no outdoor water use is allowed, other than for activities exempted in subsection (d), or as the EPD director may order. 
(6)  Exemptions. 
a.  This section shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
1.  Capture and re-use of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
2.  Re-use of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
3.  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
4.  Irrigation of personal food gardens. 
b.  Newly (in place less than 30 days) installed landscapes are subject to the following: 
1.  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during drought response level four. 
2.  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. 
c.  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule. 
1.  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
2.  Irrigation of fairways during times of non-drought and declared drought response level one. 
3.  Irrigation of tees during times of non-drought and declared drought response levels one, two and three. 
4.  Irrigation of greens. 
d.  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule. 
1.  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers: during installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
2.  Irrigation contractors: during installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
3.  Sod producers. 
4.  Ornamental growers. 
5.  Fruit and vegetable growers. 
6.  Retail garden centers. 
7.  Hydro-seeding. 
8.  Power-washing. 
9.  Construction sites. 
10.  Producers of food and fiber. 
11.  Car washes. 
12.  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. 
(c)  Rain sensing devices for automatic irrigation systems. 
(1)  New automatic irrigation systems. Any new irrigation system installed within the City on or after the adoption of this section must be equipped with rain sensing devices approved as to type by the administrator. 
(2)  Existing automatic irrigation systems as of the adoption of this section. 
Any irrigation system installed before the adoption of this section may not be operated after one year following the date of the adoption of this section without being equipped with rain sensing devices and freeze gauges approved as to number and type by the administrator. 
(d)  Variances. 
(1)  Conditions for variance. The administrator may, in special cases, grant variances from certain provisions of subsections (b) or (c) to persons demonstrating extreme hardship and need. The administrator may grant variances only under all of the following circumstances and conditions: 
a.  Granting of a variance must not cause an immediate significant reduction in the city's water supply. 
b.  The extreme hardship or need requiring the variance must relate to the health, safety, or welfare of the person requesting it. 
c.  The health, safety, and welfare of other persons must not be adversely affected by granting the variance. 
(2)  Process to receive variance. The applicant must sign a compliance agreement on forms provided by the administrator, and approved by the city attorney, agreeing to irrigate or water a lawn or landscape only in the amount and manner permitted by the variance. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible party. Such notice will include the nature of the violation, a notice to immediately cease actions in violation of this section, and a schedule to address the violation, if necessary. 
(2)  Citation. Should the violation not be remedied as ordered, a citation may be issued for an ordinance violation for trial before the Municipal Court of the City of Darien. 
(3)  Injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, the city may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(4)  Criminal prosecution. Any person that has violated or continues to violate this section shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law for an ordinance violation, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $100.00 per violation per day. The City of Darien may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this section, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2009(3)) 
Secs. 70-197—70-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 70-206. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Code 1998, § 12-112(1)) 
Sec. 70-207. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified. 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Code 1998, § 12-112(2)) 
Sec. 70-208. - Esablishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle, the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 100 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 12-112(3)) 
Sec. 70-209. - Permitted uses. 
The following use are permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot, any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone, shall not be less one acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Code 1998, § 12-112(4)) 
Sec. 70-210. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of permitted uses under this article: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under this article; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet or applicable EPD required distance of a wellhead. 
(Code 1998, § 12-112(5)) 
Sec. 70-211. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in appendix A, pertaining to zoning for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Code 1998, § 12-112(6)) 
Chapter 74 - VEGETATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND LANDSCAPING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The sections that comprise this article were originally enacted under an ordinance entitled "Tree and Landscape Ordinance," adopted by the mayor and city council on June 18, 2002. Attached as appendices to this ordinance were lists characterizing tree sizes by species, labeled appendix A, and a list of Streetscapes and Parks Committee rules and regulations, labeled as appendix B. The list characterizing tree sizes by species appears as appendix D of this Code. The appendix comprising the Streetscapes and Parks Committee rules and regulations was not printed in the Code at the discretion of the editor. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-19. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  This article is enacted to provide standards for: 
(1)  Preserving and/or replacing trees and vegetation as part of the land development and building construction process; 
(2)  Improving the aesthetic appearance of commercial, governmental, industrial and residential areas through the incorporation of landscaping guidelines into development, in ways that enhance the environment; 
(3)  Maintaining permeable land areas essential to surface water management and aquifer recharge; 
(4)  Encouraging the conservation of natural resources through the use of native plants and maintenance techniques as recommended by the American National Standards Institute (A300); 
(5)  Promoting energy conservation through the creation of shade, thereby reducing heat retention in or on buildings or paved areas; 
(6)  Protecting canopy and specimen trees as defined in this article. 
(b)  The intent of these standards is to provide necessary information to facilitate development project design, plan review, and enforcement processes so that the provisions of the article can be administered by the city staff in the most effective, efficient and economical manner. In furtherance of this intent, the City of Darien, Georgia Tree and Landscape Ordinance Activities Manual (Activities Manual) is created as a tool to provide detailed examples and guidance in creation and implementation of development plans in compliance with this article and is made a part thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002; Ord. of 4-17-2007(1); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-101; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1)) 
Sec. 74-20. - Application. 
With the exception of individual single and two-family dwellings, the terms and provisions of this article shall apply to any planned development or land disturbing activity, private and/or governmental, as follows: 
(1)  All undeveloped property; 
(2)  Any developed property which undergoes substantial change (50 percent or more) in footprint; 
(3)  Public rights-of-way, parks and other public lands; 
(4)  Any annexed property. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002; Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-201; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1)) 
Sec. 74-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Basal caliper means the diameter of a plant's main stem measured at six inches above ground level. 
Canopy tree means a large tree that has a distinct presence in the landscape or forest where the limbs overhang large areas including public rights-of-way. 
Critical root zone (CRZ) means the minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone (CRZ) will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. For example, the CRZ radius of a 20-inch diameter tree is 20 feet. 
Preserved tree means any tree indicated on a site development plan that is to be protected during development of property for incorporation into the final landscaping requirements. 
Sight triangle means the area of property on both sides of a driveway formed by the intersection of each side of the driveway and public right-of-way, with the two sides of each triangle being a minimum of 15 feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a straight line connecting the ends of the two other sides. 
Specimen tree means any tree designated for preservation because of rarity, aesthetic value, historical value, botanical importance, importance to overall community planning or size. 
Street yard means a perimeter planting area which is located between a street right-of-way and a vehicular use area. 
Structural roots means those tree roots which should not be encroached upon by soil disruptions and hard scape installation (see appendix B). 
Tree means, for purposes of land clearing, any woody plant, except dogwood or other flowering tree, that has a single trunk with a caliper of five inches or more at six inches above the ground. A dogwood or other flowering tree with a caliper of two inches or more at six inches above the ground is also defined as a tree. 
Vehicular use area means any ground surface area, except public rights-of-way, used by any type of vehicle, whether moving or at rest, for purposes including, but not limited to, driving, parking, loading, unloading, storage or display such as, but not limited to, new and used car lots, activities of a drive-in nature in connection with banks, restaurants, filling stations, grocery stores, and convenience stores. 
(Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-310; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1)) 
Secs. 74-22—74-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC TREE CARE 

Sec. 74-44. - Maintenance by city. 
(a)  Trees under city control. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in pruning, treating or removing public or park trees, except those persons who are employees of or contracted by the city or are approved or designated by the city manager. 
(b)  Removal for public safety. The city council may recommend to the public works department the removal or pruning of any trees or vegetation or part thereof which: is deemed to be in an unsafe condition, or which by reason of its nature is a public hazard, or is potentially injurious to any public improvement, or is affected by any threatening insect or injurious transmittable disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees in the city. 
(c)  Right to clear sight obstructions. The city shall have the right to prune obstructive trees and shrubs on private property that overhang onto the public right-of-way or obstruct the view or safe passage for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Private trees that overhang public property may be pruned or removed up to the property line by the city without notice to the property owner. The city shall be obligated to prune only that portion of the tree which affects public interests. 
(d)  Maintenance standards. All pruning of public trees shall be done in accordance with the most recent edition of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standard for Tree Care Operations—Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance, Standard Practices (ANSI A300). 
(e)  Pruning standards for private trees pruned by the city. Where necessary to protect the public interest, private trees will be pruned to ANSI standards only if permission is given by the property owner for the city to enter upon private property. 
(f)  Stumps. All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § I(A); Ord. of 4-17-2007(1), § I(A); Ord. of 5-15-2007, §§ 21-401—21-406; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § I) 
Sec. 74-45. - Placement of street trees and park trees. 
(a)  Approval of streetscapes and parks committee required. Prior to planting a tree or shrub on or along any street, park, or other public land, the species to be planted must be approved by the city staff. 
(b)  Spacing of trees. Small trees may not be planted less than 30 feet apart, medium trees less than 40 feet apart, and large trees less than 50 feet apart, except in case of special planting effects created by a qualified landscape designer. 
(c)  Clearance from curbs and sidewalks and underground utilities. No tree stem shall be planted closer to a curb or sidewalk, or the closest lateral distance from an underground utility than the following distances: small and medium trees, three feet; and large trees, four feet. No pines shall be planted within ten feet of a curb or sidewalk. 
(d)  Clearance from intersections. No tree may be planted any closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or pavement. 
(e)  Clearance from fire hydrants. A minimum ten feet radius clear zone shall be maintained around all fire protection equipment, including fire hydrants. The clear zone shall contain no plant materials or structural elements other than ground cover plants. 
(f)  Clearance from overhead utilities. The location of overhead utility lines shall be considered during the placement of required trees in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Small and medium species may be planted within 35 feet of the nearest overhead utility line. 
(2)  Large species shall be planted more than 35 feet from the nearest overhead utility line. (See appendix D for characterization of tree sizes by species.) 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § I(B); Ord. of 4-17-2007(1), § I(B); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-407; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § I) 
Secs. 74-46—74-63. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 74-64. - Permits required. 
(a)  Administrator. City staff shall administer and control the care of and necessary removal of all trees and vegetation growing now or hereafter in the city in accordance with the guidelines set forth herein. 
(b)  Permits. No person, firm, organization, corporation or society shall directly or indirectly cut, remove, burn or destroy any tree situated on property subject to this chapter without first obtaining the required permits: 
(1)  Building permit. No building permit shall be approved for development by the city building inspector without it being determined that the proposed site development plan is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Tree and landscape permit. Permit forms may be obtained from the clerk of the city. The completed form shall be submitted to city manager along with a tree inventory of the subject site, noting trees to be removed as described in section 74-66. 
(3)  Burning permit. Issued by the city with the approval of the city fire chief and building inspector. 
(c)  Annexed property. Any property annexed into the city shall comply with this chapter within 12 months of annexation. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § II(A); Ord. of 4-17-2007(1), § II(A); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-501; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § II) 
Sec. 74-65. - Permit procedures. 
The following procedures and requirements shall be followed by the applicant and the city: 
(1)  Filing and review. Application for approval of landscape plan and issuance of a permit shall be made by filing the site development plan (landscape plan) at the same time other building plans are submitted for review by the city building inspector's office. The landscape plan shall be reviewed and approved by city staff prior to the issuance of permits by the city. Landscape plans for properties in the historic districts must also be reviewed and approved by the city historic preservation commission. 
(2)  Approved landscape plan required. No building permit, if required, shall be issued unless and until the city has approved the site development plan and issued a tree and landscape permit. 
(3)  Permit posting. A copy of the approved land disturbing activities permits shall be available and displayed conspicuously on site during construction and installation of landscape improvements. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § II(B); Ord. of 4-17-2007(1), § II(B); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-502; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § II) 
Sec. 74-66. - Site development plan required. 
For any site development requiring a building permit from the city, a site development plan shall be submitted upon application for a tree and landscape permit. The site development plan shall include the following information: 
(1)  Scale drawing indicating the existing and proposed structural improvements, location, dimensions and square footage of vehicular use areas, vehicle sales display areas, outdoor storage areas, public and private utility service areas, proposed parking space and overhead and underground utilities lines. 
(2)  Existing and proposed landscaping uses to satisfy the requirements of this chapter, including quantities, species, location and size of trees, shrubs and ground covers; the location and dimensions of planting areas and street yards; the location and size of earthen berms; the location, size and construction material of fences, walls, wall planters, and walkways. 
(3)  Trees to be preserved on the site shall be identified by location, species, height and diameter 4.5 feet above grade, critical root zone, and special techniques employed for tree preservation. 
(4)  Trees to be removed from the site shall be identified by location, species, height and diameter 4.5 feet above grade. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § II(C); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-503; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § II) 
Secs. 74-67—74-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 74-91. - Applicability. 
To ensure the attainment of the objectives of this article, the design and installation of required landscaping shall be consistent with the standards in this division and the City of Darien, Georgia Tree and Landscape Ordinance Activities Manual (Activities Manual) unless it can be demonstrated that alternative design and installation plans will meet the objectives of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002; Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-601; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § III) 
Sec. 74-92. - General requirements. 
(a)  Vision clearance at intersections. Landscaping required by this chapter shall comply with the city's minimum vision clearance standards and sight triangle for streets, intersections and driveways as defined herein and in appendix A, pertaining to zoning, and any other applicable codes. Landscape plant material shall not obstruct or impede public pedestrian rights-of-way or routes. 
(b)  Protection from vehicle encroachment. All vegetation in planting areas which are adjacent to vehicular use areas or outdoor storage areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by construction of curbing or other appropriate barriers. 
(c)  Erosion control. The soil surface of all planting areas shall be stabilized to prevent erosion by the use of live ground cover plants, shrubs, mulches, permeable pedestrian paving blocks, or a combination thereof. 
(d)  Overhead utilities. The location of overhead utility lines shall be considered during the placement of required trees in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Small and medium species may be used when located within 35 feet of either side of the nearest overhead utility line. 
(2)  Large species may be used when located more than 35 feet on either side of the nearest overhead utility line. (See Activities Manual for characterization of tree sizes by species.) 
(e)  Clearance from fire hydrants. A minimum ten-foot radius clear zone shall be maintained around all fire protection equipment, including fire hydrants. The clear zone shall contain no plant materials or structural elements other than ground cover plants. 
(f)  Tree and shrub selection. Tree selection for planting will be made from the locally adapted species list included in the activities manual. If a species not on the list is intended for planting, it first must be approved by the streetscapes and parks committee. All medium and large trees must be at least two inches at basal caliper and at least eight feet in height at the time of planting. All small trees to be planted must be at least one inch at basal caliper and at least six feet in height at the time of planting. Shrubs included in interior planting areas must be a minimum of 12 inches in height at installation. Shrubs shall be locally adapted species which retain their foliage to within six inches above ground line and shall be spaced no more than 18 inches apart edge to edge. All planting shall conform to the most recent edition of the Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual distributed by the International Society of Arboriculture. Tree quality shall meet or exceed Grade 1 as defined in the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock published by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
(g)  Preservation of existing trees. The city desires to preserve all existing trees wherever possible during development. Preserved trees may be credited toward and count in the minimum landscape requirements. To be deemed a preserved tree and count in the minimum landscape requirements, the existing tree must be at least five inches in basal caliper and included among the approved species listed in the activities manual. In order to encourage the preservation of large mature trees, except those defined as specimen trees, preserved trees will be substituted for trees required to be planted under the minimum landscape standards on a one-to-one ratio. Preserved trees shall meet or exceed the minimum standards for planted trees. Preserved specimen trees will be credited toward the landscape minimum standards for trees to be planted on a one-to-six ratio. (One preserved specimen tree shall equal six proposed planted trees.) 
(h)  Tree protection measures during construction. Existing trees to be retained on development sites shall be protected from injury and damage throughout the development process from permit approval through issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Tree protection fence required. A tree protection barrier shall be erected upon issuance of the building permit and prior to commencing any other physical construction or land disturbing activities on the site. The tree protection fence shall be maintained in place throughout construction until issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The minimum area enclosed by a tree protection barrier shall include the critical root zone (CRZ) for all trees enclosed by the fence. 
(2)  Critical root zone (CRZ) protection. The CRZ shall be maintained free of encroachment. No construction materials, equipment, vehicles, tools, portable toilets, construction trailers or other matter shall be stored, set up or disposed of, nor shall any concrete or paint washout, or any other material disposal occur within the CRZ of any retained tree or within the tree protection barrier area. 
(3)  CRZ clearing. Clearing of underbrush, vines and other materials shall be accomplished by hand. No vehicle entry is permitted. 
(4)  CRZ mulching. The soil surface surrounding the CRZ shall be mulched to a depth of four to six inches with wood-product mulch. Mulch and mulch depth shall be maintained throughout construction. 
(5)  Underground and overhead utilities. Underground and overhead utilities shall be routed so as not to encroach into a CRZ whenever possible. 
a.  If encroachment cannot be avoided, underground utilities shall be bored the entire distance of encroachment through the CRZ with a minimum depth of two feet. Under no circumstances shall underground utilities be routed within the zone of structural roots. 
b.  Overhead utilities shall maintain a minimum clearance of ten feet of the nearest part of a protected tree. Pruning shall not be used to attain the required clearance. 
(6)  Grading and filling. No grading or filling shall occur within the CRZ of any preserved tree. 
(i)  Maintenance of preserved trees and plants. Preserved trees shall be maintained during construction as required by this chapter. Maintenance is the sole responsibility of the owner. Any dead trees or plants shall be replaced according to the provisions of this chapter within 60 days of mortality, and/or prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(j)  Open space requirement. Each development site shall include a minimum of 20 percent gross surface area as open permeable land. 
(k)  Irrigation. Permanent irrigation is required for all planted areas. The minimum shall be a hose bib capable of supplying three gallons of water per minute. No preserved tree shall be more than 75 feet distance from a hose bib. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § III(A); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-602; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § III) 
Sec. 74-93. - Vehicular use areas. 
The following landscaping standards shall be met in all vehicular use areas in development or redevelopment: 
(1)  Permeable land requirement. Vehicle use areas shall have a minimum five percent of its gross surface area as permeable land. 
(2)  Tree and shrub planting. In vehicular use areas, the minimum landscape requirement of one large tree species and five shrubs for every 8,000 square feet of vehicular use area or proportionate fraction thereof. No parking surface shall be located within four feet of the base of any tree. The minimum planting area width or diameter is nine feet. 
(3)  Planting space size requirements. Each large tree shall have a minimum of 400 square feet of permeable land allocated to its root system. Each medium tree shall have a minimum of 225 square feet of permeable land allocated to its root system. Each small tree shall have a minimum of 100 square feet of permeable land allocated to its root system. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § III(B); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-603; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § III) 
Sec. 74-94. - Street yard areas. 
(a)  Tree and size requirements. A landscaped street yard area shall be required along all vehicular use areas adjacent to a street right-of-way. A street yard area must have a minimum width of nine feet of private property. A minimum of one large tree species and five shrubs shall be required along every 75 linear feet of street yard, except in the presence of overhead utilities. If overhead utilities are present, small tree species shall be substituted for large species on a one-for-one basis. Trees and shrubs planted in street yard areas must conform to the specifications stated in section 74-92(f). Planting the largest size class of tree the site will accommodate is specifically encouraged. 
(b)  Walkway placement and design. Street yard areas may not be used for any purposes other than landscaping, signage and pedestrian walkway. If pedestrian walkways are constructed of impervious material, the walkway shall not exceed 15 percent of the total surface area of the street yard. Any walkway constructed of impervious material shall not be within three feet of the trunk of any existing or proposed planting. When this is not possible, the sidewalk shall be rerouted or pervious paving materials shall be used upon approval of the city staff. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § III(C); Ord. of 4-17-2007(1), § III(C); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-604; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § III) 
Sec. 74-95. - Expansion of existing vehicular use areas. 
Any expansion of existing vehicular use areas up to and including 50 percent of the gross existing surface area shall have the same requirements as prescribed for interior and exterior street yard planting areas of new development. The requirements shall pertain only to the expansion area; however, the minimum landscape standards as to trees and shrubs may be distributed throughout the entire vehicular use area if the applicant desires. Existing vehicular use areas shall comply with the same tree and landscaping standards as new vehicular use areas whenever any expansion, singularly or collectively, commenced within a period of two years, of an existing vehicular use area exceeds 50 percent of the existing gross surface area. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § III(D); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-605; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § III) 
Sec. 74-96. - Screening outdoor storage areas. 
Any outdoor storage area with a linear dimension of 15 feet or greater, or any dumpster-type refuse container with a linear dimension of five feet or greater which is not screened by a building or other structure shall be screened from view from any public street right-of-way for its entire length, including the gated area. A wall or natural barrier with a minimum height of six feet constructed of the same or acceptable material as the principal structure is required. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § III(E); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-606; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § III) 
Sec. 74-97. - Historic district provisions. 
(a)  Deposit to tree fund in lieu of planting. If the historic preservation commission recommends that part or all of the requirements for tree and shrub planting under this chapter would conflict with the historic preservation guidelines for a commercial development proposed within the historic district of the city, those requirements in conflict shall be met by deposit of monies into the tree fund by the developer at the rates in effect at the time of permit issuance. In no case shall funds received from projects located within the historic district of the city be used to fund plantings outside the historic district. 
(b)  Receipt of monies required prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. All funds due for a project shall be received into the tree fund prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy for that project. 
(c)  Location of alternate plantings on public property. Trees and shrubs shall be planted in the closest available planting spaces to the development project. The closest available spaces shall meet the planting space requirements of this chapter and shall not require modification of built infrastructure by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § III(F); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-607; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § III) 
Sec. 74-98. - Specimen trees. 
The city seeks to protect the live oak (Quercus virginiana L.) as well as exceptional specimens of other tree species within the city limits. Every effort shall be made to ensure survival of trees designated as specimen trees. In recognition of the importance of these trees and the additional costs likely to be incurred in the conservation of specimen trees, the following requirements and credits are enacted: 
(1)  Specimen tree designation. City staff shall annually recommend a list of specimen trees to the city council. Upon action of the city council in regular meeting assembled, the trees accepted as specimen trees shall enjoy protection under this article. The list shall include tree identification by property identification number, diameter and approximate height. The list shall be published as an annual addendum to the Tree and Landscape Ordinance Activities Manual. 
(2)  Critical root zone is the minimum conserved area. The minimum area which must be conserved for use by a specimen tree is the critical root zone (CRZ). Conservation outside the boundaries of the CRZ is strongly encouraged. 
(3)  Use of CRZ area under special conditions. Some portion of the CRZ of a specimen tree may be allowed (i.e., for vehicle use, storage, or structure overhang) if additional protections and treatments are provided and specific conditions are met. 
(4)  Root zone specific conditions. The following minimum criteria must be met and maintained to achieve and maintain specimen tree conservation credits: 
a.  Soil compaction. Soil compaction as measured by bulk density is 1.7g/cc or less in sandy soils and 1.3g/cc or less in clay soils during construction and maintained at or below this limit after construction throughout the conserved area. 
b.  Water supply. Permanent water supply adequate to deliver one inch of water per week to the entire conserved area. 
c.  Organic matter. Provisions are made to supply and cover the entire conserved area with an average minimum depth of two inches of wood-product mulch annually. 
d.  Soil pH. Soil pH is maintained between 4.5 and 7.0. over the entire conserved area. 
(5)  Credits for specimen tree conservation. The credits for specimen tree conservation are measured in square unit area. Credits are determined by subtracting the 20 percent minimum permeable ground requirement area from the conserved area. The positive remainder in square unit area is the credit for specimen tree conservation. 
(6)  Applying for credits for specimen tree conservation. A request for consideration for tree conservation credits shall be submitted with the site development plan. The request shall include description of the methods for achieving root-zone-specific conditions and show calculations for determining the credits requested. The applicant will be notified by the city in writing upon issuance of the building permit if credits will tentatively be awarded for the project. 
(7)  Award of credits. Credits will be officially awarded in writing at issuance of certificate of occupancy upon completion of inspection and testing has confirmed all specific conditions have been met. 
(8)  Redeeming credits for specimen tree conservation. Credits may be redeemed on subsequent development projects on a one-for-one basis against minimum permeable land requirements. 
(9)  Reporting transfer of credits for specimen tree conservation. The owner of specimen tree conservation credits may elect to sell or otherwise permanently transfer some or all of their accumulated credits to another party. The city shall be notified of the transfer with a letter signed by all involved parties stating the quantity of credits transferred, naming the provider and the receiver of credits, and the effective date of the transfer. 
(10)  Replacement of specimen trees. In the event that it is not possible to retain a specimen tree on a development site, the specimen tree shall be replaced on a species per species and basal-cross-sectional-inch per basal-cross-sectional-inch basis. (E.g. one 24-inch diameter live oak specimen tree would be replaced by 16 six-inch diameter live oaks, or 36 four-inch caliper live oaks, or 144 two-inch caliper live oaks, or combination thereof.) 
(11)  Alternatives to planting specimen tree replacement trees on the development site. Alternatives to planting all replacements for specimen trees on the development site are: 
a.  To plant the replacement trees on other lands within the city limits upon approval of the property owner and provided the sites meet all planting site and maintenance requirements under this chapter; 
b.  To deposit sufficient monies into the tree fund to cover the cost for the city to plant the replacement trees; or 
c.  A combination of these. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § III(G); Ord. of 4-17-2007(1), § III(G); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-608; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § III) 
Secs. 74-99—74-124. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TREE FUND 

Sec. 74-125. - Established. 
The City of Darien, Georgia Tree Fund (tree fund) is hereby established as a separate account held and managed by the city to receive and disburse funds for planting trees, shrubs and other vegetation on public property in the city. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § IV(A); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-701; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § IV) 
Sec. 74-126. - Source of deposits. 
Deposits into the tree fund may be from any source. The tree fund is specifically established to receive funds: 
(1)  In lieu of direct on-site planting required under this chapter on development sites within the city; 
(2)  Public or private donations for beautification projects and tribute plantings; 
(3)  Other projects as may be designated by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § IV(B); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-702; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § IV) 
Sec. 74-127. - Timely use of funds required. 
The city shall start to use the funds deposited in lieu of planting by a private development project within 12 months of issuance of the certificate of occupancy for that project. Any funds remaining 36 months after issuance of certificate of occupancy shall be returned to the project developer. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § IV(C); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-703; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § IV) 
Sec. 74-128. - Location of plantings on public property relative to private development project. 
Trees and shrubs shall be planted on public property in the closest available planting spaces to the development project. The closest available spaces shall meet the planting space requirements of this chapter and shall not require modification of built infrastructure at cost to the city. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § IV(D); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-704; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § IV) 
Sec. 74-129. - Approved uses for funds from private development sources. 
Funds received from private development sources shall be used exclusively to plant and maintain on public property and through a two-year establishment period the trees and shrubs waived from on-site planting for the private development. Tree funds shall be used only for direct costs to purchase, deliver, install, and maintain through a two-year establishment period the said trees and shrubs. Purchase, delivery, installation and maintenance may include unit cost, shipping, hardening off, loading, off-loading, watering, soil tests, labor, equipment, soil treatments, amendments, mulching, plant health care, staking, and all other usual and necessary tasks to ensure plant establishment. Funds may also be used by resolution of the city council to purchase additional green space. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § IV(E); Ord. of 4-17-2007(1), § IV(E); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-705; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § IV) 
Sec. 74-130. - City to plant in numbers and sizes equal to deposits received. 
The city shall plant trees and shrubs on a one-for-one basis equal to the quantities and sizes of plants used to determine the amount of the deposit received from private development sources. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § IV(F); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-706; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § IV) 
Sec. 74-131. - Schedule of costs. 
The schedule of costs for the city to plant trees of the three size classes, standard shrubs, special plantings and other vegetation as might be required by the city council shall be reviewed annually by city staff. Cost adjustments necessary to cover the city's actual direct costs to conduct planting and establishment operations shall be recommended to the city council as annual budget requests. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § IV(G); Ord. of 4-17-2007(1), § IV(G); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-707; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § IV) 
Editor's note— The "Schedule of Costs" table, Initial 2002 Cost Schedule, that appeared at this location in the ordinance of 6-18-2002 has been included in appendix B to this Code at section 27-117, at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 74-132—74-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CONTINUING COMPLIANCE AND OBLIGATION FOR MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 74-161. - Maintenance required. 
The owner/lessee of a property to which a tree and landscape permit applies shall be required to maintain the landscaping in compliance with this chapter in perpetuity. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § V(A); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-801; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § V) 
Sec. 74-162. - Inspection. 
Sites shall be inspected at least annually by the city public works department and city code enforcement to ensure that continuing compliance with required trees and landscape standards are met and that plants are established and thriving. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § V(B); Ord. of 4-17-2007(1), § V(B); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-802; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § V) 
Sec. 74-163. - Notification of deficiency. 
The owner/lessee of the property will be notified in writing by the city public works department of any missing or dead plants that need to be replaced. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § V(C); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-803; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § V) 
Sec. 74-164. - Prompt replacement required. 
All missing or dead plants shall be replaced with a plant of the same species meeting requirements under this chapter within 60 days (or in the next planting season, November-March) of written notice to the applicant and property owner. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § V(D); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-804; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § V) 
Sec. 74-165. - Change of ownership. 
In the event that a property changes ownership, the provisions of this chapter shall be followed by the new owner. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § V(E); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-805; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § V) 
Secs. 74-166—74-183. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND CONFLICTS 

Sec. 74-184. - Failure to obtain a permit before performing land disturbing activities or other activities which impact trees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any land disturbing activity to property under the jurisdiction of this chapter or perform pruning or removal work on a tree without first obtaining a permit from the city building inspector's office. Each tree impacted by such work shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § VI(A); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-901; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § VI) 
Sec. 74-185. - Violations of provisions or removal or destruction of trees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, mutilate, remove or otherwise destroy any trees which are under the jurisdiction of this chapter. The injury, mutilation, removal or destruction of each tree shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § VI(B); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-902; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § VI) 
Sec. 74-186. - Failure to maintain trees on site. 
Any tree designated in the site development plan to be retained that dies or is destroyed during construction or dies after occupancy shall be replaced with a tree of the same species meeting planting size requirements within 60 days (or in the next planting season, November-March) of written notice to the applicant or property owner. Failure to replace said tree within this time frame shall subject said party, upon conviction, to a minimum fine of $200.00 per tree. Each day the party fails to replace said tree after the 60-day notice required herein shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § VI(C); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-903; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § VI) 
Sec. 74-187. - Failure to replace dead plants as designated in the landscape plan. 
Any person failing to replace any dead plants and/or tree after 60 days' written notice as provided for in this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to a minimum fine of $50.00 per offense. Each day that said party fails to replace said plants shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § VI(D); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-904; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § VI) 
Sec. 74-188. - Jurisdiction. 
Any person violating this chapter shall be punished according to the law and subject to fine by the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § VI(E); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-905; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § VI) 
Sec. 74-189. - Waivers. 
The city council may waive requirements and penalties under this chapter upon the developer demonstrating in a show for cause hearing why meeting the provisions of this chapter imposes an unreasonable burden. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § VI(F); Ord. of 5-15-2007, § 21-906; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § VI) 
Sec. 74-190. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, supplant or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § VII; Ord. of 5-15-2007, art. X; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § VII) 
Secs. 74-191—74-218. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VEGETATION IN PUBLIC PLACES 

Sec. 74-219. - Trees and shrubs. 
(a)  Planting and removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure, or cut any tree, bush, or shrub in or from any public street, parkway, or other public place without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city clerk in the manner specified in chapter 58, entitled Streets, Curbs, Sidewalks, and Public Places. 
(b)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any sign, advertisement, or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(c)  Dangerous trees. 
(1)  Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street, or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. 
(2)  Any tree or limb of a tree which is likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. 
(3)  The director of public works may cause to be trimmed or removed any and all such trees or shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be removed. 
(d)  Poles and wires. Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys, or other public places of the city shall keep such wires and poles free and away from any nearby trees or shrubs in such places, and keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the director of public works, so that no injury shall befall either the poles and wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact. 
(Code 1998, § 14-101(10)) 
Sec. 74-220. - Burning of leaves or rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish, or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks, or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 14-101(11)) 
Appendix A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the zoning ordinance, as adopted August 18, 1998 by the mayor and city council in the City of Darien Code of Ordinances as "Chapter 20: Zoning Ordinance." Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Section 1-104 of Chapter 1- "General Provisions" in the 1998 Code provided that the headings appearing in the Code were "intended as mere captions to indicate the contents" therein, and were not to be deemed or taken as a part of the substantive law of the Code. Thus, for stylistic purposes of this appendix, the headings, catchlines, and section numbers that had appeared in the zoning chapter have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for purposes of clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - ENACTMENT, SHORT TITLE, JURISDICTION, PURPOSE 

Sec. 20-101. - Enactment clause. 
The City council of Darien, McIntosh County, Georgia, in accordance with the Authority granted cities by the 1983 Georgia State Constitution, Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 4 and Chapter 66 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia, does ordain and enact into law the following sections. 
(Code 1998, § 20-101) 
Sec. 20-102. - Short title. 
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Darien". 
(Code 1998, § 20-102) 
Sec. 20-103. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall govern the use of all land and the developments thereof within the incorporated area of the City of Darien, Macintosh County, Georgia. 
(Code 1998, § 20-103) 
Sec. 20-104. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations shall be to encourage such distribution of population and such classification of land use and such distribution of land development utilization, and such standards for land development, as will lessen and prevent congestion in the streets; help secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; promote the health and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Darien; provide adequate light and air; prevent urban sprawl; facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, police, fire protection, and other public requirements; promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; protect property against blight and deterioration; secure economy in governmental expenditures; conserve the value of building and land; encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and other structures; and for other purposes. 
(Code 1998, § 20-104) 
ARTICLE II. - INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 20-201. - Interpretation. 
For the purpose of these regulations certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
A.  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
B.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
C.  The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, or corporation. 
D.  The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
E.  The word "building" includes the word "structures." 
F.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely discretionary. 
G.  The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
(Code 1998, § 20-201) 
Sec. 20-202. - Definitions. 
Abandon. The cessation of a use as indicated by the visible or otherwise apparent intention of an owner to discontinue a use of a structure or lot; or, the removal of the characteristic equipment of furnishing used in the performance of the use, without its replacement by similar equipment or furnishings; or, the replacement of a use or structure by a different use or structure. 
Accessory building. Accessory building - a building or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure and located on the same lot as the principal building. 
Accessory farm dwelling units. Dwelling units located on a farm and which are occupied or designed to be occupied by non-transient farm workers employed by the owner or operator of the farm. 
Accessory use. A use which exists on the same lot and which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the property. 
Agriculture. The raising of soil crops and/or poultry and livestock in a customary manner on tracts of land at least five acres in size and shall include all associated activities. 
Alley. A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Apartment. A room, or a suite of two or more rooms in a multiple dwelling unit, occupied or suitable for occupancy as a residence for one family. 
Apartment house. A building or a portion of a building, designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other, and containing three or more dwelling units. 
Applicant. An owner or his/her designated representative who is submitting an application for consideration under any provision of this ordinance. 
Automobile service, major. Automobile repair services which generally require substantial replacement/repair of major components of an automobile. Examples of major automobile services include, but are not limited to, transmission repairs/replacement, paint and body work, engine overhaul, and radiator repair. 
Automobile service, minor. Automobile maintenance services which generally only require very brief adjustments and replacement of minor components. Examples of minor automobile services include, but are not limited to, tune-up, oil change, lubrication, brake repair, air conditioning system servicing, muffler replacement, and alignment. 
Automobile service station. A building or premise where products necessary for automobile service or maintenance are sold, provided there is no storage of automobiles, and only minor services are rendered, and all repairs are performed indoors. An automobile service station is not a repair garage nor a body shop. 
Boarding house. "Boarding house" means a building with not more than five guest rooms where lodging and meals are provided for compensation for not more than ten persons, but shall not include rest homes or convalescent homes. 
Body shop. A building or premise where motor vehicle repair and/or replacement is performed, including but not limited to painting and metal fabrication of motor vehicle bodies or structures. 
Buffer. That portion of a lot or parcel of land established for permanent vegetation and open space and intended to separate properties with a different and possible incompatible types of use/or zoning classifications. This area is a distance as specified pursuant to this ordinance and typically as measured from the common property line of the different uses and/or zoning classifications. 
Buffer, natural. A buffer which is left to remain in its natural state except for minor maintenance activity as may be authorized under this ordinance. 
Buffer, opaque. A buffer which is of sufficiently dense vegetation and/or other features (such as a fence or earthen berm) as to preclude uninterrupted vision from one side to another. 
Buffer, planted. A buffer which consists of planted vegetation as provided for in this ordinance. 
Buffer, undisturbed. A buffer, which once installed, is not to be reduced or altered except for minor maintenance as may be authorized under this ordinance. This term "installed" as used herein refers to the time at which either: a) the natural buffer is staked out, or b) the planned buffer is planted and approved. 
Building. Any combination of materials, whether portable or affixed to the ground, used for sheltering, housing or the enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, property, or materials of any kind. Such "building" shall include open porches, open breezeways and any other roofed areas. 
Building height. Building height - The vertical distance of a building measured from the first finished floor level or street level, whichever is lower, to the highest point of the roof. The measurement shall not include roof appurtenances such as chimneys, antennas, or church steeples. 
Building inspector. The official appointed by the city and charged with the responsibility of building permit and certificate of occupancy compliance certification. 
Building line, minimum. The line located on [or] closer to a property line than the required minimum yard lines, behind which all structure shall be located except as otherwise provided herein. 
Building, main. The principal building on a lot or building site designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are devoted; where a permissible use involves more than one structure designed or used for the primary purpose, as in the case of group houses, each such permissible building on one lot as defined by this ordinance shall be construed as comprising a main building. 
Building site. Means (a) the ground area of one lot or (b) the ground area of two or more lots when used in combination for a building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces required by this ordinance. 
Business or commerce. The purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, service, substance or commodity for livelihood or profit; or the management of office buildings, offices, recreational or amusement enterprises, or the maintenance and use of offices, structures and premises by professions and trades rendering services. 
Care home. An orphanage, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, boarding home for the aged, personal care home or similar use established to render domiciliary care in which nursing or supervisory care are provided, but not including inpatient facilities providing hospital or clinical treatment for the care of mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics, drug addicts and not including nursery schools. 
Certificate of occupancy (CO). A statement signed by the building inspector permitting occupancy and use of a building. 
Club. An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
Common open space. That land designated in a development which is undeveloped and of sufficient size and good quality, open, natural, unpaved except for recreational structures, and easily accessible, which is specifically set aside for common use and enjoyment, and restricted only for such recreational and conservation uses as parks, playgrounds, swimming, golf courses and conservation areas. While the term "common land" may be either singular or plural, the intention and emphasis is on quality and suitability rather than number of parcels. 
Condominium. A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis, as more specifically provided in the Code of Georgia. It is a legal form of ownership of real estate and not a specific building style. 
Court. Any portion of the interior of a lot or building-site which is wholly or partially surrounded by buildings, and which is not a required front, side or rear yard. 
Curb cut. The segment of the boundary of lands bordering and adjacent to a public street providing access for vehicular ingress and/or egress to the property from an abutting public street. 
Day care center. A private establishment enrolling four or more children under five years of age and where tuition, fees, or other forms of compensation for the care of the children is charged. 
Dwelling unit (D.U.). One or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment physically segregated from any other dwelling units in the same structure, containing an independent entrance, and permanent provisions for living, cooking, sleeping and sanitation facilities. Units in facilities such as hotels, motels, boarding houses, or other facilities intended for transient use shall not be considered dwelling units. 
Dwelling, single family. A building containing one dwelling unit which is not attached to any other dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, two-family or duplex. One building containing two separate dwelling units. 
Dwelling, multi-family. One building containing three or more dwelling units. 
Educational institution. Elementary, junior high, [or] high schools, colleges or universities or other schools giving general academic instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught by the state board of education. 
Facade. The exterior surface of a building. 
Factory built home. Any structure or component thereof which is designed primarily for residential occupancy and which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building site. 
Family. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood or marriage, or a group of not more than five persons, excluding servants, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
Farm. Any plot or tract of land consisting of at least five acres and devoted to agricultural purposes or the raising of domestic and/or other animals. 
Flashing sign. A sign whose illumination is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits changes in light, color, direction, or animation. Illuminated signs which indicate the date, time, and temperature will not be considered flashing signs. 
Floodplain. The area within the inter-regulated flood contour elevations subject to periodic flooding based upon United States Corp of Engineers floodplain information reports and other federal, state, or county hydrological studies. 
Floor area, gross. The sum of the horizontal area of several floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches or attics not used for human occupancy or for commercial and/or industrial use. 
Floor area, net. The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding stairwells, equipment rooms, storage areas, interior vehicular parking and all floors below the first or ground floor, except when used or intended to be used for human habitation. 
Free-standing sign. A self-supporting sign not attached to any building, wall, or fence, but in a fixed location. This does not include portable or trailer type signs. 
Frontage. That lot dimension along any road or street. 
Garage, private. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the main building, enclosed on all sides and designed or used only for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned and operated by the occupants of the main building. 
Garage, public. A building other than a private garage used for the care, repair or equipping of automobiles, or where such vehicles are kept for remuneration, hire, or sale. 
General service or repair establishment. A commercial establishment, the primary concern of which is the rendering of service and repair activities on equipment and appliances rather than the sale of goods. Such establishments include but are not limited to: watch, clock, radio, television, home appliances, and bicycle repair, but shall not include automotive, boat, truck, and earthmoving equipment repair. 
Grade. The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the above-ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk. 
Group housing. A building or buildings consisting of 11 or more dwelling units on one lot. In general, grouped or constructed about a central mall or court. 
Guest house. A secondary building incidental to the main residence which is used only for the non-commercial boarding of guests or on-site domestic workers. 
Height. As applied to a building means the vertical distance from grade to the highest finished roof structure in the case of flat roofs or to a point midway between the top plate and the ridge of any building having a pitch greater than one foot in 4½ feet height of a building in stories; does not include basements and cellars that are not habitable. 
Home beauty parlors and professional use. When located within the principal dwelling and operated by a person resident in the building and employing not more than one person who is not a resident of the premises, provided that not more than 25 percent of total floor area in any dwelling unit is devoted to such use and that no additional parking spaces shall be required. 
Home occupation. An occupation for gain or support, such as dressmaking, music teaching, party food preparation, etc., provided that no special space is designed or arranged for such occupation and that no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, or other particular matter, glare, odors, aromas, or other objectionable effects shall occur. 
Homeowners association. A private non-profit corporation, association, or other non-profit legal entity organized under the laws of the State of Georgia established to provide for the ownership, care and maintenance of common open space lands and site improvements. 
Hospital. Any institution receiving inpatients, or a public institution receiving outpatients, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical, and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of the mentally ill, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
Hospital, small animal. An establishment in which veterinary services, clipping, bathing, boarding, and other services are rendered to dogs, cats, and other small animals and domestic pets. 
Hotel or motel. A building or group of buildings in which there are six or more guest rooms where lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation, and where no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite, but shall not include, hospitals, asylums, sanitariums, orphanages, or where human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Junkyard. Any land or building used for the abandonment, storage, keeping, collecting, or bailing of paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap or discarded materials, or for the abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage, or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in running condition, machinery, or parts thereof. 
Kennel. The housing of four or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals for the purpose of providing income or revenue. 
1.  Commercial kennel: Any location where boarding, caring for and keeping of more than a total of three dogs or cats or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on, and also raising, breeding, caring for or boarding of dogs, cats or other small animals for commercial purposes. 
2.  Noncommercial kennels: Any location where the boarding, caring for and keeping of more than three but not more than 12 dogs or cats or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on, not for commercial purposes, but as a hobby such as the raising of show and hunting dogs. Noncommercial kennels shall not be the for the purpose of producing income or revenue: hobby only). 
Lodging house. The same as boarding house, but no meals shall be provided. 
Lot. Land occupied, or to be occupied, by a building, group of buildings or uses, and accessory buildings, together with such yards and lot area as required by this ordinance. 
Lot area. The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot. 
Lot coverage. That portion of the lot that is covered by impervious surfaces. 
Lot depth. The average horizontal length between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot lines. Lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
Lot of record. A platted lot which is on record in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of McIntosh County, Georgia. 
Lot, through. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Manufactured housing. Any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, which include plumbing, heating and electrical heating systems contained therein. Homes built since June 15, 1976, are constructed in accordance with the standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and bear that department's insignia. The home shall be incorporated on a permanent enclosed foundation with wheels and tongue removed. Manufactured housing as defined herein shall not include pre-site built housing. 
1.  Mobile home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. Mobile homes are prohibited in all districts. 
2.  Modular home. A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with the regulations of the Southern Building Code Congress International, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act, or the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act as amended. For the purpose of this ordinance, a modular home is a one-family detached dwelling. 
Manufacturing. Uses serving the needs of the community for industrial activity which are not offensive to nearby commercial or residential uses, as described below. 
1.  Light industry includes manufacture or assembly processes carried on completely inside a building. Light industry shall not produce any of the following adverse impacts, as determined at the boundary of the light industry lot: 
a.  Noise at a level greater than typical street or traffic noise; 
b.  Hazardous solids, liquids, or gases for emission to the environment; 
c.  Offensive odors or glare; 
d.  Offensive vibration; or 
e.  Any other adverse impact as may be determined by the city council, based on evidence presented. 
Medical clinic building. An establishment where patients are accepted for special study or treatment by a group of physicians practicing together. 
Modular home park. A lot containing all required utility connections where space is rented for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for a period exceeding 30 days. 
Nonconforming building. A building, or portion thereof, which was lawfully erected or altered and maintained, but which, because of the application of this ordinance, no longer conforms to the use, height or area regulations of the zone in which it's located. 
Nonconforming lot. A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption of this ordinance, but which fails, by reason of such adoption, to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
Nonconforming use. A use which was lawfully established and maintained but which, because of the application of this ordinance, no longer conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
Office building. Rooms and/or buildings used for office purposes of any business or service other than medical or dental clinics. 
Outdoor storage. Placement on a lot not within a building or structure of supplies, materials, goods, products, or surplus materials for more than seven consecutive days or more than 30 days in any year if not fully screened from public view. 
Perennial stream. A stream which flows year-round. 
Personal service establishment. A commercial establishment, the primary concern of which is the rendering of a service to persons or individuals, rather than the sale of products. Such establishments include but are not limited to: barber and beauty shops, shoe repair, dry cleaning and laundry services, photographic studios, and businesses providing similar services of a personal nature. 
Planning commission. An appointed body of people by the local governing authority whose responsibilities include the guidance of growth and development within the city and interpreting of the various city regulatory ordinances. 
Principal building. The building containing or to contain the principal use of a lot. 
Principal use. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building therein is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied, or maintained. 
Public use. Use of any land, water, or buildings by a municipality, public body or board, commission or authority, county, state, or the federal government, or any agency thereof for a public service or purpose. 
Public or community sewage system. Any sewage treatment works, pipe lines or conduits, pumping stations and force mains and all other construction, devices, and appliances appurtenant thereto, designed for treating or conducting sewage for ultimate disposal into lakes, streams, estuaries, or other bodies of surface water. 
Public utility. Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board, or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state, or municipal regulations to the public natural gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, or water. 
Recreation vehicle. A vehicle-portable structure, either towed or operated under its own power, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation or vacation uses, such vehicles being commonly known as "campers", "recreational vehicles", or "travel trailers." 
Rest home, convalescent home, or guest home. A home operated as a boarding house, in which nursing, dietary and other personal services are furnished to convalescents, invalids and aged persons - but in which are kept no persons suffering from mental sickness, disease, disorder or ailment from a contagious or communicable disease, and in which are performed no surgery, maternity or other primary treatments such as are customarily provided in sanitariums or hospitals, or in which no persons are kept or served who normally would be admittable to a mental hospital. 
Restaurant. An establishment whose principal business is serving food and which does not include any of the following operations: 
a)  An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages in previously prepared, prepackaged, ready-to-consume individual servings; or 
b)  An establishment that includes a drive-up or drive-through facility or curb service; or 
c)  An establishment where there are fewer than 15 customer seats per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area in the establishment; or 
d)  An establishment that does not provide waiter/waitress service to the customer seating area (exclusive of food bars). 
Restaurant, fast food. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages in ready-to-consume individual servings, for consumption either within the restaurant building or for carry-out, and where either: 
a)  Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are usually served in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers; or 
b)  Where the majority of customers are not served their food, frozen desserts, or beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter where the items are consumed; or 
c)  The establishment includes a drive-up or drive-through service facility or offers curb service. 
Right-of-way. A strip of land that is generally used for the location of a street, walkway, utility line or other access way, that is separate and distinct from the lots and parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions of areas of such other lots or parcels. 
Setback, minimum structure. Four lines parallel to the front, side and/or rear lot line and set back from said lot line a sufficient distance as specified herein. The setback measurements establish the area in which all structures must be erected or placed unless otherwise specified herein. 
Shopping center. A group of commercial establishments having a building composition that is an architectural unit and is not a miscellaneous assemblage of stores; planned, developed, analyzed as a unit, related in location, size, and type of shops to the trade areas that the unit serves, and providing onsite parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of stores. Shopping Centers are classified by type, each distinctive in its own function, 
a)  Neighborhood shopping center. Provides for the sale of convenience goods (foods, drugs, sundries, etc.) and personal services (laundry, barbering, shoe repair, etc.) for the day-to-day living needs of the immediate neighborhood, and is usually built around a supermarket which is the principal tenant. 
b)  Community shopping center. In addition to the convenience, goods and personal services of the neighborhood center, provides a wider range for the sale of soft line (apparel, etc.) hard line (hardware and appliances) and includes eating facilities, making more depth of merchandise and services available. It is usually built around a junior department store or variety store which is the principal tenant. 
c)  Regional shopping center. Provides for general merchandise, apparel, furniture and home furnishings in full depth and variety. It is built with one or more full-line department stores as the focal point. 
Sign. Any display of lettering, logos, colors, lights, or illuminated neon tubes visible to the public from outside of a building or from a traveled way, which either conveys a message to the public, or intends to advertise, direct, invite, announce, or draw attention to, directly or indirectly, a use conducted, goods, products, services or facilities available, either on the lot or any other premises, excluding window displays and merchandise. 
Special use. A use which within certain districts specified by this ordinance is not permitted as a matter of right, but may be permitted within these district by the city council after it has: 
a)  Reviewed, in conjunction with the standards of review, the proposed site plans, its location within the city, its arrangements and design, its relationship to neighboring property and other conditions peculiar to the particular proposal which would determine its desirability or undesirability; or 
b)  Has found the proposal not to be contrary to the intent of this ordinance. 
Street. A thoroughfare used, or intended to be used, for passage or travel by motor vehicles. 
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it. If there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it shall be considered a story. If the finished floor level directly above the basement or cellar is more than six feet above grade, such basement or cellar shall be considered a story. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, including items located in water which are attached to the ground, but not including fences or walls used as fences less than six feet in height. 
Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof joists, girders or rafters, or changes in roof or exterior lines. 
Subdivision. The division of a trace or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions; the combination of two or more lots or parcels to form one; the division of land involving the dedication of a new street, easement, or other public way for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, transference, legacy, development or other purposes; includes re-subdivisions; and where appropriate, relates to the process of subdividing the land or area subdivided. Exemptions are as follows: 
a)  The public acquisition of land for use in widening existing streets. 
b)  The transference of part of one lot or trace in an existing subdivision to adjacent lots or tract in the same subdivision providing that the transference does not reduce any lot or tract to an area or width less than the zoning minimum of the area and does not increase the total number of lots; 
c)  Division of land into parcels, all of which are three acres or more in size with a minimum width of 150 feet for a distance of sufficient area to provide an adequate area for placement of structures and improvements including wells and approved installation of approved onsite sewage management systems. 
Temporary sign. A sign intended to be used for a period of no more than 30 days. Exceptions for pennants and similar devices intended for civic purposes may be granted by special permit. 
Trailer. A vehicle designed for towing, not intended for use as a dwelling, either temporary or permanent, and restricted to such uses as a temporary construction office and/or storage facility, temporary operations office pending construction of a permanent facility, and the like. 
Travel trailer. A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and travel use. 
Use. The purpose for which land or buildings is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which either is or may be occupied or maintained. 
Variance. A relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance that will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary or undue hardship. 
Warehouse. A building used exclusively, except for appurtenant office space, for the storage of goods or merchandise. 
Water dependent users. Those uses that require for their primary purpose, location on submerged lands, or that require direct access to, or location in coastal waters and which, therefore, cannot be located away from these waters. Those uses include, but are not limited to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, fin fish and shellfish processing, storage, and retail and wholesale marketing facilities, marinas, navigation aides, basins, and channels, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water that cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland site, and uses which primarily provide general public access to marine or tidal waters. 
Yard. An open space, other than a court, on a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
Yard, front. An open unoccupied space within and extending the full width of the lot, between the R.O.W. property line and the closest part of a structure nearest to such street line. In the case of a corner lot which has frontage on two streets, the yard areas abutting both streets shall be considered front yards for setback purposes. 
Yard, rear. An open unoccupied space within and extending the full width of the lot, between the rear property line and the closest part of the structure nearest to such property line. 
Yard, side. An open unoccupied space within the lot between the side lot line, not a street line, and the parts of the structure nearest to such lot line. 
Yard, width. The distance between the side yard lines, measured along the front yard setback line as established by this ordinance, or if no setback line is established, the minimum width at the building lines. 
Zoning administrator. The individual selected by the mayor and council whose duty it shall be to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 20-202) 
ARTICLE III. - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES, THE BOUNDARIES THEREOF AND LIMITING THE USES OF LAND THEREON 

Sec. 20-301. - Names of zones. 
In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of land and buildings, to regular [regulate] and restrict the height and bulk of buildings and to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings, and to regular [regulate] the density of population, eight classes of zones are by this ordinance established to be known as follows: 

 
(Code 1998, § 20-301) 
Sec. 20-302. - Degree of restrictiveness. 
"More restrictive uses" as employed in this ordinance means the following: 
(1)  Those uses first permitted in the R-I zones are the most restrictive. 
(2)  All other uses are less restrictive in the order they are first permitted in the zones in the sequence shown R-1, R-2, C-1, C-2. 
(3)  Uses permitted in the R-A zone shall be considered to be as restrictive as those permitted in the R-I zone, except that those uses pertaining to animals shall not be considered as "more restrictive uses" for purposes of this ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 20-302) 
Sec. 20-303. - Establishment of zones by map. 
The location and boundaries of the various zones are as shown and delineated on the Zoning Map of the City of Darien, said map is made a part of this ordinance by reference as though fully set forth herein. 
(Code 1998, § 20-303) 
Sec. 20-304. - Division of zoning map. 
The zoning map may, for convenience, be divided into parts and each such part may, for purposes of more readily identifying areas within such zoning map, be subdivided into units and such parts and units may be separately employed for purposes of amending the zoning map or for any official reference to the zoning map. 
(Code 1998, § 20-304) 
Sec. 20-305. - Changes in boundaries. 
Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance adopting an amended zoning map, or part of said map, or unit of a part of said map, which said amended maps, or parts or units of parts, when so adopted, shall be published in the manner prescribed by law and become a part of this ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 20-305) 
Sec. 20-306. - Uncertainty of boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown upon a zoning map or any part or unit thereof, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  In the case of unsubdivided property, and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundaries, unless the same are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on said zoning map. 
(3)  Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the area comprising such vacated street or alley shall acquire the classification of the property to which it diverts. 
(4)  Areas of dedicated streets or alleys and railroad rights-of-way, other than such as are designated on the zoning map as being classified in one of the zones provided in this ordinance, shall be deemed to be unclassified and, in the case of streets, permitted to be used for purposes lawfully allowed. 
(Code 1998, § 20-306) 
Sec. 20-307. - Classification of annexed lands and unclassified property. 
Any property which, for any reason, is not designated on the zoning map or in this ordinance as being classified in any of the zones established hereby, shall be deemed to be temporarily zoned R-1 until said land is classified after being processed as an amendment to the zone plan pursuant to this ordinance. 
Areas annexed to the city shall be classified in the zone classification under this ordinance most comparable to the zone classification in which said area is classified in the county at the time of annexation, unless and until the city council adopts a different classification in the manner provided for zone changes in this ordinance. Such zone changes and variances and conditional use permits may be initiated and heard prior to the effective date of annexation to be effective upon annexation. 
(Code 1998, § 20-307) 
Sec. 20-308. - Limitation of land use. 
Except as provided in this ordinance, no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purposes except as hereinafter specifically provided and allowed in the same zone in which such building and land is located. 
(Code 1998, § 20-308) 
Sec. 20-309. - Use and dimensional regulations. 
Except as herein provided, no building or land shall be used except for the purposes permitted in the district as described in this chapter. A permit for the construction, alteration, enlargement, moving demolition or use of a building or structure shall not be issued by the building inspector unless it complies with the provisions of this chapter and/or has been granted a variance or special exception by the planning commission. 
(Code 1998, § 20-309) 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 20-401. - General provisions. 
a.  No junkyard or place for the storage of discarded machinery, vehicles, or other scrap materials shall be maintained in any district. 
b.  No owner or occupant of land in any district shall permit a fire or other ruins to be left, but shall remove the same within six months. 
c.  Any persistent uses that may be obnoxious or injurious by reason of the production or emission of odor, dust, smoke, refuse matter, fumes, noise, vibration, or similar conditions, or that are dangerous to the comfort, peace, enjoyment, health or safety of the community are prohibited. 
d.  Accessory buildings shall be allowed in all districts, provided they comply with all setback and height requirements. 
e.  No structure shall exceed 35 feet in height, except church steeples, belfries, cupolas, bell towers, or flagpoles. 
f.  No persons shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises of any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any occupied dwelling except as follows: 
(1)  The parking of one trailer in a private garage building or in a rear yard is permitted providing said trailer is not occupied and the trailer belongs to the owner or lessee of the land it occupies. 
(2)  The temporary use of a trailer by a person engaged in adjoining construction work, or for whom a residence is being built, provided that such use is shown to be a temporary expedient, may be permitted by the city council. The city council shall grant such permission for a period not to exceed three months excepting that they may renew in their discretion such permission at the expiration of said three month period. 
(3)  Any property owner or lessee may accommodate one trailer of a nonpaying guest in his yard for a period not exceeding 30 days in any one year. 
g.  Within any residential district, no wall or fence shall exceed four feet in height within or along a boundary of a front yard. No wall or fence shall exceed six feet in height within or along a boundary of a rear yard. Any wall or fence within or along side yard boundaries must be set back at least eight feet from the front setback requirements and may not exceed four feet in height. 
h.  All non-residential developments shall install and maintain a 20 foot wide vegetated buffer for the purposes of visual screening and noise abatement, between their property and any abutting residential properties. 
i.  All non-residential developments shall install and maintain screened areas for the purposes of service, refuse and/or storage. These areas shall be screened from public view from streets and/or adjoining properties. 
j.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8 [O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8], Chapter 3 91-3 -15.01 a 100 foot buffer and a 150-foot setback is required on all perennial streams in Darien. 
k.  The minimum square footage for any home built with money from any of the following programs shall be no less than 850 square feet and shall be designated eligible as such by the city manager. In addition, the property utilized shall be located in an area designated by the city council as appropriate for low to moderate income housing. 
(1)  Community Development Block Grant. 
(2)  Neighborhood Stabilization Program. 
(3)  Community Home Investment Program. 
(Code 1998, § 20-401; Ord. of 7-27-2010) 
Sec. 20-402. - Use regulations. 
a.  A use is permitted as a matter of right in the district in which it is denoted, subject to all other applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
b.  A use denoted by the letter "C" following a zoning designation is permitted by right only when in compliance with the conditions imposed as specified in the zoning permit, subject to all other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
c.  In zoning districts where home occupations are allowed, all such uses must comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Not more than one home occupation shall be carried on in a dwelling unit; 
(2)  No nonresidents shall be employed therein; 
(3)  The use is carried on strictly by the owner of the principal building, who shall also reside in said building. Should the owner move his/her residence, the home occupation must be discontinued within three months; 
(4)  No more than ten percent of the existing gross inhabitable floor area of the principal building is devoted to such use; 
(5)  There shall be no display of goods or wares visible from the street; 
(6)  The building or premises occupied shall not be rendered objectionable or detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood because of exterior appearance, traffic, emission of odor, smoke, dust, noise, electrical disturbance, or in any other way; 
(7)  Not more than one commercial vehicle in connection with such home occupation shall be stored on the premises; 
(8)  The use must be incidental and subordinate to the residential use of the property; 
(9)  A yearly certificate of occupancy shall be issued through the city clerk's office for the proposed used; and 
(10)  The city building inspector/code enforcement officer shall verify that the home occupation conforms with the preceding standards. 
(Code 1998, § 20-402) 
ARTICLE V. - R-A RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL ZONE (R-A 20,000 SQ. FT.) 

Sec. 20-501. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the R-A Residential Agriculture zone are: 
(1)  To provide for quiet, liveable, low-density single family areas along with agricultural areas for commercially grown products. 
(2)  To provide areas for future development for single-family neighborhoods. 
(3)  To prohibit any use which would substantially interfere with the orderly development of the community. 
(4)  To encourage the discontinuance of nonconforming uses; minor streets other than normal traffic to serve residences on those streets. 
(Code 1998, § 20-501) 
Sec. 20-502. - Permitted uses. 
In an R-A zone, the following uses are permitted as hereinafter specifically provided and allowed, subject to the provisions of article XV: 
(1)  One-family dwellings. 
(2)  Accessory buildings and structures, including private garages to accommodate not more than four cars; provided additional garage or implement shelters may be erected, maintained and used on sites of five acres or more, and provided that such structures shall not occupy any required yard space. 
(3)  Private greenhouses, fruit trees, nut trees, vines and other horticultural stock. 
(4)  Agricultural crops. 
(5)  Stands for the display of agricultural products raised on the premises. 
(6)  The following animals under the following conditions: 
(a)  Animals raised for fur-bearing, feed, or scientific purposes. 
(b)  Horses, and the grazing of bovine animals (excluding dairies) provided that on sites containing two acres or less such domestic animals shall not be permitted. On sites of over three acres such animals will be permitted but not to exceed a number equal to two horses or two bovine animals per acre devoted to feed for same (excluding feed lots). 
(c)  The keeping of all domestic animals provided for in this ordinance shall conform to all other provisions of law governing same and no fowl or animals, or any pen, coop, stable or barn, shall be kept or maintained within 200 feet of any portion of a required yard space located on adjoining property, or within 100 feet of any street or public property. 
(7)  Home occupations; home beauty parlors and professional use. 
(8)  Home day cares. 
(Code 1998, § 20-502) 
Sec. 20-503. - Height. 
No building in the R-A zone shall exceed a height of 35 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-503) 
Sec. 20-504. - Front yard. 
Every lot in an R-A zone shall have a front yard which has a depth not less than 35 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-504) 
Sec. 20-505. - Side yards. 
In the R-A zone every lot shall have side yards as follows: 
(1)  Lots shall have a side yard on each side of the main building which side yard has a width not less than 20 feet. 
(2)  Corner lots shall have the following side yards: 
(a)  On the side lot which adjoins another lot on the side yard shall be the same as that required on any lot. 
(b)  On the side street the width of the required side yard shall be the same as the front yard requirement. 
(Code 1998, § 20-505) 
Sec. 20-506. - Placement of buildings. 
Placement of buildings on any lot shall conform to the following: 
(1)  LOTS. 
(a)  No building shall occupy any portion of a required yard. 
(b)  Any building, any portion of which is used for human habitation, shall observe a distance from any side lot line the equivalent of the required side yard on such lot and from the rear property line a distance of 20 percent of the depth of the lot not to exceed 50 feet. 
(c)  The distance between buildings used for human habitation and between buildings used for human habitation and accessory buildings shall be 20 feet. 
(d)  A non-dwelling accessory building may build to the rear lot line and to the side lines to the rear of the required side yard, provided if the lot rears upon an alley such accessory building shall maintain a distance of not less than ten feet from the rear lot line and may build to within 20 feet of the side lot line. 
(2)  CORNER LOTS. 
(a)  No building shall occupy any portion of a required yard. 
(b)  The distance between buildings used for human habitation and between buildings used for human habitation and accessory buildings shall be a distance of 20 feet. 
(c)  Any building, any portion of which is used for human habitation, shall observe a distance from the rear property line of 20 feet. 
(d)  On corner lots, an accessory building may build to the rear lot line not less than 20 feet from the rear line of such lot. 
(Code 1998, § 20-506) 
Sec. 20-507. - Area. 
The minimum required area of a lot in the R-A zone shall not be less than 20,000 sq. feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-507) 
Sec. 20-508. - Lot area per dwelling. 
The lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than the minimum required lot area. 
(Code 1998, § 20-508) 
Sec. 20-509. - Lot width. 
In the R-A zone, every lot created after the effective date of this ordinance shall maintain a width of not less than 100 feet at the rear line of the required front yard. 
(Code 1998, § 20-509) 
Sec. 20-510. - Permissible lot coverage. 
All buildings including accessory buildings and structures, shall not cover more than 30 percent of the area of the lot. 
(Code 1998, § 20-510) 
Sec. 20-511. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See article XV. 
(Code 1998, § 20-511) 
ARTICLE VI. - R-1 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-1 MIN. 6,000 SQ. FT.) 

Sec. 20-601. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the R-1 Residential Zone is: 
(a)  To provide for quiet, livable, low-density single-family neighborhoods with a minimum of 6,000 square foot lots. 
(b)  To prohibit commercial and industrial use of the land and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with the development or continuation of single-family dwellings in the zone. 
(c)  To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  To provide a residential density of approximately 4 dwelling units per acre. 
(Code 1998, § 20-601) 
Sec. 20-602. - Permitted uses. 
In an R-I zone, the following uses only are permitted, and as hereinafter specifically provided and as allowed by this chapter, subject to the provisions of article XV governing off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  One-family dwellings. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and structures. 
(c)  Private greenhouses, fruit trees, nut trees vines, and other horticultural stock. 
(d)  Agricultural crops excluding commercial grown crops. 
(e)  The renting of rooms to boarders is not to exceed three months. 
(f)  The following animals under the following conditions: 
1.  Horse, provided; 
(a)  No horses shall be maintained on a lot or parcel containing less than two acres. 
(b)  Not more than two horses may be maintained on a lot or parcel containing less than three acres. Lots containing more than five acres in area shall be permitted two horses per acre. 
(c)  No stall or barn shall be kept or maintained within 200 feet of any window or door of any building used for human habitation nor within 300 feet of any portion of a required yard space or adjoining property if such property is devoted to a use other than agriculture. 
(g)  The following signs: 
1.  One unlighted sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area per face pertaining only to the sale, lease, or hire of only the particular building, property or premises upon which displayed. 
2.  Signs identifying persons engaged in construction on a site shall be permitted as long as construction is in progress. 
(h)  Day nurseries where day care is provided for not more than six children and said nursery is duly licensed. 
(i)  Home occupations-home beauty parlors and professional use. 
(Code 1998, § 20-602) 
Sec. 20-603. - Height. 
In the R-I zone no building shall exceed a height of 35 feet, or exceed three stories. 
(Code 1998, § 20-603) 
Sec. 20-604. - Front yard. 
Every lot in the R-I zone shall have a front yard which has a depth not less than 35 feet, if located on a state highway, and 25 feet if located on a local street, except that [for] lots which side upon commercially or industrially zoned property the required front yard need not exceed 25 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-604) 
Sec. 20-605. - Side yards. 
In the R-I zone lots shall have a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than ten feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-605) 
Sec. 20-606. - Placement of buildings. 
Placement of buildings on any lot shall conform to the following: 
(a)  LOTS. 
1.  No building for human habitation shall occupy any portion of a required yard. 
2.  Any building, any portion of which is used for human habitation, shall observe a distance from any side lot line the equivalent of the required side yard on such lot and from the rear property line a distance of 20 percent of the depth of the lot not to exceed 50 feet. 
3.  The distance between buildings used for human habitation and accessory buildings shall [be] ten feet, or as required by the current building code or fire code. 
4.  A non-dwelling accessory building may build to a distance of not less than 2½ feet from the rear lot line and may build within 2½ feet of the side lot line. 
(b)  CORNER LOTS. 
1.  No building for human habitation shall occupy any portion of a required yard. 
2.  The distance between buildings used for human habitation and accessory buildings shall be ten feet, or as required by the current building code or fire code. 
3.  Any building, any portion of which is used for human habitation, shall observe a distance from the rear property line of 25 [feet]. 
4.  On corner lots an accessory building may be located not less than five feet from the side or rear line of such lot. 
(Code 1998, § 20-606) 
Sec. 20-607. - Area. 
The minimum required area of a lot in the R-I zone shall be not less than 6,000 square feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-607) 
Sec. 20-608. - Lot area per dwelling. 
The lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than the minimum required lot area. 
(Code 1998, § 20-608) 
Sec. 20-609. - Lot width. 
Every lot in an R-I zone created after the effective date of this ordinance shall maintain a width not less than 60 feet at the rear line of the required front yard. Leftover parcels may be added to the minimum lot area. Provided, however, that an existing non-conforming lot or lots may be resubdivided again into a lot or lots with less than the required 60-foot width if the resubdivision results in the same or fewer number of lots all of which have at least the same or greater width and have either greater width or larger area as a result of the resubdivision. 
(Code 1998, § 20-609; Ord. of 6-19-2012) 
Sec. 20-610. - Permissible lot coverage. 
All buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall not cover more than 50 percent of the area of the lot. 
(Code 1998, § 20-610) 
Sec. 20-611. - Limitations on permitted uses in R-1 zones. 
No person shall store on a permanent basis, commercial vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the vehicle code of the State of Georgia, which has a capacity greater than three quarters of a ton, in any R-I zone. 
(Code 1998, § 20-611) 
Sec. 20-612. - Off street parking requirements. 
See Sec. 20-1515. 
(Code 1998, § 20-612) 
Sec. 20-613. - On street parking requirements. 
Local streets may contain eight-foot by 22-foot parking spaces parallel to the travel lane for visitor or neighborhood amenity uses. All lots shall provide for off street parking. 
(Code 1998, § 20-613) 
Sec. 20-614. - Single family residential standards. 
All single family residences, whether site built or manufactured housing, must meet the following standards in the R-I district: 
(a)  All structures including the primary structure and accessory structures shall be constructed with a pitched roof having a pitch of three in 12 or greater. 
(b)  The roof shall be covered with asphalt composition shingles, metal roofing, or tile materials. Plastic panels are prohibited. 
(c)  The exterior wall shall be material similar to traditional site-built housing. These materials may include clapboards, simulated clapboards such as conventional vinyl or metal siding, wood shingles, shakes, stucco, brick, brick veneer, concrete block, or similar materials, but shall not include smooth, ribbed or plastic panels. 
(d)  The minimum horizontal dimension of the unit as installed on the site shall be 24 feet. 
(e)  The minimum floor area shall be 1,000 square feet. 
(f)  All principal structures shall be placed on a permanent foundation. For the purposes of this section, a permanent foundation shall mean a concrete slab, concrete footers, foundation wall, piling or post construction which complies with the city building code. 
(g)  In no case shall wheels, any undercarriage or transporter unit be left on any structure. 
(h)  All units must meet wind loading requirements of Federal Emergency Management Administrator and the SBCCI Codes. 
(Code 1998, § 20-614; Ord. of 10-16-2012) 
Sec. 20-615. - Special uses. 
In an R-I zone, the following special uses are permitted, subject to the provisions of article XV governing off-street parking requirements and article XXVII special uses: 
(a)  Offices of any business or service other than medical or dental clinics. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2012(1)) 
ARTICLE VII. - R-MH—ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE, MIXED HOUSING DISTRICT, MANUFACTURED HOUSING PERMITTED 

Sec. 20-701. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the R-MH Residential District is to provide a sound and healthy residential area sufficient to meet the unique needs of inhabitants living in a variety of housing types including manufactured homes, to protect manufactured housing parks from encroachment by incompatible uses, and to enhance property values in the community by providing distinctive areas for manufactured housing. The residential density of this zone is approximately five dwelling units per acre. It is the intent of the city to prohibit any new rezoning amendments to this district throughout the city. 
(Code 1998, § 20-701) 
Sec. 20-702. - Permitted uses. 
In an R-MH district the following uses are permitted. 
(a)  One-family dwellings, including manufactured housing meeting requirements hereinafter set out: 
1.  Modular homes must have a minimum of 1,100 square feet of heated floor space; 
2.  Modular homes must be skirted, wheels and tongue removed. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and structures. 
(c)  Private greenhouses, fruit trees, nut trees, vines and other horticultural stock. 
(d)  Agricultural crops excluding commercial grown crops. 
(e)  The following signs: 
1.  One unlighted sign not exceeding six square feet in area per face pertaining only to the sale, lease or hire of only the participant building, property or premises upon which displayed. 
2.  Signs identifying persons engaged in construction on a site shall be permitted as long as construction is in progress. 
(f)  Day nurseries where day care is provided for not more than six children and said nursery is duly licensed. 
(g)  Manufactured Housing Parks as regulated in article XVIII. 
(Code 1998, § 20-702) 
Sec. 20-703. - Height. 
In the R-MH District no building shall exceed a height of 35 feet, or exceed three stories. 
(Code 1998, § 20-703) 
Sec. 20-704. - Front yard. 
Every lot in the R-MH district shall have a front yard which has a depth not less than 35 feet if located on a state highway, and 25 feet if located on a local street 
(Code 1998, § 20-704) 
Sec. 20-705. - Side yards. 
In the R-MH district every lot shall have side yards as follows: 
Lots shall have a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than ten feet. 
Corner lots shall have the following side yards: 
On the side lot line which adjoins another lot, the side yard shall be the same as that required on any lot. 
On the side street the width of the required side yard shall be 15 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-705) 
Sec. 20-706. - Rear yards. 
In the R-MH district every lot shall have a rear yard depth of at least 15 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-706) 
Sec. 20-707. - Placement of buildings. 
Placement of buildings on any lot shall conform to the following: 
LOTS. 
(1)  No building for human habitation shall occupy any portion of a required yard. 
(2)  A non-dwelling accessory building may build to a distance of not less than 2½ feet from the rear lot line and may build within 2½ feet of the side lot line. 
(Code 1998, § 20-707) 
Sec. 20-708. - Area. 
The minimum required area of a lot in the R-MH District shall be not less than 6,000 square feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-708) 
Sec. 20-709. - Lot area per dwelling. 
The lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than the minimum required lot area. 
(Code 1998, § 20-709) 
Sec. 20-710. - Lot width. 
Every lot in the R-MH District created after the effective date of this ordinance shall maintain a width not less than 50 feet at the rear line of the required front yard. Leftover parcels may be added to the minimum lot area. 
(Code 1998, § 20-710) 
Sec. 20-711. - Permissible lot coverage. 
All buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall not cover more than 40 percent of the area of the lot. 
(Code 1998, § 20-711) 
Sec. 20-712. - Limitations on permitted uses in R-MH districts. 
No persons shall store on a permanent basis any commercial vehicle, as that phrase [is] defined in the vehicle code of the State of Georgia, which has a capacity greater than three quarters of a ton, in any R-MH District. 
(Code 1998, § 20-712) 
Sec. 20-713. - Off street parking requirements. 
See Sec. 20-1509. 
(Code 1998, § 20-713) 
Sec. 20-714. - On street parking requirements. 
Local streets may contain eight-foot by 22-foot parking spaces parallel to the travel lane for visitor or neighborhood amenity uses. All lots shall provide for off street parking. 
(Code 1998, § 20-714) 
Sec. 20-715. - Additional requirements applying to manufactured housing parks in R-MH district. 
Every manufactured house situated in an R-MH district must comply with the following additional requirements: 
(a)  A plan of operation for the park will be submitted to the zoning administrator. Said plan of operation shall include a plat of all proposed manufactured housing sites, including roads, service areas, recreation facilities, utility easements, covenants, and a copy of the rules intended be enforced by the operator upon the park residents. 
(b)  Minimum area for a manufactured housing park is five acres. 
(c)  All manufactured housing parks shall provide the following: 
1.  Two paved parking spaces per lot with a surface driveway of not less than 20 feet in width, preferably composed of shells; 
2.  All manufactured houses shall have all weather walkways of not less than three feet width from the driveway to the front door of the house; 
3.  A laundromat, approved and maintained according to Macintosh County health department standards; and 
4.  Active recreational areas comprising at least 20% of the total development to include amenities such as: swimming pools; basketball courts; tennis courts-playgrounds. 
(d)  All streets within the park shall be constructed and maintained to city standards. 
(e)  Each lot shall have clearly marked street addresses according to the current system of numbering homes in the city. 
(f)  Each home shall be placed upon a concrete foundation pad sufficient in size to support the mobile home. 
(g)  Within 30 days of the placement of a mobile home upon a site the following items shall be accomplished: 
1.  The undercarriage shall be concealed from view utilizing nonflammable shrouding materials; 
2.  Hitches shall be detached from the home and removed from premises or concealed under the home; 
3.  Electricity and plumbing shall be hooked up to licensed contractor, and 
4.  Any window air-conditioning units must be supported properly. 
(h)  All manufactured housing parks shall install and maintain a 50-foot-wide vegetated buffer for the purposes of visual screening and noise abatement, between their property and all abutting properties; and 
(i)  All manufactured housing parks road systems shall be inspected by the fire marshal to insure the adequacy of the system for emergency vehicle access. 
(j)  All manufactured housing parks shall install and maintain screened areas for the purpose of service, refuse and/or storage. These areas shall be screened from public view from streets and/or adjoining properties. 
(k)  Such manufactured house must have a minimum of 480 square feet of fully enclosed floor space. 
(l)  Before occupancy, such manufactured house must be connected to [the] city water system and must be provided with and connected to septic tank and grease trap meeting the requirements of all city, county, and state health regulations. 
(m)  No individual power plant for supplying electricity for household uses shall be operated on the lot. 
(Code 1998, § 20-715) 
ARTICLE VIII. - HISTORIC DARIEN DISTRICT (HDD) 

Sec. 20-801. - Intent. 
The City of Darien recognizes that its historic district was laid out in a grid pattern that has served its citizens well for over 200 years. The city further recognizes the importance of preserving its heritage while accommodating future growth within its historic district. It is the intent of this ordinance to improve the quality of life for Darien's citizens by preserving the important characteristics of this historic district while welcoming new growth and development that is sensitive to the district's historic fabric. Essential characteristics of the town center of Darien which either include or are adjacent to this district include: 
a)  Residences, stores, and workplaces generally located in close proximity to each other, 
b)  A hierarchy of streets for a balanced mix of both pedestrians and automobiles, 
c)  Greens and parks dedicated to collective social activity, recreation and visual enjoyment, 
d)  Modestly sized buildings fronting on, and aligned with streets in a disciplined manner, generally uninterrupted by parking lots, 
e)  Civic buildings for assembly, and other civic purposes, sited to act as visual landmarks and symbols of identity within the community, and 
f)  A recognizable, functionally diverse, visually unified commercial center, frequently aligned with traditionally important crossroads. 
Therefore, herein is written a Historic Darien District Ordinance (HDDO) to overlay the current land use regulations within the Historic District of Darien. It is additional intended that this HDD and herein the HDDO shall: 
a)  Encourage the preservation of both our built historic heritage and our natural resources through recognizing that land and water are nonrenewable resources, and are limited; 
b)  Encourage growth to occur in areas which are best suited for increased density in accordance with our Comprehensive Plan; 
c)  Promote pedestrian travel and street life by placing residences, workplaces and public places in close proximity; 
d)  Reduce traffic congestion and dependence on the automobile by creating ways which equitably and efficiently serve pedestrians, cyclists and drivers; 
e)  Create a built environment that fosters a sense of community while at the same time providing greater independence for those without ready transportation; 
f)  Promote the physical and social integration of citizens diverse in age, lifestyle and economic status; 
g)  Promote a pattern of development which permits the efficient delivery of municipal services. 
It is further intended that this chapter [article] of the Darien Zoning Ordinance (the HDDO) will allow for and encourage the expansion of opportunities for the development of land in the Historic District consistent with the goals and objective of the adopted Comprehensive Plan and other requirements of law. 
(Code 1998, § 20-801) 
Sec. 20-802. - Boundaries. 
To encourage this style of development, the city is creating an overlay zoning classification over the Historic Darien District. This district shall be bounded on the north by center line of Trumbull, Madison and Adams Streets and the center line of Fort King George Drive from the east side of the Darien River bridge to center line of North Way; bounded on the east by the center line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Blvd., Rittenhouse Street, including the east lot line between lots with eight and nine in block 21 and the east lot line between lots one and two in block three; bounded on the south by the Darien city waterfront from lot five to west side of Boone Dock Road and bounded on the west by the center line of Market Street, Franklin Street, North Way and the east side of the Darien River Bridge. These properties are recognized as the historic center of the City of Darien as well as performing an important role in the future of the center of Darien. 
(Code 1998, § 20-802) 
Sec. 20-803. - Dedication. 
a.  The HDDO shall only apply to the lands located in the Historic Darien District, as shown on the City of Darien Zoning Map, and zoned R-1 and on central water and sewer. 
b.  Dedication. Because of the special objectives of the HDDO and the special considerations allowed under this chapter of the Darien zoning ordinance, land may not be removed from the HDD except in accordance with article XX of the City of Darien Zoning Ordinance. 
c.  Addition of lands. Land areas of any size contiguous to the HDD may be added upon application to the Darien zoning administrator, with design review from the Darien Historic Preservation Commission, and with final approval dependent upon the Darien city council. An applicant requesting to add lands shall be required to show how the requirements of the HDDO shall be met if the application for addition is approved. 
d.  Rededication. Lands decided as open space area or civic use area shall not be re-dedicated nor incorporated as any other use except by application to the Darien zoning administrator, with design review by the Darien Historic Preservation Commission. 
(Code 1998, § 20-803) 
Sec. 20-804. - Definitions. 
When used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section. 
Enfront. Primary buildings are to face each other across a street. 
Public. The general public at large, including governmental agencies. 
Satellite dish antennas. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include but not limited to what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROS, and satellite microwave antennas. 
Scrap yard. An area of land or a building, within which waste or scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored or otherwise handled. A Scrap Yard includes without limitation, an auto wrecking yard and "Junkyard" as defined by Law. 
Streetlight. A pole or pedestal mounted lumina, ten to 12 feet in height, with a metal halide or other full spectrum bulb. 
HDDO and HDD. Herein the HDDO refers to the Historic Darien District Ordinance; the HDD refers to the Historic Darien District as a total unit. 
Vista termination. A lot, building or monument site generally located at an intersection, on an end, of streets or active pedestrian ways, which is prominently visible from one or more streets, or ways, approaching said site. 
(Code 1998, § 20-804) 
Sec. 20-805. - Design requirements and general provisions. 
In interpreting the HDDO, a specific requirement shall control over a general requirement. 
1)  Land Use Mix. 
a.  While the HDDO is expected to address the unique features of each lot, it is recognized that for the concept of the HDD to properly function, a general range of residential structures is allowed. 
b.  Location of new structures - Similar residential properties shall generally either abut or afront each other. Dissimilar residential properties shall generally abut along rear property lines and at street intersections. 
2)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the HDD: 
a.  Residential: 
(1)  See section 20-602. 
b.  Commercial - Commercial uses shall be limited to tourist-oriented uses such as craft shops, eating establishments, hospitality related businesses such as bed and breakfeasts, and antique shops. Any business not tourist related is prohibited for example: no service stations, service station/mini-marts, vehicle light service or major service establishments, fast food restaurants or quick-service food stores shall be permitted. 
3)  Public/semi-public zoned lands may change to other uses only upon application and approval of the Darien mayor and council, with design review by the Darien Historic Preservation Commission. 
4)  Open spaces may be used solely for greens, parks, and natural areas. No enclosed structures shall be built except through application and approval from the Darien mayor and council, with design review by the Darien Historic Preservation Commission. Other uses may be permitted which, upon application to the Darien Historic Preservation Commission, are deemed to be in accordance with the intent of the HDD. 
5)  Prohibited uses - The following uses are prohibited in the HDD: 
a.  Industrial uses; 
b.  Prisons, detention centers or half-way houses; 
c.  Scrap yards; 
d.  Mobile homes; 
e.  Outdoor storage; and 
f.  Commercial kennels. 
(Code 1998, § 20-805; Ord. of 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 20-806. - Lot requirements. 
1)  Lots shall have the following widths at the building site in accordance with the use of the lot: Lot Minimum: R-1-HDD, 60 feet. 
2)  Setbacks. Where existing buildings express a traditionally modest (pre-zoning) front setback, creating a characteristically close relationship with the street, it is highly desirable to continue this pattern in order to retain the area's character. Therefore, the maximum setback of new construction should harmonize with the average setbacks of existing adjacent buildings. All setbacks shall be undisturbed vegetated spaces, except where sidewalks and public easements are required. 
Lots shall have the following front setback requirements as measured from the right-of-way in accordance with the use of the lot: Lot Minimum: R-1-HDD, 25 feet.* 
*Any application for rezoning of properties within the HDD shall have their front setbacks determined by the Darien Historic Preservation Commission in accordance with the harmony of adjacent properties, subject to approval from the Darien mayor and council. If, for example, the surrounding buildings have a front setback of ten feet, then a new development shall have a front setback of ten feet, also. 
3)  Lots shall have the following side-yard setback requirements in accordance with the use of the lot: Lot Minimum: R-1-HDD, ten feet. 
4)  Lots shall have the following rear-yard setback requirements in accordance with the use of the lot: Lot Minimum: R-1-HDD, ten feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-806) 
Sec. 20-807. - Building requirements. 
Within the HDD, lot sizes which are kept consistent with the surrounding preexisting lot dimensions help to provide for harmony in scale, and help to retain the general development pattern of the community. Also, restrictions placed upon the bulk, height, and total floor space allowed within the Historic Darien District can do much to protect current historic building scale. 
1)  Scale—a building's scale is the proportion of the structure relative to neighboring buildings, and to the general surroundings, including pedestrians. Scale is the single most important element of design that contributes to the overall visual impact of a building. Maintaining the proper scale requires attention to three major items: the number of stories, the floor elevation, piers and the cornice height. 
Number of stories - The number of stories should not exceed the height of the tallest adjacent structure. Within this district no structure is taller than two stories (excluding belfries). New structures should be no taller than two stories (35') or only one story, if the adjacent structures are only one story. 
b.  Floor elevation. When new construction is proposed for infill in the HDD, the first floor elevation and subsequent interior floor elevations should average that of the adjacent structure where possible. 
c.  Piers. Many of the structures within this district have been constructed on piers. Any alterations and/or additions to such structures should maintain like materials with new piers. Any underpinnings (screening materials) should be set in from the piers by at least three inches and should be of a dark color so as to not draw attention to the screening. 
d.  Cornice line. The cornice line establishes the top of the structure visually, and is therefore important to the overall scale. In order to assure the proper scale of a structure in relation to those surrounding it, the height of the cornice line on the new structure should be consistent with either adjacent structure. 
2)  Facades. It is particularly important that new construction meet minimum design criteria in order that it may blend with the surroundings. New construction throughout the HDD should be compatible with surrounding properties, in terms of formal characteristics such as height, massing, roof shapes and window proportions. 
3)  Roofs. Should be of consistent style with adjacent dwellings with the HDD. Most roofs within the district appear to be metal or shingle. Intrusive modern conveniences such as solar panels, skylights, ventilation wind turbines, satellite dishes and antennas should be hidden away from public view. 
a.  Pitch of Roof. The pitch of the roof of a structure sets the style for the appearance of that structure. Any renovations, additions, or new construction within the Historic District should remain sensitive to the original roof pitches of either the existing structure or to surrounding structures, if new construction. 
4)  Height. No structure shall exceed 35 feet. Exceptions to this shall include church steeples, belfries, cupolas, bell towers, or flagpoles. 
5)  Rhythm. There is a symmetry or balance to both the placement of structures along a street, and in the placement of windows and other openings on the face of the structures. This balance is often referred to as rhythm. The four most common types of rhythm are: 
a.  Spacing of building on the street - When moving down a street, there is a definite spacing pattern between the size of the structures and the distance between each building; 
b.  Spacing of entrances or porches - When viewed from the sidewalk, there is a definite pattern to the entrances or porches of each building; and 
c.  Solid to void relationship - There is also a definite pattern or balance between the areas of solid wall and windows and doors in most historic buildings there is a very well defined rhythm that is carefully maintained. 
d.  Location of mailboxes - Currently there appear to be no mailboxes on the streets within this district. This is a very important, albeit, subtle nuance to the district. Therefore, new construction or renovations within the district should not allow mailboxes on the street, unless the U.S. Postmaster rules otherwise. 
All new construction, as well as renovations should take these characteristics into account and maintain the sense of rhythm that is prevalent in that locale. All applications should be reviewed by the Darien Historic Preservation Commission to assume that these components have been satisfied. 
6)  Construction Materials. The majority of the buildings within the Darien HDD are brick, wood siding or tabby. Roofs are of asphalt shingle or tin. New or rehabilitated structures within the HDD should continue this pattern. Textures should be generally subtle and compatible with the adjacent buildings. Metal or plastic paneling should be avoided. 
7)  Fenestration. Fenestration is the arrangement of windows and doors on a building. Most of the historic buildings within the HDD have wooden double-hung windows. Doors tend to be centered in the middle of the buildings and are constructed of wood. There are occasionally sidelights or a transom glass in the door frame. 
a.  Within the HDD there is a variety of window forms, but they are generally vertical rather than horizontal in emphasis. Windows are typically double-hung. New construction or rehabilitation should adhere to the historic nature of these windows. New construction should include wood materials (or wood simulation) for windows. Renovations should maintain the existing materials. 
b.  Within the HDD there is a variety of doors, as well. Some are surrounded by transom lights. New construction or rehabilitation should adhere to the historic nature of these doors. New construction should include wood materials (or wood simulation) for doors. Renovations should maintain the existing materials. 
8)  Location of Main Entrances. The primary building entrances for residences shall generally open to the front sidewalk. 
9)  Building Codes. All buildings and structures within the HDD shall comply with all applicable city, county, state, and federal buildings and safety codes as may be adopted by the city or as may otherwise be in effect in the city. 
10)  Corner Lots. For the purpose of setbacks on a corner lot, any lot line along a street other than an alley shall be a front lot line, any lot line along an alley shall be a rear lot line, any lot line between two lots and intersecting a lot line along a street other than an alley shall be a side lot line, and any lot line intersecting two other lot lines which are not along a street other than an alley shall be a rear lot line. 
(Code 1998, § 20-807) 
Sec. 20-808. - HDD compliance. 
All proposals for the HDD shall comply with all applicable provisions of this ordinance, and other pertinent ordinances, regulations and policies of the city; provided, however, that in the event of conflict between such ordinances, regulations or policies with the HDD standards shall control. 
(Code 1998, § 20-808) 
Sec. 20-809. - Non-conformances. 
1)  Nonconforming lots. Any lot, being a lot of record at the time of the passage of this ordinance, which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the HDD in which it is located may, if vacant, be used for any of the uses as allowed within the zoning classification of that area of the HDD or a less intense use, as described in article XVII of this ordinance, or, if occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged, or extended, provided that in either case: 
a.  Minimum requirements of the district setbacks, as well as all other requirements as set forth in the HDDO shall be complied with. 
b.  The requirements of substandard lots of record are met. 
2)  Nonconforming open uses of land. All nonconformances of open uses of land shall be governed by the provisions in article XVII. 
3)  Illegal nonconforming uses. All nonconformances of illegal uses shall be governed by the provisions in article XVII. 
(Code 1998, § 20-809) 
Sec. 20-810. - Streets. 
1)  Streets within this district are very simple in that there are no curbs or strong delineation between the roadway and land on each side of the road. Some areas have sidewalks while others do not. New streets shall be designed to ensure the safety of motorists and pedestrians and shall generally: 
a.  Minimize the alteration of natural site features by not allowing any curbing of streets; 
b.  New streets shall have tree lawn strips between the road and sidewalks; 
c.  Improve the view of and the view from buildings and other prominent vistas and vista terminations; and 
d.  Promote pedestrian design so that it is generally more convenient and pleasant for most of the community to walk short distances than to drive. 
2)  Sidewalk sizes and requirements. Sidewalks at least three feet in width shall be provided within the HDD. Sidewalk casements of at least three feet in width shall be set aside for all new development. Sidewalks shall generally be parallel with the streets they adjoin. The sidewalk's use and maintenance shall be ensured by permanent easement. 
3)  Streetlights: 
a.  Shall be provided at each street intersection. Light level at the lot line may not exceed 0.2 footcandles, measure at ground level. To achieve this luminaries shall be shielded to prevent light shining beyond the lot lines onto neighboring properties or public right-of-ways. A street light shall be mounted on a standard not to exceed 12 feet in height, and be equipped with an incandescent clear bulb. All lighting (except for security purposes) should be turned off between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. Exceptions may be granted through the Darien mayor and council, upon design review by the Darien Historic Preservation Commission. 
b.  Lights attached to buildings should be in keeping with the period of the individual building. Lights should be attached to the building via wall brackets. These fixtures should be made of brass, copper or painted steel with clear lenses. Fluorescent lighting shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1998, § 20-810) 
Sec. 20-811. - Landscaping. 
The following number of street trees shall be planted within the HDD: one tree for every 50 feet of street frontage for new construction only. The location and layout of the foregoing number of street trees shall be decided upon by the City of Darien Historic Preservation Commission. Street trees shall be deciduous and not less than three-inch caliper (trunk diameter at four feet from natural ground). Each tree shall be surrounded by no less than 16 square feet of permeable, unpaved area. 
No tree over 12 inches in diameter at four feet from natural ground may be removed to install a drive, walk or street unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Historic Preservation Commission that there is no practical alternative. Any tree removed must be replaced by the property owner within one year with a similar tree. The placement of the new tree shall be agreed upon between the property owner and the Historic Preservation Commission, but does not have to be on the property owner's property (i.e., city parks, etc.). 
(Code 1998, § 20-811) 
Sec. 20-812. - Parking requirements. 
1)  The following minimum number of parking spaces shall be required: see Sec. 20-1509. 
2)  On-street parking is generally permitted along all streets. 
3)  Alleys—No parking is permitted in alleys unless the alley is constructed to additional width and approved by the Darien mayor and council for such use, upon design review by the Darien Historic Preservation Commission. 
(Code 1998, § 20-812) 
Sec. 20-813. - Utility requirements. 
1)  Utilities and location. All utilities shall be located above ground in keeping with the existing pattern. All utility outlets, service entrances, transformers and the like shall generally be clustered in a neat and orderly fashion and shall be screened from view where permitted by building and electrical codes. 
2)  Local, state, and federal standards. Water and sewerage facilities shall be designed and installed in accordance with applicable city, county, state and federal standards. 
3)  Cellular transmission towers. No new tower may be built if there is space available on an existing tower in the same service area. The tower must be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the historic character of the HDD and must be buffered with vegetation and secured by a solid wood fence or brick wall. All obsolete or unused facilities must be removed within six months of cessation of operations. 
4)  Satellite dish antennas. May be no larger in size than eight feet in diameter and 15 feet in height, except through application to the Darien mayor and council. All dishes must be certified for safety by a professionally licensed engineer. This certificate must be filed with the city clerk. Dishes must be either a dark wire-mesh antenna or painted to blend in with the surrounding environment in which they will be placed. No dishes may be allowed within the front or side yards, except through proven hardship and application to the Darien mayor and council. 
(code 1998, § 20-813) 
Sec. 20-814. - Review and approval procedures. 
The following procedures shall be followed for all zoning and development, construction, and redevelopment requests within the HDD: 
1)  Pre-application conference. Prior to filing a formal application, the applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator in order to review the general character of the proposed development, i.e., its scope, nature and location. At this time, the applicant shall be fully advised of the approval procedures contained herein and the various information, studies, etc., which the applicant may need in order to continue with the said procedure. 
2)  Application submittal. An applicant shall submit a petition to the Darien mayor and council through the zoning administrator who shall deliver a copy of the petition to the Darien Historic Preservation Commission for their review and recommendations of the application. This petition shall contain a development plan and a written summary of intent, and shall show the relation between the proposed development and the surrounding area, both proposed and existing. The Darien Historic Preservation Commission followed by the Darien mayor and council shall make their determinations on the basis of the information contained in the development plan, any other information they so request and the purposes and standards of the application, as contained herein. 
3)  Development plan. The following information shall be submitted as the development plan: 
a.  A general location map; 
b.  A current topographical map clearly showing existing topographic conditions, including contour intervals of no more than two feet based on field survey or photogrammetric methods; 
c.  A map showing the existing flood plains and flood soil as indicated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
d.  Existing and proposed land uses on the development site and in surrounding areas for a distance of 500 feet, including the approximate location of all buildings, structures, lots, and streets; 
e.  The approximate location of existing and proposed utilities, including a preliminary utility and drainage plan; 
f.  The present zoning pattern in the area; 
g.  A legal description of the subject property; 
h.  Detailed drawings of buildings which indicate the proposed architectural style and appearance; 
i.  A landscaping plan; and 
j.  A lighting plan. 
4)  Approval. 
a.  An application for approval of a development shall be considered administratively as a petition for rezoning and will be subject to the procedure established in this HDDO. 
b.  After review and public hearing, the city council may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the proposed development after receiving the recommendations of the Darien Historic Preservation Commission and the zoning administrator. 
c.  If the proposed zoning and development application is approved as submitted, the zoning administrator shall cause the official zoning map to be changed to indicate the new development. If the plan is approved with modifications, the applicant shall file written notice of consent to the modification and a properly reviewed development plan with the zoning administrator prior to changing the map. The development plan and all other accompanying information shall be properly identified and permanently filed with the zoning administrator. 
5)  Building and occupancy permits. The zoning administrator shall approve the issuance of building permits for buildings and structures if they are in conformity with the approved development plan, the development schedule, and with all other applicable regulations. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any completed building or structure if it conforms to the requirements of the approved development plan and all other applicable regulations. 
6)  Revision of development plan. any change in the approved development plan, which affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes, must be reviewed and approved by the city council upon the recommendation of the Darien Historic Preservation Commission and the Darien mayor and council. A request for a revision of the development plan shall be supported by a written statement as to why the revisions are necessary or desirable. 
7)  Appeals. Any appeals to changes within the Historic District which affect the intent and/or character of a structure, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes, must be reviewed and approved by the Darien Historic Preservation Commission before proceeding for decision by the Darien mayor and council. A request for an appeal shall be supported by a written statement. 
(Code 1998, § 20-814) 
ARTICLE IX. - R-2 ONE[-] AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-2 ZONE) 

Sec. 20-901. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the R-2 Medium-Density Residential Zone are: 
1.  To provide for quiet, livable, single, and two-family dwellings. 
2.  To encourage the use of land for one and two-family [dwellings]. 
3.  To prohibit any use which would substantially interfere with the development or the continuation of two-family and multi-family dwellings. 
4.  To encourage the discontinuance of nonconforming uses. 
5.  To prohibit any new rezoning applications for properties within 600 feet of any marshland or river frontage, as this zone is not appropriate for these areas. 
6.  To provide a maximum residential density of approximately eight dwelling units per acre. 
(Code 1998, § 20-901) 
Sec. 20-902. - Permitted uses. 
In the R-2 multi-family zone the following uses only are permitted and as hereinafter specifically provided and allowed by this chapter [article]: 
1.  Any use permitted in the R-I single-family zone, except horses. 
2.  Two-family dwelling—only one two-family dwelling (duplex or townhouse) per lot area is required by section 20-906. 
(Code 1998, § 20-902) 
Sec. 20-903. - Height. 
No building in the R-2 multi-family zone shall exceed a height of 35 feet or exceed three stories. 
(Code 1998, § 20-903) 
Sec. 20-904. - Front yards. 
Every lot in the R-2 multi-family zone shall have a front yard which has a depth of not less than 25 feet, except that on key lots which side upon commercially or industrially zoned property, the depth of the required front yard need not exceed 20 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-904) 
Sec. 20-905. - Side yards. 
In the R-2 zone every lot shall have side yards as follows: 
1.  Lots shall have a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than ten feet. 
2.  Corner lots shall have the following side yards. 
3.  On the side lot line which adjoins another lot, the side yard shall be the same as that required on any lot. 
4.  On the side street side the width of the required side yard shall be 15 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-905) 
Sec. 20-906. - Placement of buildings. 
Placement of buildings on any lot shall conform to the following: 
(a)  LOTS. 
(1)  No building for human habitation shall occupy any portion of a required yard. 
(2)  Any building, any portion of which is used for human habitation, shall observe a distance from any side lot line the equivalent of the required side yard on such lot line and from the rear property line a distance 20 percent of the depth of the lot not to exceed 30 feet. 
(3)  The distance between buildings used for human habitation and between buildings used for human habitation and accessory buildings shall be ten feet, or as required by the current building code and fire code. 
(4)  A non-dwelling accessory building may be built to the rear lot line and to the side lines to the rear of the required side yard, provided if the lot rears upon an alley such accessory building shall maintain a distance of not less than 2½ feet from the rear lot line and may build to only one side lot line. 
(b)  CORNER LOTS. 
(1)  No building shall occupy any portion of a required yard. 
(2)  The distance between buildings used for human habitation and buildings shall be 20 feet. 
(3)  Any building, any portion of which is used for human habitation, shall observe a distance from the rear property line of ten feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-906) 
Sec. 20-907. - Area regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in R-2, Multi-Family Residential Districts shall conform to the following requirements: 
Minimum lot area: 
Two-family dwellings: 9,000 square feet. 
Minimum dwelling unit size: 
Two-family dwellings: 1100 square feet per unit. 
(Code 1998, § 20-907) 
Sec. 20-908. - Lot width. 
Every lot created after the effective date of this ordinance shall maintain a width not less than 75 feet at the rear line of the required front yard. Lots having 12,000 square feet or more, the minimum width of a lot shall be not less than 100 feet at the rear line of the required front yard. 
(Code 1998, § 20-908) 
Sec. 20-909. - Permissible lot coverage. 
All buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall not cover more than 50 percent of the area of a lot. 
(Code 1998, § 20-909) 
Sec. 20-910. - Off street parking requirements. 
See Sec. 20-1509. 
(Code 1998, § 20-910) 
Sec. 20-911. - On street parking requirements. 
Local streets may contain eight-foot by 22-foot parking spaces parallel to the travel lane for visitor or neighborhood amenity uses. All lots shall provide for off street parking. 
(Code 1998, § 20-911) 
ARTICLE X. - C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-1 ZONE) 

Sec. 20-1001. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the C-1, Neighborhood Commercial Zone are to permit the establishment of needed commercial developments in areas not presently zoned for such uses and to minimize any detrimental effects of these developments on existing land uses. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1001) 
Sec. 20-1002. - Permitted uses. 
In a C-I zone, only the following uses are permitted as are hereinafter specifically provided and allowed, subject to the provisions of chapter XII [XV] governing off-street parking requirements: 
Barber shops or beauty parlor. 
Curb market. 
Doctors, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors and other practicing the healing arts for human beings, and related uses as oculists, pharmacies (prescription only), biochemical laboratories and X-ray laboratories. 
Florist shops. 
Funeral parlors. 
Laundromats. 
Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges, excepting those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business. 
Real estate business. 
Signs. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1002) 
Sec. 20-1003. - Limitations on permitted uses in C-1 zone. 
Every use permitted shall be subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  All uses shall be conducted wholly within a building except such uses as electrical transformer substations and nurseries for sale of plants and flowers and similar enterprises customarily conducted in the open. 
2.  Permitted signs shall be limited to identification of occupants, type of use or commodity sold or serviced on the premises, or the lease, sale or rental of the premises. 
3.  Storage shall be limited to accessory storage of commodities sold on the premises. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1003) 
Sec. 20-1004. - Height. 
No commercial structures shall exceed a height of 35 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1004) 
Sec. 20-1005. - Front yard. 
A 20-foot yard shall be provided. A 40-foot setback is to be provided if parking is placed in front of structures. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1005) 
Sec. 20-1006. - Side yards. 
Unless otherwise required by a precise plan, no side yard need be provided; if a side yard is provided, it shall be a minimum of five feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1006) 
Sec. 20-1007. - Placement of buildings. 
On any lot, the rear lot line of which abuts property in any "W" zone and no alley intervenes, no building shall be erected closer than 30 feet to the rear lot line; provided further if such a lot abuts upon an alley, no building shall be erected closer than 20 feet to the rear lot line of such lot. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1007) 
Sec. 20-1008. - Off street parking requirements. 
See Sec. 20-1509. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1008) 
ARTICLE XI. - C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-2 ZONE) 

Sec. 20-1101. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the C-2 General Commercial Zone are: 
1.  To encourage the use of the land for city commercial and service uses. 
2.  To provide for the orderly expansion of such uses. 
3.  To encourage the discontinuance of nonconforming uses, 
4.  To encourage the development of the zone with such uses and in such a manner as to minimize traffic and parking congestion. 
5.  To allow medium to high density residential uses (including loft apartments and live-work units) that are compatible with nonresidential uses. For the purposes of this section, loft apartments are defined as residential units within large, formerly nonresidential buildings converted or partially converted to residential purpose. A live-work unit is a dwelling unit, part of which may be used as a business establishment. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1101) 
Sec. 20-1102. - Permitted uses. 
In a C-2 zone the following uses are permitted as hereinafter specifically provided and allowed by this chapter [article]. 
Any use permitted in the C-1 zone. 
Bars and liquor package stores. 
Newspaper, printers. 
Outdoor advertising signs pertaining to things other than identification of the premises or business and products maintained therein. 
Photo engraving and finishing. 
Upholstering shops. 
Veterinarians, small animal hospitals and kennels. 
Retail or service businesses catering directly to the consumer. 
Vehicle repair, sales and service, truck and heavy equipment repairing, overhaul and rental. 
Car laundry, using assembly line type of process or other specialized progressing service. 
Frozen food lockers, and ice plants. 
Plumbing shops, supply yards. 
Other commercial business or enterprises such as dry good stores, hardware and other uses normally found in a central business district. 
Multi-family dwellings (such as loft apartments and live-work units), at a maximum density of ten dwelling units per gross acre. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1102) 
Sec. 20-1103. - Limitations on permitted uses. 
Every use permitted in a C-2 zone shall be subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  All uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building except such uses as drive-in restaurants, gasoline stations, electrical transformer substations and horticultural nurseries, and similar enterprises customarily conducted in the open. 
2.  Products made incident to a permitted use and manufactured or processed on the premises shall be sold only at retail on the premises, and not more than five persons may be employed in such manufacturing, processing and treatment of products. 
3.  Storage shall be limited to accessory storage of commodities sold at retail on the premises. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1103) 
Sec. 20-1104. - Height. 
No building in the C-2 zone shall exceed a height of 35 feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1104) 
Sec. 20-1105. - Front yard. 
No front yard shall be provided except as may be required by precise plan. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1105) 
Sec. 20-1106. - Side yards. 
Same as "Front Yard" requirements. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1106) 
Sec. 20-1107. - Placement of buildings. 
On any lot, the rear lot line of which abuts property in any "R" zone and no alley intervenes no building shall be erected closer than ten feet to the rear lot line of such lot. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1107) 
Sec. 20-1108. - Off street parking requirements. 
See Sec. 20-1509. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1108) 
ARTICLE XII. - MT-1 - GENERAL MARITIME ZONE 

Sec. 20-1201. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this district is to reserve those waterfront areas which have significant value for commercial fishing activities. Those uses which may conflict with these uses are excluded, while those uses which support or do not pose a threat to the long-term vitality of the commercial fishing industry are permitted. The scale of these uses is limited to prevent an intensity of use which will detract from the traditional scale and scenic quality of the district. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1201) 
Sec. 20-1202. - Permitted uses. 
In the MT-1 zone the following uses are permitted: 
Boat Repair and building; 
Chandlers; 
Bait and tackle, marine supplies and accessories stores; and 
Commercial fishing activities. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1202) 
Sec. 20-1203. - Special performance standards. 
No building shall be more than two stories or 35 feet in height except for those structures used for boat building and repair. 
Buildings within 75 feet of mean high water must be at least 50 feet from other buildings. 
Buildings taller than 25 feet shall be positioned so as to minimize visual impact. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1203) 
ARTICLE XIII. - OPEN SPACE PARK ZONE (OP) 

Sec. 20-1301. - City plan adopted. 
The City of Darien is unique in that there exists presently a map or plan of the city styled MAP OF THE CITY OF DARIEN, GEORGIA, FROM MAPS BY A. C. WYLLY, CITY SURVEYOR, FEBRUARY 1918, SCALE 1 INCH: 200 FEET, COMPILED BY J.F CHARLTON, CIVIL ENGINEER, which map was adopted as official map of the City of Darien by the Board of the mayor and aldermen in lawful meeting held August 2, 1941, copy of which in the form of a blueprint is on file in the office of the city clerk, City Hall, Darien, Georgia; and 
The map above referred to constitutes a well-designed plan for development of the land area of the City of Darien (encompassed therein) providing street and alley access to those areas of the city shown thereon, and providing reasonable open spaces for light and air in the developed areas and in areas which may be developed in the future, and providing spaces for parks and recreational areas which will be valuable assets in the overall future development of the city; and 
(Code 1998, § 20-1301) 
Sec. 20-1302. - Acceptance of public property. 
The City of Darien now asserts that it accepts as public property of the City of Darien all of those areas of land shown on the map of the City of Darien, Georgia, from maps by A. C. Wylly, City Surveyor, February 1918, scale 1 inch 200 feet, complied by J.F Charlton, Civil Engineer, which map was adopted as official map of the City of Darien by the Board of the Mayor and Alderman in lawful meeting held August 2, 1941, copy of which in the form of a blueprint is on file in the office of the city clerk, City Hall, Darien, Georgia, as streets, alleys, parks, and muster grounds, where express or implied dedication can be proved. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1302) 
Sec. 20-1303. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the OP zone is: 
1.  To provide areas of open space within the City of Darien to provide for light, air and vistas of marsh and river such as will enhance the quality of life in the areas where found. 
2.  To provide and preserve means of access from open, publicly maintained thoroughfares and streets to areas now undeveloped or marginally developed which are likely to be developed in the future. 
3.  To provide, as development occurs, parks and recreational areas to serve the needs to present and future residents and businesses of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1303) 
Sec. 20-1304. - Permitted uses. 
In an OP zone only the following uses are permitted except as provided for in article XX of this chapter: 
1.  Driveway, roadways, walkways. 
2.  Public recreational facilities such as parks, park benches, playgrounds, flower gardens. 
3.  The owners of property which lie immediately adjacent to any OP zone shall be allowed to carry out in that portion of an OP zone adjacent to their own property certain uses for which a permit has first been obtained from the mayor and council of the City of Darien, issued in accordance with the rules and guidelines hereinafter set out: 
Any owner of land desiring to make use of land in an OP zone adjacent to his platted lots shall make application to the Clerk of the City of Darien. 
The application shall designate and describe the property owned by the applicant adjacent to the OP zone, and shall describe the area of the adjacent OP zone which the applicant desires to utilize. 
4.  The application shall fully describe the activity desired to be carried out by the applicant, which may include any of the following: 
a.  To improve a driveway or walkway to property owned by applicant adjacent to the OP zone. 
b.  To clear and beautify by planting and mowing grass, by planting flowers and shrubbery. 
c.  To install benches or other seating of a moveable nature which will not interfere with the generally open character of the OP area. 
d.  To plant and cultivate on a year-to-year basis a garden spot for personal use. 
e.  A statement by the applicant of what legal title, if any, he has to the area for which application is made. 
f.  If applicant asserts that he holds legal title to the areas of the OP zone adjacent to other property owned by him, the area of the OP zone adjacent to [the] owner's platted lot shall be added to the required yard area of the platted lot, and the uses permitted shall only be those permitted for a required yard in the zone in which the applicant's platted lot is located. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1304) 
ARTICLE XIV. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 20-1401. - Permitted uses. 
All of the following, and all matters directly related thereto are declared to be uses possessing characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their being included automatically in any classes of use as set forth in the various zones herein defined, and the authority for the location and operation thereof shall be the subject to review and the issuance of a conditional use permit. The purposes of review shall be to determine what the characteristics of any such use shall not be unreasonably incompatible with type of use permitted in surrounding area and for the further purpose of stipulating such conditions as may reasonably assure that the basic purposes of this ordinance shall be served. Factors to be considered are (1) damage or nuisance from noise, smoke, odor, dust, vibration, etc., (2) hazard from explosion, contamination or fire, (3) hazard occasioned by unusual volume or character of traffic or the congregating of a large number of people or vehicles. Conditional Use Permits shall be processed in the manner specified in article XIV. 
Cemeteries. (Excluded from R-1, and R-2 zones). 
Churches. 
Educational Institutions. 
Public utilities or utilities operated by mutual agencies, consisting of water wells, gas metering and regulating stations, telephone exchanges, booster stations or conversion plants with the necessary buildings, apparatus or appurtenances incident thereto, but not including distribution mains. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1401) 
Sec. 20-1402. - Yard requirements. 
The provisions for required front and side yards applicable to the particular zone in which any such use is proposed to be located shall prevail, unless in the findings and conditions recited in the resolution dealing with each such matter specific exceptions are made with respect thereto. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1402) 
Sec. 20-1403. - Height and area requirements. 
The provisions for height and area applicable to the particular zone in which any such use is proposed to be located shall prevail, unless in the findings and conditions recited in the resolution dealing with each such matter specific exemptions are made with respect thereto. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1403) 
Sec. 20-1404. - Off-street parking requirements. 
The requirements for provision of off-street parking applicable to the particular use shall prevail unless in the findings and conditions recited in the resolution dealing with each such matter specific exemptions are made with respect thereto. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1404) 
ARTICLE XV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS, CONDITIONS AND EXCEPTIONS USE 

Sec. 20-1501. - Off-street parking included in permitted uses. 
The respective uses permitted in each zone shall be deemed to include the off-street parking of automobiles accessory or incidental to any use permitted within such zone, and the foregoing regulations pertaining to the several zones shall be subject to the general provisions conditions and exceptions contained in this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1501) 
Sec. 20-1502. - Limitation of land use. 
Except as provided in this chapter, no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose other than is specifically permitted in the same zone in which such building or land is located. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1502) 
Sec. 20-1503. - Clarification of ambiguity. 
If ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this ordinance, or if ambiguity exists with respect to matters of height, yard requirements, area requirements or zone boundaries, as set forth herein and no logical changes in processing of materials, it shall be the duty of the planning commission to ascertain all pertinent facts and by resolution set forth its findings and its interpretations, and such resolution shall be forwarded to the city council and, if approved by the city council, thereafter such interpretation shall govern. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1503) 
Sec. 20-1504. - Use control in reclassified precise plan. 
In order to assure that the purpose and provisions of a formally adopted precise plan of record shall be conformed to, the land reclassified within any precise plan shall be limited exclusively to such uses as are first permitted in the zone to which it is classified. Uses shown on such precise plan, even though such use, or uses, are not otherwise specifically classified by this ordinance as permissible in any given zone. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1504) 
Sec. 20-1505. - Public utilities. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall not be construed to limit or interfere with the installation, maintenance and operation of pipe lines for the transmission or distribution of water, gas or other public utilities, or electric or telephone transmission lines, or railroads, upon property or within rights-of-way, easements, or franchises authorized and available for such purpose. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1505) 
Sec. 20-1506. - Temporary real estate office. 
A temporary real estate office may be located on any new subdivision in any zone, provided that such office, if in any "R" zone, shall be removed at the end of a 12-month period measured from the date of the recording of the map of the subdivision upon which said office is located. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1506) 
Sec. 20-1507. - Temporary real estate signs. 
Two temporary real estate billboards, not to exceed 50 square feet in area per face, or one billboard not to exceed an area of 100 square feet per face may be located on any new subdivision in any zone, provided such billboards, if in any "R" zone, shall be removed at the end of a 12-month period measured form the date of the recording of the map of the subdivision upon which said billboard or billboards are located. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1507) 
Sec. 20-1508. - Temporary construction buildings. 
Temporary structures for the housing of tools and equipment, or containing supervisory offices in connection with major construction of major construction projects may be established and maintained during the progress of such construction of such project, and shall be abated within 60 days after completion of [or] 60 days after cessation of work. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1508) 
Sec. 20-1509. - Required off-street parking. 
Every building, or portion of building hereafter erected shall be provided with permanently maintained a parking space as provided in this chapter and such parking space shall be made permanently available and be permanently maintained for parking purposes, provided, however, that any alterations or additions providing less than 200 square feet of additional floor space shall be exempted from this requirement. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1509) 
Sec. 20-1510. - Parking spaces required. 
The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be no less than as set forth in the following: 

 
(Code 1998, § 20-1510) 
Sec. 20-1511. - Parking requirements for uses not specified. 
Where the parking requirements for a use are not specifically defined herein, the parking requirements for such use shall be determined by the planning commission in the manner set forth in section 1201.2 [this chapter] and such determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable use specified herein. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1511) 
Sec. 20-1512. - Parking provisions may be waived by the commission. 
The planning commission may, by resolution, waive or modify the provisions as herein set forth establishing required parking areas for uses such as electrical power generating plants, electrical transformer stations, utility or corporation storage yards or other uses of a similar or like nature requiring a very limited number of persons. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1512) 
Sec. 20-1513. - Parking in the C-2 district south of 4th street. 
The provision of off-street parking is not required for the establishment of any new use in the C-2 district south of 4th Street. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1513) 
Sec. 20-1514. - General requirements. 
The following general requirements shall apply: 
1.  Size and access. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than 180 sq. ft. exclusive of drivers or aisles, and a width of not less than nine feet. Each such space shall be provided with adequate ingress and egress. When the required parking space for a one, two, or multiple family structure in any "R" zone is not to be provided in a covered garage, each such required car space shall be not less than 200 sq. ft. in area. 
2.  Location. Off-street parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter specified. Where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the building that such facility is required to serve. 
a.  For one, two, or multiple-family dwellings, parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or building site as the buildings they are required to serve; 
b.  For hospitals, sanitariums, homes for the aged, asylums, orphanages, rooming houses, lodging houses, club rooms, fraternity and sorority houses not more than 150 ft. from the buildings they are required to serve; and 
c.  For uses other than those specified above, not over 300 ft. from the building they are required to serve, except as provided in section 20-1201 [this chapter]. 
3.  Mixed occupancies in a building. In the case of mixed uses in a building or on a lot, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use except as hereinafter specified for joint use. 
4.  Joint use. The planning commission may, upon application by the owner or lessee of any property, authorize the joint use of parking facilities by the following uses or activities under the conditions specified herein: 
a.  Up to 50 percent of the parking facilities required by this chapter for a use considered to be primarily a day time use may be provided by the parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a nighttime and/or Sunday use. Up to 50 percent of the parking facilities required by this chapter for a use considered to be primarily a nighttime and/or Sunday use may be provided by the parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a daytime use, provided such reciprocal parking area shall be subject to conditions set forth in paragraph d. below. 
b.  Up to 100 percent of the parking facilities required by this chapter for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a daytime use, provided such reciprocal parking area shall be subject to conditions set forth in paragraph d. below. 
c.  The following uses are typical daytime uses; banks, business offices, retail stores, personal service shops, manufacturing or wholesale buildings and similar uses. The following uses are typical of nighttime and/or Sunday uses; auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, churches, and theaters. 
d.  Conditions required for joint use: 
1.  The building or use for which application is being made for authority to utilize the existing off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use, shall be located within 150 ft. of such parking facility. 
2.  The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the buildings or uses for which the joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed. 
3.  Parties concerned in the joint use of off-street parking facilities shall evidence agreement for such joint use by a proper legal instrument approved by the city attorney as to form and content. Such instrument, when approved as conforming to the provisions of this ordinance, shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and copies thereof filed with the city clerk's office and the planning commission. 
4.  Common facilities: Common parking facilities may be provided in lieu of the individual requirements contained herein, but such facilities shall be approved by the planning commission as to size, shape, and relationship to business sites to be served, provided the total of such off-street parking spaces, when used together, shall not be less than the sum of the various uses computed separately. When any such common facility is to occupy a site of 5,000 sq. ft. or more, then the parking requirements [which] are specified herein for two or more participating buildings or uses may be reduced not more than 15 percent upon approval of development plans by the planning commission in the manner prescribed for a conditional use permit as set forth in article XVII [XX]. 
5.  Plans: The plan of the proposed parking area shall be submitted to the building department at the time of the application for the building permit for the building to which the parking area is accessory. The plans shall clearly indicate the proposed development, including location, size, shape, design, curb cuts, lighting, landscaping and other features and appurtenances of the proposed parking lot. 
All parking areas shall be subject to the same restrictions governing accessory buildings as defined in the zone in which said parking area is located. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1514) 
Sec. 20-1515. - Required improvement and maintenance of parking area. 
Every lot used as a public or private parking area and having a capacity of five or more vehicles shall be developed and maintained in the following manner: 
1.  Surfacing. Off-street parking areas shall be paved or otherwise surfaced and maintained so as to eliminate dust or mud and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water. In no case shall such drainage be allowed across sidewalks 
2.  Border barricades, screening and landscaping: 
a.  Every parking area that is not separated by fence from any street or alley property line upon which it abuts, shall be provided with a suitable concrete curb or timber barrier not less than six inches in height; located not less than three feet from such street or alley property lines and such curb and barrier shall be securely installed and maintained; provided no such curb or barrier shall be required across any driveway or entrance to such parking area. 
b.  Every parking area abutting property located in one of the "R" zones shall be separated from such property by a solid wall, view-obscuring fence or compact evergreen hedge six feet in height measured from the grade of the finished surface of such parking lot closest to the contiguous "R" zone property, provided that along the required front yard the fence, wall or hedge shall not exceed 30 inches in height. No such wall, fence or hedge need be provided where the elevation of that portion of the parking area immediately adjacent to an "R" zone is six feet or more below the elevation of such "R" zone property along the common property line. 
c.  Any lights provided to illuminate any public parking area, semipublic parking area or used car sales [as] are permitted by this ordinance shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from any premises upon which a dwelling is located. 
3.  Entrances and exits. The location and design of all entrances and exits shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission provided no entrance or exit other than on or from an alley shall be closer than five feet to any lot located in an "R" zone. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1515) 
Sec. 20-1516. - Parking areas in "R" zones. 
Off-street parking facilities may be permitted in any of the "R" zones subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No parking lot to be used as an accessory to a commercial or industrial establishment shall be established until it shall first have been reviewed by the planning commission and its location approved by a conditional use permit. Such approval may be conditioned upon the commission's requiring the planting and/or maintenance of trees, shrubs or other landscaping within and along the borders of such parking area. 
2.  Such a parking lot to be used as an accessory to a permitted commercial or industrial establishment shall be so located that the boundary of such parking lot abuts the commercial or industrial establishment to which it is accessory. 
3.  Such parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of private passenger vehicles. 
4.  No sign of any kind, other than one designating entrances, exits or conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking lot. Any such sign shall not exceed eight sq. ft. in area. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1516) 
Sec. 20-1517. - Home occupations. 
Home occupations including any profession, vocation, business, trade, and personal services may be conducted in any residential district. Home occupations, with the exception of commercial stables or kennels and any occupation which customarily requires the use of a panel or delivery truck, may be conducted in a residential district only after approval of the city council which shall hold a public hearing as set forth in chapter 21 [20-2003] of this ordinance. The city council may then deny or grant approval of such home occupation in accordance with such regulations as the city council may determine to be in the public interest and also in accordance with the Zoning Regulations. The following rules apply to all home occupations. 
1.  The home occupation shall be conducted within the principal building and only by members of the family residing in the building. No more than one person who is not a resident of the premises shall be employed. 
2.  No more than 20 percent of the gross floor area of any dwelling unit may be used for a home occupation, except for medical and dental offices and foster family care, which may use up to 40 percent. 
3.  For the purpose of identification of such use, one non-illuminated wall sign not exceeding one square foot in area may be permitted. Such signs shall identify only the name of the professional and the name of the occupant of the premises and shall be mounted against a wall of the principal building. 
4.  No motor power other than electrically operated motors shall be used in conjunction with such home occupation and the total horsepower of such permitted electrical motors shall not exceed three horsepower. 
5.  There shall be no alteration internally or externally of the premises in connection with such home occupation unless so authorized by the city council. 
6.  No merchandise or articles for sale shall be displayed for advertising purposes and no sign or device relative to the sale of such merchandise shall be displayed on the premises. 
7.  No article or materials used in connection with such home occupation shall be stored other than in the principal building so used. 
8.  Any home occupation as provided for in this section may be reviewed by the city council at any time after 12 months following the approval of such use and may revoke permission to continue such home occupation at any time thereafter. 
9.  There shall be no disturbance or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, traffic hazard, unhealthy or unsightly condition. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1517) 
ARTICLE XVI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS, CONDITIONS AND EXCEPTIONS: YARDS, HEIGHT AND AREA 

Sec. 20-1601. - Commission may establish formula for modifying yard requirements. 
The planning commission may, by resolution, adopt a formula or establish standard practices by which to determine an appropriate and practical modification of required yards in all residential zones where geometric shape and dimensions and topography are such as to make the literal application of such required yards impractical. After the adoption of such formula or standard practices, they shall be applied as an administrative act. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1601) 
Sec. 20-1602. - Measurement of front yards. 
Front yard requirements shall be measured from the front property line or the indicated edge of a right-of-way for which a precise plan exists. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1602) 
Sec. 20-1603. - Vision clearance, corner, and reversed corner lots. 
All corner lots and reversed corner lots subject to yard requirements shall maintain for safety vision purpose a triangular area one angle of which shall be formed by the front and side lot lines separating the lot from the streets, and the sides of such triangle forming the corner angle shall each be 15 feet in length, measured from the aforementioned angle. The third side of said triangle shall be a straight line connecting the last two mentioned points which are distant 15 feet from the intersection of the front and side lot lines, and within the area comprising said triangle no tree, fence, shrub or other physical obstruction higher than 42 inches above the established grade shall be permitted. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to fences required by state law to surround and enclose public utility installations. 
Where a retaining wall protects a cut below the natural grade, and is located on the line separating lot, such retaining wall may be topped by a fence, wall or hedge of the same height that would otherwise be permitted at the location if no retaining wall existed. Where a retaining wall contains a fill, the height of the retaining wall built to retain the fill shall be considered as contributing to the permissible height of a fence, solid wall or hedge, providing that in any event a protective fence or wall not more than 36 inches in height may be erected at the top of the training wall. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1603) 
Sec. 20-1604. - Required increase of side yard where multiple or row dwellings front upon a side yard. 
The minimum width of the side yard upon which dwellings front shall be not less than one-half the front yard. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1604) 
Sec. 20-1605. - If only one building on a lot or building site it constitutes a main building. 
Any building which is the only building on a lot or building site is a main building unless authorized by variance. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1605) 
Sec. 20-1606. - Lot area not to be reduced. 
No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the lot area, yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this ordinance, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with regulations established by this ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1606) 
Sec. 20-1607. - Substandard lots. 
When a lot has less than the minimum required area or width as set forth in any of the zones contained herein, or in a precise plan, and was of record on the effective date of this ordinance, and had the minimum area of width required on the effective date of this ordinance, such lot shall be deemed to have complied with the minimum required lot area or width as set forth in any such zone or precise plan. The lot area per dwelling unit shall, however, remain as specified in the applicable area district, except that in no instance shall this provision prevent the erection of a single-family dwelling on any substandard lot, providing that said substandard lot had the minimum area or width on the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1607) 
ARTICLE XVII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS, CONDITIONS AND EXCEPTIONS NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 

Sec. 20-1701. - Continuation of nonconformance. 
Any lawful use of buildings, structure, land, or parts thereof existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this ordinance, and made nonconforming by the provisions of this ordinance or any amendments thereto, may be continued, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1701) 
Sec. 20-1702. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
In any district, any lot of record at the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this ordinance may be built upon even though such lot fails to meet the minimum requirement for lot area or lot width which are applicable in the district. For the purposes of this ordinance, a lot of record is an individual parcel of land described on a deed or subdivision plan legally recorded with the city clerk for the City of Darien or with the clerk of the superior court of McIntosh County, Georgia. Such lot shall conform to all other requirements, not involving lot area or lot width, for the district in which it is located, unless a variance from such other requirement is obtained from the city council. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1702; Ord. of 7-15-2008, § 20-1702) 
Sec. 20-1703. - Nonconforming buildings or structures. 
No building or structure or site improvements such as parking or driveways which is nonconforming with respect to the space and bulk requirements of this ordinance may be expanded, enlarged or increased in height unless such expanded or enlarged or higher portion complies with the space and bulk requirement of this ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1703) 
Sec. 20-1704. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
1.  No nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than that occupied at the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this ordinance. 
2.  No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot which was not occupied by such use at the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this ordinance. 
3.  If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one year, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land is located. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1704) 
Sec. 20-1705. - Nonconforming uses of structures. 
1.  No existing structure devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended or expanded except in changing the use of the structure to a conforming use. 
2.  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly in existence and arranged or designed for such use at the time of the adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building, 
3.  If a nonconforming use of a structure is superseded by a permitted use, the nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed. 
4.  If any nonconforming use of a structure ceases for any reason for a period of more than one year, any subsequent use of such structure shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such structure is located. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1705) 
Sec. 20-1706. - Reconstruction of nonconforming building partially destroyed. 
A nonconforming building destroyed to the extent of not more than 50 percent of its replacement value at the time of its destruction by fire, explosion or other casualty or Act of God, or the public enemy, may be restored and the occupancy or use of such building or part thereof which existed at the time of such partial destruction may be continued subject to all other provisions of this chapter. A residence located upon a lot of record if destroyed by any of the above courses shall be permitted to be replaced, provided the setback requirements are met or the size of the structure is not increased more than the original structure as to the ground area. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1706) 
Sec. 20-1707. - Public utility exemptions. 
The foregoing provisions of this chapter concerning the required removal of nonconforming buildings and uses and the reconstruction of nonconforming buildings partially destroyed, shall not apply to public utility buildings and structures when such buildings and structures pertain directly to the rendering of the service or distribution such as power generating plants and electrical distribution substations, water wells and pumps, gas storage, metering and valve control stations. Nor shall anything in this chapter be construed or applied so as to prevent the expansion, modernization or replacement of such public utility buildings, structures, equipment and features as are used directly for the delivery of, or distribution of the service, provided the provisions of this section shall not exempt from the provisions covering nonconformity of such buildings, structures, or uses as do not immediately relate to the direct service by consumers, such as warehouses, storage yards and the like. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1707) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-1801. - Manufactured housing parks. 
Manufactured housing parks are permitted pursuant to the following regulations: 
Manufactured housing parks are only permitted in the R-MH district. 
Location: manufactured housing parks will be permitted in the incorporated area of Darien provided that no manufactured housing unit in the park will be allowed within 200 feet of an existing residence. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1801) 
Sec. 20-1802. - Setback. 
1.  No manufactured housing used for dwelling or sleeping purposes shall be located closer than 150 ft. from the centerline of the road upon which the manufactured housing park fronts, and that uninhabited manufactured housing displayed for sales purposes only, and incidental buildings may be within 50 feet of such road right-of-way. 
2.  No manufactured housing shall be closer than 30 feet from the centerline of any road within the manufactured housing park. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1802) 
Sec. 20-1803. - Area. 
No manufactured housing park site will be issued a permit which contains an area less than three acres. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1803) 
Sec. 20-1804. - Roads and walkways. 
All roads within the manufactured housing park shall be surfaced. These roads shall be easily accessible to all mobile homes and shall be adequately lighted. The walkways to the various buildings shall be also adequately surfaced and lighted. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1804) 
Sec. 20-1805. - Entrance and exit. 
Entrance and exit shall be well marked and easily controlled and supervised. Entrance and exit shall meet the standards of the Georgia State Highway Department. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1805) 
Sec. 20-1806. - Manufactured housing lot. 
Manufactured housing lots shall be a minimum of 50 by 80 feet and a minimum area of 4,000 square feet. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1806) 
Sec. 20-1807. - Patio. 
Every manufactured housing lot shall have a concrete patio at least eight by 12 feet, over which an awning may be placed, provided that no permanent structure will be allowed on such patio or abutting manufactured house. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1807) 
Sec. 20-1808. - Distance. 
1.  No manufactured house site shall be less than 15 feet to the side of any other manufactured house and no end shall be closer than 12 feet to any other manufactured house. 
2.  Walking distance from any manufactured house shall not exceed 100 feet to garbage and refuse collection station. There shall be vehicular access to every garbage and refuse collection station. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1808) 
Sec. 20-1809. - Recreation. 
Not less than ten percent of the total area of the park shall be set aside as a recreation area. Such recreation area shall be made safe from traffic by an enclosure or other device. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1809) 
Sec. 20-1810. - Removal of wheels. 
Any action towards the removal of wheels except of the temporary purpose of repair or other action to attach the manufactured house to the ground by means of post, piers, foundation, or skirting, shall subject the manufactured house to the requirements of the building code and be classified as a house. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1810) 
Sec. 20-1811. - Scaled plot plan. 
Prior to issuing any permit for a manufactured housing park, a scale plot plan shall be submitted and approved by the planning commission. Such plan will indicate: 
1.  Driveways at entrances and exits, roadways, and walkways. 
2.  Location of individual lots for mobile homes. 
3.  Location and number of proposed sanitary conveniences, including laundries, drying yard, and utility of storage rooms. 
4.  Method and plan of sewage disposal. 
5.  Method and plan of garbage and refuse removal. 
6.  Plan of water supply. 
7.  Plan of street lighting. 
8.  Type of road surfacing. 
9.  Children's play or recreation area. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1811) 
Sec. 20-1812. - Manufactured housing park review. 
A manufactured housing park shall be subject to review every 12 months in order to assure continued compliance with above requirements. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1811) 
ARTICLE XIX. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 20-1901. - Zoning administration. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator of Darien, Georgia who shall be that person who has been appointed by the city council. His duties, among others, shall include receiving applications for demolition permits and issuing such permits; receiving applications for building permits and giving occupancy permits, and issuing building permits and giving occupancy permits for uses and structures which meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1901) 
Sec. 20-1902. - Demolition permit. 
No principal building or structure shall be demolished before the issuance of a demolition permit. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1902) 
Sec. 20-1903. - Building permits. 
Except as hereinafter provided, a building permit issued by the building inspector is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving or alteration of any buildings or structure or for the development of land for a use which does not require a structure. 
1.  Application for a building permit. except as hereinafter provided, any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, erect, move or alter any building or structure, or to develop land for a use not requiring a building or structure, shall first make application to the city administrator to obtain the required building permit therefor. 
a.  Form. Each application for a building permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator on a form furnished by her and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or his authorized agent. 
b.  Information. Each application for a building permit shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building, structure, or tract of land, and shall contain such information as may be required by the city administrator and building inspector. 
c.  Plat or plan. All applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat or plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, which shows the actual dimensions of the lot to be developed; the size and location of buildings and structures to be erected; the setback of any building and structures from front, side, and rear property lines; the use of adjoining properties; the setback lines of buildings and structures, if any, on adjoining properties; and such other information as may be essential to determine whether or not the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. All plats or plans shall bear the signature of the owner or agent. 
d.  Approval of county health department. When a proposed development is to be served by wells, or by septic tanks, or by a private water system and/or a private sewage disposal system, then the applicant for a permit for such development shall submit with his application for a permit a certificate from the county health department approving such water system, waste disposal system, septic tank, or well. If city water or sewer is available, it is required to be utilized instead of septic tanks or wells. 
2.  Issuance of a building permit. If the building inspector is satisfied with [that] the work described in the application for the permit and by the drawing filed therewith conform to the requirements of this ordinance, and if proper certification has been obtained from the county building and health department approving the proposed development, then the zoning administrator shall issue a building permit for such development to the applicant, along with a signed copy of the plat or plan. 
3.  Building permit denied. If the application for a permit and the plat or plan filed therewith, describes work which does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance, or the building codes, or if the health department recommends that a permit be denied for reasons of public health, then the building inspector shall not issue a permit. In such case, the building inspector shall return the plat or plan to the applicant showing his refusal to issue a permit. Such refusal shall state the reasons therefor, and shall cite the particular chapter and section of this ordinance with which the application does not comply. 
4.  Conditions of the permit. A building permit which has been issued shall be construed to be authority to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any provision of this ordinance, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the building inspector from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction or development which violates this ordinance. Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have commenced within six months of its issuance, or if the work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the work or development is commenced; provided that extensions of time for periods not exceeding six months each may be allowed in writing by the building inspector. 
5.  Building permit not required. A building permit shall not be required for the construction, erection, alteration, or moving of any structure established in connection with agricultural, forestry, or fishery activities, or in connection with the development of land for any such purposes in any district in which such activities are permitted and constitute the principal use, individually or collectively, of a tract or plot ground. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1903) 
Sec. 20-1904. - Occupancy permits. 
Except as hereinafter provided, an occupancy permit issued by the building inspector is required in advance of the occupancy or use of. 
1.  Any building or structure hereafter erected, altered, or moved. 
2.  Land on which a new use is established after the adoption of this ordinance. 
3.  A change in the use of a building or land to a use which requires a greater number of parking spaces or loading spaces than a use which previously occupied such building or land. 
a.  Application for occupancy permit. Each application for an occupancy permit shall be filed with the building inspector on a form furnished by him. The application shall be signed by the owner or his authorized agent. 
b.  Occupancy permit to be denied. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the development for which such permit is requested complies with all applicable provisions of this ordinance. A record of all such occupancy permits shall be filed in the office of the building inspector. 
c.  Occupancy permit not required. An occupancy permit shall not be required for agricultural, forestry, or fishery activities, in any district where such activities are permitted and when such activities are permitted and when such activities, individually or collectively, constitute the principal use of the lot or tract of land on which they are being conducted. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1904) 
Sec. 20-1905. - Appeals. 
Appeals from the decisions of the building inspector with regard to the interpretation, administration and enforcement of this zoning ordinance shall be made to the city council in accordance with the provisions of article XVII. 
(Code 1998, § 20-1905) 
ARTICLE XX. - CITY OF DARIEN COUNCIL'S FUNCTION IN DEALING WITH APPEALS, VARIANCES, CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, AND NON-CONFORMING USES 

Sec. 20-2001. - Administrative assistance. 
The zoning administrator shall provide such technical, administrative, and clerical assistance and office space as is required by the building inspector to carry out his/her function under the provisions of these regulations. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2001) 
Sec. 20-2002. - Appeals. 
1.  Who may appeal. Appeals to the city council may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the governing authority affected by any decision of the governing authority affected by any decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeals shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of notification of the decision appealed from, by filing with the zoning administrator and with the City of Darien a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the City of Darien all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
2.  Legal proceedings stayed. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator certifies to the City of Darien after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason or facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the City of Darien or by a court of record on application, on notice to the zoning administrator, and on due cause shown. 
3.  Presentation of evidence. The appellant, and any public agency or private individual shall be entitled to present evidence on matters before the City of Darien, and said city may request technical service, advice, data, or factual evidence from the planning commission and the governing authorities for assistance in reaching decisions. 
4.  The City of Darien may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the building inspector, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building inspector or the planning commission. The city may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to carry out the decisions of the city. 
5.  A building permit issued by the authority of the City of Darien shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit shall have commenced within six months of its issuance, or if work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the work or development has commenced. The valid time of a building permit issued by the city may be extended by the city for a good cause. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2002) 
Sec. 20-2003. - Public hearing. 
1.  Notice of hearing shall be given. Before making its decision on any appeal, request for permission to establish a use, request for a variance, or on any other matter within the City of Darien preview, said city shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least 15 days notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be sent to the appellant and petitioner, to the city council, to the building inspector, and to the owners of all properties either adjoining the property with which the hearing is concerned or situated directly across a public right-of-way from said property. Such notice shall contain the name of the appellant or petitioner, the date, time, and place fixed for the haring, and a brief statement of the error alleged by the appellant, or of the variance use requiring special approval or other relief requested. 
2.  Erection of sign. Within three days after acceptance for filing of an appeal the applicant shall erect a sign, to be furnished by the building inspector, on the land with which the appeal is concerned. The sign shall be of metal or other durable materials shall have a minimum size of 18 by 18 inches, show the application number, the type of relief sought, the scheduled date, time and place of public hearing, and the telephone number to call for further information. The applicant shall pay a fee of $25.00 and shall deposit a sum of $25.00 for a sign which deposit shall be repaid when the sign is returned. 
3.  Adjournment of hearings. Hearings may be adjourned from time to time and, if the time and place of the continued hearing be publicly announced at the time of the adjournment no further notice of such continued hearings shall be required; otherwise, notice thereof shall be given, as in the case of the original hearing. 
4.  Who may appear. Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. 
5.  Public notice in newspaper. The City of Darien shall give public notice of the hearing in a newspaper published and circulated in the City of Darien by advertisement published at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
6.  Re-hearings. An application for a re-hearing may be made in the same manner as provided for an original hearing. 
7.  Time limit on board's decision. The City of Darien shall reach a decision following a public hearing within a reasonable period of time; however, said period shall not exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2003) 
Sec. 20-2004. - Powers and duties. 
1.  Appeals from actions of the building inspector. The City of Darien shall hear and decide upon appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement of this zoning ordinance or from appeals from decisions or actions of the planning and zoning commission. 
2.  Request for permission to establish uses. The City of Darien shall hear and decide upon request for permission to establish uses upon which the City of Darien is required to pass under the terms of these regulations. The application to establish such use shall be approved on a finding by the City of Darien that: 
a.  The proposed use does not affect adversely the general plans for the physical development of the City of Darien as embodied in these regulations and in any comprehensive plan or portion thereof adopted by the city council of the City of Darien and Ex-Officio Judges thereof; and 
b.  The proposed use will not be contrary to the purposes stated for these regulations; and 
c.  The proposed use will not affect adversely the health and safety of residents in the City of Darien; and 
d.  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood; and 
e.  The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses; and 
f.  The proposed use will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of said use; and 
g.  The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such facility, vehicular movement, noise, or fume generation or type of physical activity; and 
h.  The standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may be granted have met; and 
i.  Provided, that the city may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood; and 
j.  Provided, that the proposed use shall be subject to the minimum area, setback and other locational requirements of the zoning district in which it will be located; and 
k.  Provided, that the proposed use shall be subject to the off-street parking and service requirements of these regulations; and 
l.  Provided, that wherever the City of Darien shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations that any of the terms, conditions or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said board shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing. 
3.  Request for a variance. The City of Darien may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement to the provisions of these regulations will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; provided, however, that a variance shall not be granted to permit a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance in the district in question. Such variance may be granted in an individual case upon a finding by the City of Darien that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; and 
b.  The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of these regulations. 
4.  Request for extension of nonconforming use. The City of Darien may authorize upon appeal in specific cases an extension of an existing nonconforming use involving an increase in the land area occupied by an open use of land which is a nonconforming use. Said extension may be granted in a nonconforming use. Said extension may be granted in an individual case upon a finding by the City of Darien that 
a.  The use is a nonconforming use as defined in these regulations and; 
b.  The use is in full compliance with all requirements of these regulations applicable to nonconforming uses; and 
c.  The extension of said use will not further injure a permitted use on adjacent property in the same zoning district. 
In no case shall the city permit the enlargement of a building for purpose of enlarging a nonconforming use. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2004) 
Sec. 20-2005. - Forms. 
Appeals, request for permission to establish a use requiring special approval, requests for variances, and requests for extension of nonconforming uses shall be made on forms provided therefor, and all information required on said forms shall be provided by the appellant. Forms shall be filed with the City of Darien, and the appellant shall pay said city of expenses by the City of Darien unless it contains all pertinent information and is accompanied by the required fee to defray expenses. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2005) 
Sec. 20-2006. - Calendar of appeals. 
Appeals and applications filed in proper form shall be numbered serially, docketed, and placed upon the calendar of the City of Darien. The calendar of appeals to be heard shall be posted conspicuously in the office of the City of Darien and in the office of the building inspector during the period before such hearing date. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2006) 
ARTICLE XXI. - AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE 

Sec. 20-2101. - General conditions. 
These regulations, including the zoning map, may be amended by the city council of the City of Darien and thereof on their own motion, on petition or on recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall submit its report within 30 days after receiving an amendment proposal for review, otherwise said amendment shall be deemed denied by the planning commission. The planning commission may extend its time to report by up to 60 additional days in 30-day increments by vote of the planning commission if it seeks additional information or in the case of amendment proposals for a planned unit development or other proposal that involves complicated issues of fact or law. Before enacting an amendment to these regulations, the governing authority shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon as set forth in this section. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2101; Ord. of 3-20-2007, § 20-2101; Ord. of 7-19-2007(2), § 20-2101) 
Sec. 20-2102. - Application for amendment. 
1.  General. Applications for amendment of these regulations may be in the form of proposals for amendment of the text of these regulations or proposals for amendment of the zoning map. Applications for amendment shall be submitted to the city council of Darien. 
2.  Signature of applicant required. All applications shall be signed by the applicant and shall state his name and address. When a change in the zoning classification of a piece of property is requested, the applicant shall be only the owner of such property or his authorized agent. 
3.  Application for text amendment. In the case of a text amendment, the application shall set forth the new text to be added and the existing text to be deleted. 
4.  Application for map amendment. An application for a map amendment shall include the following information: 
a.  The community or area in which is located the land proposed to be reclassified and the street number, lot numbers, the location with respect to the nearby public roads in common use; 
b.  A suitable description of the land which may be by a plat of the land in question, or by a description by metes and bounds, or by the lot, block and subdivision designations with appropriate plat reference or by other suitable description; 
c.  The present zoning classification and the classification proposed for such land; 
d.  The name and address of the owners of the land; 
e.  The area of the land proposed to be reclassified stated in square feet if less than one acre, and in acres if one acre or more; 
f.  The county tax map reference number. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2102) 
Sec. 20-2103. - Posting of property. 
1.  Erection of sign. Within three days after acceptance for filing of an application for a map amendment, the applicant shall erect a sign, to be furnished by the building inspector, on the land proposed to be reclassified. Such sign shall be erected by the applicant within ten feet of whatever boundary line of such land abuts the most traveled public road if no public road abuts thereon, then such sign shall be erected to face in such a manner as may be most readily seen by public. The lower edge of the sign face shall be not less than two and one half feet above the ground. The sign furnished by the building inspector shall be of metal or other durable material, shall have a minimum size of 18 by 18 inches, shall show the application number, the present zone classification, the proposed zoning classifications, the scheduled date, time and place of public hearing and the telephone number to call for further information. If the land sought to be reclassified lies within more than one block as shown on a plat recorded in the land records of the County, then a sign shall be erected by the applicant on the land in each such block. 
2.  Deposit. No sign shall be furnished by the building inspector unless the applicant shall pay a fee of $1.00 and shall deposit the sum of $10.00 to be applied to the cost of said sign. On the return of the sign to the building inspector by the applicant as hereinafter provided there shall be repaid to the applicant the amount of said deposit. 
3.  Removal of sign. Any such sign shall be maintained at all times by the applicant until a decision on the application has been made public by the governing authority. The sign shall be returned to the building inspector within five days thereafter. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2103) 
Sec. 20-2104. - Referral to planning and zoning commission. 
After acceptance of application for an amendment, the city council of the City of Darien shall transmit of copy thereof to the planning and zoning commission which shall submit its findings to the city council of the City of Darien within 30 days from the date it received the petition. If the planning and zoning commission fails to submit a report within 30 days, it shall be deemed to have denied the requested change or departure. The planning commission may extend its time to report by up to 60 additional days in 30-day increments by vote of the planning commission if it seeks additional information or in the case of amendment proposals for a planned unit development or other proposal that involves complicated issues of fact or law. The planning and zoning commission shall consider each proposal for amendment and as a basis for its recommendations shall report on the following matters, among others, as appropriate to the circumstances of the case. 
1.  Compatibility with comprehensive development plans; timing of development. The planning and zoning commission shall examine the proposal to determine whether it is in accord with comprehensive development plans. In its findings in this regard, it may report that the proposal is compatible or incompatible, or that while the change is in accord with those of longer range it would be premature in the light of the comprehensive development plans. The planning and zoning commission shall not recommend any change not in accord with adopted comprehensive development plans but may, where it sees fit, recommend changes in such plans, following which, if such change in plans are officially adopted, the zoning change may be reconsidered without prejudice and without a new application if an application is involved. 
2.  Availability of and effect on public facilities and services; referrals to other agencies. The planning and zoning commission shall consider and report on the availability of public facilities and services and the effect the proposed change would have on demands for public facilities and services in the area in which the change is proposed or generally. Such facilities and services include but are not limited to water supply, sewerage, drainage, transportation, schools, fire and police protection, and solid waste collection and disposal. 
3.  Availability of other land suitable for proposed use; effect on balance of land uses. The planning and zoning commission may consider the availability of other appropriate land already zoned for the proposed use, generally and in the area of the proposed change. 
The planning and zoning commission may also consider whether generally, or in the area of the proposed change, the change would have adverse environmental effects on the balance of land uses by removing land from a category for which it is suited and for which there is a greater public need to a category for which the public need is lesser. 
4.  Effect on character of the neighborhood. The planning and zoning commission shall consider the effect of uses permitted under the proposed change on the surrounding neighborhood and shall report any substantial adverse influences on desirable living conditions or sustained stability, or any tendencies toward blight and depreciation likely to result from the change. 
5.  Suitability of proposed uses. The planning and zoning commission shall consider whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
6.  Effect on adjacent property. The planning and zoning commission shall consider whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
7.  Economic use of current zoning. The planning and zoning commission shall consider whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
8.  Other conditions. The planning and zoning commission shall consider whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2104; Ord. of 3-20-2007, § 20-2104; Ord. of 7-19-2007(2), § 20-2104) 
Sec. 20-2105. - Hearing procedure and public notice. 
1.  All amendments to the City of Darien zoning ordinance not initiated by the City of Darien city council requires a minimum of one public hearing. Additional public hearings may be held, if deemed appropriate by the local governing authority. 
2.  Prior to scheduling the required hearing, applicants shall first complete all submission requirements contained in the City of Darien zoning ordinance (e.g., forms, fees, deeds, maps, etc.) 
3.  The City of Darien Planning and Zoning Commission shall then notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of the required public hearings. 
4.  At least 15, but not more than 45 days prior to the scheduled public hearing, the City of Darien Planning and Zoning Commission shall publish in the newspaper of general circulation, notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
5.  If a zoning amendment is for the rezoning of property, then the public notice shall also include: 
a.  The location of the property; 
b.  The present zoning classification of the property; and 
c.  The proposed zoning of the property. 
6.  Not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing, the City of Darien Planning and Zoning Commission shall post in a conspicuous location on the property in question a sign which shall contain information regarding the proposed rezoning—specifically, the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
7.  No official action shall be taken on the proposed amendment by the City of Darien until after at least one public hearing has been conducted. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2105) 
Sec. 20-2106. - Procedures for conducting a public hearing. 
1.  All public hearings on zoning amendments shall be chaired by either the chairman of the planning and zoning commission or the city council chairman or their designees. 
2.  A secretary shall record the proceedings of the public hearing. If requested by any party, verbatim transcripts of the public hearing can be prepared, only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party. 
3.  The record of public hearing and all evidence submitted at the public hearing shall be recorded as such and become a permanent part of the particular zoning amendment's file. 
4.  The official zoning map and the City of Darien Comprehensive Plan shall be available at the public hearing for reference by the planning and zoning commission. 
5.  Copies of sections 20-1804 and 20-1805 of this ordinance shall be available for distribution to the public at each public hearing. 
6.  The planning and zoning commission chairman or city council chairman (mayor) shall preside at the public hearing and shall identify speakers, maintain order, and conduct the public hearing. 
7.  The process to be followed in conducting these hearings shall be as follows: 
a.  The presiding officer shall open the hearing by stating the specific zoning amendment being considered at the public hearing. 
b.  When there are a large number of individuals wishing to testify at a hearing, the presiding officer may invoke time limits on individual speakers. In such cases, these time limits shall apply to all speakers. 
c.  The presiding officer shall recognize the individual parties wishing to testify or present evidence and allow them to present this information. 
d.  Once all parties have concluded their testimony the presiding officer shall adjourn the public hearing. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2106) 
Sec. 20-2107. - Conflict of interest in zoning actions. 
1.  Any government official, as defined in Georgia Law, Chapter 67A, who has a financial interest in any real property affected by a rezoning or has a member of the family with such an interest, shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest as required by [O.C.G.A. § 36-67-A]. 
2.  Applicants for rezoning shall file concurrent with the rezoning application, a Disclosure Report listing all campaign contributions or gifts made to local government officials of McIntosh County within the two years preceding the filing of the application. 
3.  Opponents of zoning actions, who have made campaign contributions, as defined in 36-67-A shall file a disclosure statement at least five calendar days prior to the first public hearing. This disclosure statement shall list the local government officials to whom campaign contributions were made totaling over $250.00 each during the previous two years. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2107) 
ARTICLE XXII. - REMEDIES AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 20-2201. - Remedies. 
1.  In case any building or structure is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, maintained, or used in violation of this ordinance; or any land is proposed to be used in violation of this ordinance, the city council of the City of Darien or any owner of real estate within the city in which such building, structure, or land is situated, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, or use in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
2.  In case any building or structure is being erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, demolished or maintained, in violation of this ordinance, then the building inspector in addition to other remedies may cancel any certificate of occupancy, demolition permit, building permit, or sign permit which has been issued for the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, demolition, or maintenance of a building or structure. After such cancellation, any further work upon the demolition, construction, alteration, or repair on said building or structure, or the continued use of such building, structure, or land, shall be deemed a violation. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2201) 
Sec. 20-2202. - Penalties. 
1.  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, demolished, altered, repaired, moved, converted, or maintained in violation of this ordinance, the building inspector or any other appropriate authority, or any city resident who would be damaged by such violation may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action to prevent the use of the building, structure or land. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2202) 
ARTICLE XXIII. - ADOPTION 

Sec. 20-2301. - Zoning ordinance. 
1.  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE. The zoning ordinance for the City of Darien are hereby adopted and for the regulations for this municipality with like effect as if recited in full herein. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2301) 
Sec. 20-2302. - Sudivision ordinance. 
2.  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE. The subdivision ordinance for the City of Darien are hereby adopted as and for the regulations for this municipality with like effect as if recited in full herein. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2302) 
The Code of Ordinances of the City of Darien, Georgia, 1998 is hereby amended by adding a new section within chapter 20, zoning ordinance, to be numbered article XIX which section reads as follows. 
ARTICLE XIV[XXIV]. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) 

Sec. 20-2311. - Purpose and intent. 
The City of Darien recognizes that existing zone districts were created and applied to property to best address anticipated development at a point in time but that over time, it becomes necessary to create new zone districts to accommodate new development patterns and opportunities. It is the intent of this ordinance to maintain the quality of life for Darien's citizens by accommodating a new type of unified residential and mixed-use development, available to be applied citywide, that is sensitive to existing land use and the protection of the marshland habitat and historic resources of the city. 
Therefore, herein is written a Planned Unit Development Ordinance (PUD) to be applied on appropriate lands within the City of Darien. It is additionally intended that this PUD shall: 
a)  Provide an option for a unified residential and/or mixed-use development that may be applied on appropriate properties throughout the city; 
b)  Encourage growth to occur in areas which are best suited for increased density in accordance with our Comprehensive Plan, as amended; 
c)  Create a built environment that fosters a sense of community, provides connectivity, and provides opportunities for interaction of its inhabitants; 
d)  Provide for compatibility between new higher density development and existing lower-density land use; provide proper building typology and compatible development form that will support the existing neighborhoods and development patterns found within the city; 
e)  Provide for protection of sensitive marshland and waterfront habitat; 
f)  Promote a pattern of development which permits the efficient delivery of municipal services and will provide for the recreational and open space needs of the residents. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2313) 
Sec. 20-2314. - Permitted uses. 
In the PUD zone the following uses are permitted and as hereinafter specifically provided and allowed by this chapter [article]: 
1.  Multi-family dwellings (such as patio apartments, garden apartments, townhouses, and condominiums); accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to such residential dwellings and when used exclusively for the residents of the planned unit development. 
2.  Single-family and two-family dwellings only as a part of planned residential community. 
3.  Piers and boat docking facilities when a part of a specific planned residential community. Community dock facilities are encouraged. 
4.  Mixed use consisting of compatible service, office, retail, recreational and civic uses. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2314) 
Sec. 20-2315. - Area and density regulations. 
1.  Minimum parcel size. The PUD shall only be applied to a parcel of five acres or greater. The PUD may apply to parcels less than five acres, only if it is an existing lot of record and not a newly subdivided parcel. 
2.  Lot area. Lots within the planned unit development may be of any size provided they are a part of master planned community consisting of private lots, or condominium ownership, and common open space. 
3.  Maximum lot coverage. There are no specific requirements for lot coverage, however, the Master Development Plan Text must specify maximum lot coverage to be provided. 
4.  Maximum density: 
(a)  For inland property the residential density on inland property (not adjacent to a coastal marshland) shall not exceed eight units per gross acre. For purposes of this article, the term gross acre represents the area within the legal boundaries of the property to be developed, less any land that falls within the definition of coastal marshland. 
(b)  For coastal marshland property providing the additional building setback of 25 feet from the marshland buffer, per Sec. 20-2316 the residential density shall not exceed ten units per gross acre unless provisions are met in [sub]section (c). 
(c)  For PUD projects in any location exceeding the minimum open space requirement provided in Sec. 20-2318, by an additional 15%, the residential density shall not exceed 16 units per gross acre. This is an incentive based density, for developers volunteering additional open space within the PUD project. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2315) 
Sec. 20-2316. - Yard, buffer and placement of building requirements. 
1.  As it is the intent for the PUD zone to be applied to parcels which are to be developed in a well-designed and environmentally sensitive manner, there is no minimum yard, minimum lot frontage, or minimum width requirements for the interior relationship of lots and buildings. 
2.  All PUDs shall provide for perimeter buffers for the purposes of visual screening and noise abatement between their property and all abutting properties where compatibility of adjacent uses cannot be enhanced by the type of building architecture alone. The buffers will be provided on the Master Development Plan and set forth in the Master Development Plan Text of the enacting ordinance. 
3.  When property is adjacent to coastal marshlands which are waters of the state, a 25-foot buffer is required as measured horizontally from the delineated boundary of jurisdictional marshlands pursuant to Georgia State Code. An additional 25-foot-wide principal building setback will also be encouraged for the purposes of water quality and habitat protection. 
4.  No habitable building or parking area shall occupy a required perimeter buffer or marshland buffer. 
5.  The minimum distance between buildings used for human habitation and between buildings used for human habitation and accessory buildings shall be ten feet or as required by the current building code and current fire code. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2316) 
Sec. 20-2317. - Height. 
No building in the PUD zone shall exceed a height of 35 feet or shall exceed three habitable stories. Building elements, such as towers, cupolas and spires, not to exceed 300 square feet in collective floor area, are allowed up to 45 feet in height. For individual buildings that are shown in the Master Development Plan to be located to provide increased public vista protection per Sec. 20-2318, the maximum building height shall be 45 feet. 
For the purposes of this article, maximum building height is measured from the lowest allowable finished floor elevation to the average roof height. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2317) 
Sec. 20-2318. - Design requirements. 
A Master Development Plan (MDP) shall accompany a petition to rezone property to the PUD designation. Besides general building, street, and perimeter buffer features, the MDP shall show how the proposed development will accommodate the following requirements: 
1.  Common amenity area: Active recreational areas comprising at least ten percent of the total net development area to include amenities such as: swimming pools; basketball courts; tennis courts; playgrounds; ball fields; walking or jogging paths; community buildings. 
2.  Vista protection: In addition to the minimum distance between building requirement as defined in this zone, the building and landscape layout shall maintain to the maximum degree possible the existing vista of the marshland and waterways from public right-of-way. Use may be made of such vista corridors as allowed in 20-1304 (OP District). 
3.  Open space: 20 percent of the net development area shall be in open space. This open space shall include perimeter and marshland buffers, Common Amenity Area, and other non-impervious areas including storm water retention and treatment areas. At least 25 percent of the required open space area shall be contiguous in that it may be accessed by a continuous pedestrian movement not withstanding the need to cross streets or common amenity areas. The use of greens and squares within a new PUD development is encouraged, as provided in the historic districts of the city. These squares shall not be less than a ratio of 4 to 1 (length to width). 
4.  Parking: 
(a)  On-site parking shall be provided pursuant to section 20-1509. 
(b)  On-street parking designed as parallel to the travel lane along local streets, meeting the minimum size of eight feet by 22 feet, may be counted toward the overall PUD recommendation for parking. This on-street parking must be located within 600 feet of the proposed uses to be considered toward the parking requirement. 
5.  Pervious surfaces are encouraged in all PUD projects 
(Code 1998, § 20-2318) 
Sec. 20-2319. - Review and approval procedures. 
The following procedures shall be followed for all zoning and development, construction, and redevelopment requests within a PUD: 
1.  Pre-application conference. Prior to filing a formal application, the applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator in order to review the general character of the proposed development, i.e., its scope, nature and location. At this time, the applicant shall be fully advised of the approval procedures contained herein and the various information, studies, etc., which the applicant may need in order to continue with the said procedure. 
2.  Application submittal. An applicant shall submit an application, application fee, and petition to the Darien mayor and council through the zoning administrator who shall deliver a copy of the petition to the planning commission for their review and recommendations of the application. This petition shall contain a written Master Development Plan Text (Text) and a Master Development Plan (Plan) and shall show the relation between the proposed development and the surrounding area, both proposed and existing. The Text and Plan create a unified development plan by which the project shall be developed. The Text and Plan shall apply to any and all developers, contractors, and buyers within the project. The Darien planning commission followed by the Darien mayor and council shall make their determinations on the basis of the information contained in the Master Development Plan Text and Master Development Plan, any other information they so request and the purposes and standards of the application, as contained herein. 
3.  Master Development Plan. The following information shall be provided, as a legible scaled drawing, prepared by a registered engineer or landscape architect, or certified land planner, as the Master Development Plan: 
a.  A general location map; 
b  The present zoning pattern in the area; 
c.  A legal description of the subject property; 
d.  Existing and proposed land uses on the development site and in surrounding areas for a distance of 500 feet, including the approximate location of all buildings, structures, lots, and streets; 
e.  The approximate location of existing utilities and the proposed method for bringing utilities to the site including stormwater retention and treatment as needed; 
f.  The general development design including points of access, street systems, building locations, common amenity areas, perimeter and marshland buffers, open pace, and waterway vista, and connections to the public right-of-way; 
g.  Pedestrian circulation; 
h.  Parking configuration and vehicular circulation; 
i.  Land use tabulation showing the acreage of the project, total number of units for each type, residential density, and maximum non-residential square footage; 
j.  Project name, applicant name, and name of professionals responsible for the preparation of the plan. 
In addition, the following maps and plans shall be submitted with the Master Development Plan: 
a.  A current topographical map clearly showing existing topographic conditions, including contour intervals of no more than two feet based on field survey or photogrametric methods; 
b.  A map showing the existing flood plains and flood soil as indicated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
c.  A generalized plan showing jurisdictional wetlands and navigable waterways. 
d.  Schematic or conceptual drawings of buildings which indicate the proposed architectural style and appearance. 
4.  Master Development Plan Text. The Text shall be provided in a format consistent with the following requirements. The Text shall be written in a clear and concise manner fully addressing each subsection. The Text shall include a written description of the intended proposed project, including the following, as appropriate. Additional criteria may be requested, based upon the character, scope and location of the project. 
a.  A description related to the design, character and architectural style or theme of the project, which demonstrates an innovative, unified, cohesive and compatible plan of development for all uses; 
b.  The total number of gross acres and net acres; 
c.  Total number of residential dwelling units and density of project; 
d.  For mixed-use PUDs, the maximum amount of non-residential square footage; 
e.  The residential and non-residential structure setbacks; minimum size of residential lots; number of parking spaces for residential and non-residential uses, and maximum height of all structures; 
f.  The type and location of infrastructure needed to serve the project, including drainage facilities, internal vehicle and pedestrian access to the project, vehicle and pedestrian access to the project, interconnectivity access points to adjacent property (if applicable), open space and Common Amenity Center provided, fire protection, and solid waste collection; 
g.  The type of buffering provided, general landscaping, tree removal and tree protection; 
h.  The use, location and duration of temporary uses, including construction trailers, sales units, model homes; 
i.  The use and location of accessory uses for residential and non-residential structures including setbacks, swimming pools, fencing, and similar uses; 
j.  If applicable to the size of the development, a phasing schedule, which shall include the amount of residential and non-residential development to be completed within each phase; 
k.  A statement and agreement to comply, binding all successors and assigns in title to the commitments and conditions of the Mater Development Plan. 
5.  Approval. 
a.  An application for approval of a development shall be considered administratively as a petition for rezoning and will be subject to the procedure established in section 20-2101 et seq. 
b.  After review and public hearing, the city council may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the proposed Master Development Plan and Master Development Plan Text after receiving the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning board. 
c.  If the proposed zoning and development application is approved as submitted, the zoning administrator shall cause the official zoning map to be changed to indicate the new development. If the Master Development Plan and Master Development Plan Text are approved with modifications, the applicant shall file written notice of consent to the modifications and a properly reviewed Master Development Plan with the zoning administrator prior to changing the map. The Master Development Plan, Master Development Plan Text and all other accompanying information shall be properly identified and permanently filed with the zoning administrator. 
6.  Revision of development plan. Any change in the approved Master Development Plan and/or Master Development Plan Text, which affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes, must be reviewed and approved by the city council upon the recommendation of the planning commission. A request for a revision of the Master Development Plan or Master Development Plan Text shall be supported by a written statement as to why the revisions are necessary or desirable. 
7.  Subsequent development to be consistent. All subsequent development plans including, but not limited to site development plan, subdivision plat/plan, utilities plan, landscaping plan, building plans shall be deemed consistent with the Master Development Plan, by the zoning administrator, prior to the issuance of building or other work permits. The developer/applicant may appeal any adverse decision of the zoning administrator in accordance with the provisions of section 20-2002 et seq. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2319) 
Sec. 20-2320. - PUD amendments to the zoning ordinance. 
The planning and zoning commission shall consider each proposal for amendment and as a basis for its recommendations shall report on the matters as provided in Sec. 20-2104. 
(Code 1998, § 20-2320) 
ARTICLE XV[XXV]. - CONSERVATION PRESERVATION PUBLIC ZONE (CP-P ZONE) 

Sec. 20-2401. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the CP-P zone are: 
(a)  To protect the ecological integrity of identified land, coastal marshlands, wetlands, and water areas within the City of Darien. 
(b)  To protect environmentally sensitive areas for the health, general welfare and passive recreational needs of city's residents. 
(c)  To ensure the continued presence, operation of the State of Georgia's Altamaha Wildlife Management Area. 
(d)  To exclude uses capable of negatively impacting the environment and the operation of the Altamaha Wildlife Management Area. 
(e)  To exclude uses that pose a threat to the long term vitality of the commercial fishing industry. 
(f)  To limit the intensity of uses that will detract from the traditional scale and scenic quality of the district. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(1), § 20-2401) 
Sec. 20-2402. - Permitted uses. 
In the CP-P zone, the following uses only are permitted and as hereinafter specifically provided and allowed by this chapter. 
1.  Altamaha Wildlife Management Area (AWMA), operated in accordance with the most recent State approved management plan. 
2.  Publicly owned open space and associated passive recreational facilities and structures. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(1), § 20-2402) 
Sec. 20-2403. - Conditional permitted uses. 
In the CP-P zone, the following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in article XX, and if additional conditions, which may be required by the city council, are met. 
1.  Multi-use trails, provided they are constructed with pervious materials. 
2.  Museum or exhibit area on or near land of historic, aesthetic, ecological, or educational significance. 
3.  Farms for the growing of agricultural products, seafood, or timber, with dwelling units for owner or operator. 
4.  Public utility lines, fire, or water tower, utility sub-station. 
5.  Public dock or boathouse 
6.  Dwelling or operational structures for AWMA and other public agency personnel. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(1), § 20-2403) 
Sec. 20-2404. - Special performance standards. 
Special performance standards for CP conservation zone should conform to those included in section 20-1203 special performance standards for MT-1 general maritime zone, and: 
1.  Impervious surfaces are prohibited, with the exception of those essential to permitted uses. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(1), § 20-2404) 
ARTICLE XVI[XXVI]. - CONSERVATION PRESERVATION RESIDENTIAL ZONE (CP-R ZONE) 

Sec. 20-2501. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the CP-R zone are: 
(a)  To provide for the preservation of open space as a nonstructural stormwater control and watershed protection measure. 
(b)  To provide a residential zoning district that promotes environmentally sensitive uses of the land. 
(c)  To encourage preservation of unique or sensitive natural resources such as coastal marshlands, fisheries, freshwater wetlands, waterways, groundwater, floodplains, and wildlife habitat. 
(d)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(e)  To conserve scenic views. 
(f)  To exclude uses capable of negatively impacting the environment. 
(g)  To exclude uses that pose a threat to the long term vitality of the commercial fishing industry. 
(h)  To limit the intensity of uses that will detract from the traditional scale and scenic quality of the district. 
(i)  To provide a residential density of approximately one dwelling unit per two acres. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2501) 
Sec. 20-2502. - Permitted uses. 
In the CP-R zone, the following uses only are permitted and as hereinafter specifically provided and allowed by this chapter: 
(a)  One-family dwellings. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and structures, including private garages to accommodate not more than four cars; provided additional garage or implement shelters may be erected, maintained and used on sites of five acres or more, and provided that such structures shall not occupy any required yard space. 
(c)  Private green houses, fruit trees, nut trees, vines, and other horticultural stock. 
(d)  Agricultural crops, excluding commercial grown crops. 
(e)  Stands for the display of agricultural products raised on the premises. 
(f)  Privately owned open space and associated passive recreational facilities and structures. 
(g)  The following animals, under the following conditions: 
1.  Horse, provided: 
(a)  No horses shall be maintained on a lot or parcel containing less than two acres. 
(b)  Not more than two horses may be maintained on a lot or parcel containing less than three acres. Lots containing more than five acres in area shall be permitted two horses per acre. 
(c)  No stall or barn shall be kept or maintained within 200 feet of any window or door of any building used for human habitation nor within 300 feet of any portion of a required yard space or adjoining property if such property is devoted to a use other than agriculture. 
(h)  Day nurseries where day care is provided for not more than six children and said nursery is duly licensed. 
(i)  Home occupations: home beauty parlors and professional use. 
(j)  The following signs: 
1.  One unlighted sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area per face pertaining only to the sale, lease, or hire of only the particular building, property or premises upon which displayed. 
2.  Signs identifying persons engaged in construction on a site shall be permitted as long as construction is in progress. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2502) 
Sec. 20-2503. - Conditional permitted uses. 
In the CP-P [CP-R] zone, the following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in article XX, and if additional conditions, which may be required by the city council, are met: 
(a)  Farms for the growing of commercial agricultural products. 
(b)  Public utility lines, fire, or water tower, utility sub-station. 
(c)  Public dock or boathouse. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2503) 
Sec. 20-2504. - Height. 
No building in the CP-R zone shall exceed a height of 35 feet. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2504) 
Sec. 20-2505. - Front yard. 
Every lot in a CP-R zone shall have a front yard which has a depth not less than 35 feet. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2505) 
Sec. 20-2506. - Side yards. 
In the CP-R zone every lot shall have side yards as follows: 
(a)  Lots shall have a side yard on each side of the main building which side yard has a width not less than 20 feet. 
(b)  Corner lots shall have the following side yards: 
1.  On the side which adjoins another lot, the side yard shall be the same as that required on any lot. 
2.  On the side street the width of the required side yard shall be the same as the front yard requirement (35 feet). 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2506) 
Sec. 20-2507. - Placement of buildings. 
Placement of buildings on any lot shall conform to the following: 
(a)  Lots. 
1.  No building shall occupy any portion of a required yard. 
2.  Any building, any portion of which is used for human habitation, shall observe a distance from any side lot line the equivalent of the required side yard on such lot and from the rear property line a distance of 20 percent of the depth of the lot, not to exceed 50 feet. 
3.  The distance between buildings used for human habitation and between buildings used for human habitation and accessory buildings shall be 20 feet. 
4.  A non-dwelling accessory building may build to the rear lot line and to the side lines to the rear of the required side yard, provided if the lot rears upon an alley such accessory building shall maintain a distance of not less than ten feet from the rear lot line and may build to within 20 feet of the side lot line. 
(b)  Corner lots. 
1.  No building shall occupy any portion of a required yard. 
2.  The distance between buildings used for human habitation and between buildings used for human habitation and accessory buildings shall be a distance of 20 feet. 
3.  Any building, any portion of which is used for human habitation, shall observe a distance from the rear property line of 20 feet. 
4.  On comer lots, an accessory building may build to the rear lot line not less than twenty (10) [sic] feet from the rear line of such lot. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2507) 
Sec. 20-2508. - Area. 
The minimum required area of a lot in the CP-R zone shall not be less than two acres, or 87,120 square feet. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2508) 
Sec. 20-2509. - Lot area per dwelling. 
The lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than the minimum required lot area. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2509) 
Sec. 20-2510. - Lot width. 
In the CP-R zone, every lot created after the effective date of this ordinance shall maintain a width of not less than one hundred (200) [sic] feet at the rear line of the required front yard. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2510) 
Sec. 20-2511. - Permissible lot coverage. 
All buildings including accessory buildings and structures shall not cover more than 15 percent of the area of the lot. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2511) 
Sec. 20-2512. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See article XV. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2512) 
Sec. 20-2513. - Riparian buffer requirement. 
All conservation subdivisions within this district shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained along both banks of streams and along all impoundments, as measured from the top of the bank of the stream or impoundment. The buffer shall be a variable width buffer with an average width of at least 75 feet, and a minimum width of 50 feet. All land disturbing activity is prohibited within the buffer unless a variance is granted in accordance with City of Darien Codes. 
(b)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained along all coastal marshlands, measured horizontally from the landward edge of the coastal marshlands, as established by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and along all wetlands, as measured from the inland edge of the wetland, as established by the Army Corp of Engineers. The buffer shall be a variable width buffer with an average width of at least 75 feet, and a minimum width of 50 feet. All land disturbing activity is prohibited within the 75 foot buffer unless a variance is granted in accordance with City of Darien Code Article XX. 
(c)  A minimum setback of 200 feet must be maintained for individual sewage disposal systems on lots adjacent to streams, coastal marshlands and wetlands as defined above. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2513) 
Sec. 20-2514. - Site analysis map requirement. 
Concurrent with the submission of a site sketch plan, as outlined in the City of Darien Subdivision Regulations, a site analysis map shall be submitted. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design. The preliminary site analysis map shall include the following features: 
(a)  Property boundaries; 
(b)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(c)  Topographic contours of no less than two-foot intervals; 
(d)  General site hydrology; 
(e)  Tree survey including all trees with a diameter at breast height of six inches; 
(f)  General soil types; 
(g)  Existing roads and structures; 
(h)  Riparian buffers; and, 
(i)  Critical habitat, archeological and historical sites. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2514) 
Sec. 20-2515. - Single family residential standards. 
All single family residences, whether site built or manufactured housing, must meet the following standards in the CP-R district: 
(a)  All structures including the primary structure and accessory structures shall be constructed with a pitched roof having a pitch of three in 12 or greater. 
(b)  The roof shall be covered with asphalt composition shingles, metal roofing, or tile materials. Plastic panels are prohibited. 
(c)  The exterior wall shall be material similar to traditional site-built housing. These materials may include clapboards, simulated clapboards such as conventional vinyl or metal siding, wood shingles, shakes, stucco, brick, brick veneer, concrete block, or similar materials, but shall not include smooth, ribbed or plastic panels. 
(d)  The minimum horizontal dimension of the unit as installed on the site shall be 24 feet. 
(e)  The minimum floor area shall be 1,200 square feet. 
(f)  All principal structures shall be placed on a permanent foundation. For the purposes of this section, a permanent foundation shall mean a concrete slab, concrete footers, foundation wall, piling or post construction which complies with the city building code. 
(g)  In no case shall wheels, any undercarriage or transporter unit be left on any structure. 
(h)  All units must meet wind loading requirements of Federal Emergency Management Administrator and the ICC-IBC and IRC Codes. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007(2), § 20-2515) 
ARTICLE XXVII. - SPECIAL USES 

Sec. 20-2701. - General provisions. 
Special uses, as listed in the various zones of this ordinance are so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are located, than do other uses permitted in the zone and as such require certain controls in order to insure compatibility with other uses in the zone within which they are proposed for location. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2012(2)) 
Sec. 20-2702. - Application procedure. 
Applications for a special use shall be submitted city manager and shall be accompanied by an application fee of $250.00. 
The application shall be made on proper forms and shall be accompanied by a site plan or survey showing existing and proposed structures, uses, access drives, setbacks, easements, buffer areas, parking and loading areas and any other pertinent information necessary for proper review. The city manager shall review the special use application and the accompanying site plan for compliance with the regulations set forth in the ordinance with particular reference to these requirements established for uses in those zones in which they are proposed for location. 
If the city manager finds the use to be in conformance with the ordinance and compatible with the existing uses in the area, the city manager shall forward his or her recommendation of approval, with or without additional conditions, to the city council for their final action. If the city manager finds the use not in conformance with the ordinance or non-compatible with the uses in the area then the city manager shall forward his or her recommendation of denial, and state the reason(s) of such action, to the city council for their action. 
Citizens shall be notified about the city council's public hearing by placement of notice in the newspaper of general circulation in the City of Darien and by posting on the affected property a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing before the city council and the kind of the special use being requested, at least ten days before the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2012(2)) 
Sec. 20-2703. - Approval, denial. 
The city council and the city manager in reviewing the application for a special use permit should consider the following: 
(a)  The effect the proposed activity will have on traffic flow along adjoining streets; 
(b)  The location of off-street parking facilities; 
(c)  The number, size and types of signs proposed for the site; 
(d)  The amount and location of open space; 
(e)  Protective screening; 
(f)  Hours and manner of operation; 
(g)  Outdoor lighting; 
(h)  Ingress and egress to the property; and 
(i)  Compatibility with surrounding land use. 
The city council may approve the application as submitted, it may deny the application or it may impose conditions and safeguards deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2012(2)) 
Sec. 20-2704. - Classification and duration. 
Permits issued for special uses shall bear the stamp "special use" and shall be valid only for that particular use and shall expire if the use, or operation pertaining thereto, does not commence within 12 months of the date of approval or shall cease for more than six months for any reason. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2012(2)) 
Appendix B - MUNICIPAL FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Municipal Fees ordinance, as adopted by the mayor and city council on October 17, 2006. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Section 1-104 of Chapter 1- "General Provisions" in the 1998 Code provided that the headings appearing in the Code were "intended as mere captions to indicate the contents" therein, and were not to be deemed or taken as a part of the substantive law of the Code. Thus, for stylistic purposes, headings, catchlines, and section numbers that had appeared in the municipal fees chapter have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for purposes of clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 27-100. - General provisions. 
For the purpose of municipal fees this section shall be referred to as chapter 27 [appendix B] "Municipal Fees". The fees in this chapter are referenced throughout the Code of the City of Darien. The fees are established under the provisions of the Charter of the City of Darien. Any fees not listed in this chapter but that are listed in other chapters of the Code of the City of Darien remain in effect. Any fees that are listed in other chapters of the code of the City of Darien which are inconsistent with fees set forth herein are hereby repealed and the new fee as set forth herein shall be binding. All fees may be changed from time to time by a vote of the city council. 
Sec. 27-101. - Annexation (nondeveloped land). 
1.  $100.00/acre, up to $10,000.00 
2.  All property less than an acre shall be treated as an acre. 
Sec. 27-102. - Rezoning. 
1.  $200.00/acre, up to $10,000.00 
2.  All property less than an acre shall be treated as an acre. 
Sec. 27-103. - Variances. 
1.  $250.00 each variance request 
Sec. 27-104. - Subdivision plat/plan reviews. 

 
Sec. 27-105. - Subdivision inspections. 

 
Sec. 27-106. - Site plan reviews. 

 
Sec. 27-107. - Site development inspections. 
Clearing, grading, & improvements: $450.00 plus $10.00/acre 
Sec. 27-108. - Water taps. 

 
Sec. 27-109. - Sewer taps. 

 
Sec. 27-110. - All building permit and inspection fees. 
1.  The following fees are hereby established. 

 
2.  Any construction not covered by the schedule listed above and over $2,000 in cost shall be assessed at the rate of $3.00 per $1000.00 for the purpose of permitting. 
3.  For multifamily building permits the schedule is graduated; therefore the fee must be paid at each level as the number of units increase. 
Sec. 27-111. - Certificate of occupancy. 
$50 per unit 
Sec. 27-112. - Business license. 

 
2.  The following list of occupations are required by Georgia law to either pay a flat rate occupational tax not to exceed $400.00 per state certificate holder to the City of Darien or a local occupational tax assessment based on the local government's rate schedule: 
Physician licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 
Osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 
Chiropractors 
Podiatrists 
Dentists 
Optometrists 
Psychologists 
Veterinarians 
Landscape architects 
Land surveyors 
Practitioners of physiotherapy 
Certified Public Accountants 
Embalmers 
Funeral directors (this does not mean funeral homes) 
Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers 
Architects 
Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors 
Dealers of motor vehicles as defined in paragraph (1) of section 10-1-622 O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622] and any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by State Law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
Sec. 27-113. - Water, sewer rate schedules. 
Monthly Billing Rates and Charges for Water 
Base Charge of $8.00 per REU* Inside the City 
Base Charge of $12.00 per REU* Outside the City 

 
*kgal = 1000 gallons; REU = Residential Equivalent Unit 
Monthly Billing Rates and Charges for Wastewater 
Base Charge of $10.00 REU* Inside the City 
Base Charge of $13.00 per REU* Outside the City 

 
*kgal = 1000 gallons; REU = Residential Equivalent Unit 
(Ord. of 5-20-2008, § 27-113) 
Sec. 27-114. - Meters. 
1.  Meters shall be installed by the city at a cost of $250.00 per meter. This price shall cover installation, labor, and capital equipment. 
2.  The city shall lease meters to residents at a fee of $3.00 per meter per month. The fee shall be added on as a surcharge to monthly city utility bills. 
Sec. 27-115. - Garbage collection. 
1.  Fee Schedule 

 
2.  All garbage fees shall be billed in with city utility bills. 
3.  Any commercial business that requires more than one garbage can shall be accessed at the rate equivalent to five pulls per week or $20.00. 
4.  Every business in the city shall be required at minimum to pay for one pull per week or $12.00. 
Sec. 27-116. - Definitions. 
1.  (REU)—Residential equivalency unit. A calculation used to determine the impact of a development onto a water or sewer system. REUs for Darien are based on 300 gallons per day. 
2.  All subdivision fees are also applicable to PUD as they both are a subdivision of land. 
[Sec. 27-117. - Schedule of costs for planting trees.] 
Cost Schedule 

 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § IV(G) ; Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § IV(G)) 
[Sec. 27-118. - Land disturbing activity permits.] 
Editor's note— The following provision was adopted on August 21, 2007, by the City Council of the City of Darien, Georgia, as part of the "Water Resources Protection Ordinance." It has been reprinted here at the request of the city for referential purposes. 
The following permit fees are established per acre or fraction thereof in the project area: 

 
Appendix C - CULTURAL AND HERITAGE TOURISM (CHT)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Cultural and Heritage Tourism District Code of the City of Darien, as adopted by ordinance of the city council on November 15, 2006. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the title, enactment date, severability, repealer, transitional language, ratification date, publication date or effective date of the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. The same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text has been used as it appears in the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

A. - Scope of provisions. 
The regulations set forth in the Cultural and Heritage Tourism District, or set forth elsewhere in this part when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the Cultural and Heritage Tourism District. In addition to these district regulations all City of Darien Development Standards will apply. 
B. - Purpose. 
The regulations set forth in the Cultural and Heritage Tourism District are designed to: 
1.  Improve the quality of life for area residents through the economic benefits of cultural and heritage tourism that support a healthy and sustainable economy, which include improved community services and amenities, new jobs and business opportunities, stable property values, strong diversified local economies, a balanced mix of uses, and appealing storefronts and public spaces. 
2.  Create vital historic downtowns and neighborhoods that accommodate present-day lifestyles while remaining strongly grounded in their cultural heritage. 
3.  Develop and nurture a successful and sustainable local cultural and heritage tourism industry by incorporating the principles established by The National Trust for Historic Preservation which are [to]: focus on quality and authenticity; preserve and protect resources; make sites and programs come alive; find the appropriate fit between community and tourist needs; and collaborate with partners. 
4.  Protect, share, and enhance locally or regionally significant cultural, historic and natural resources that may include places, artifacts, landscapes, architecture, ecological systems, archeological sites, indigenous and emerging communities, products including arts and crafts, folklore, events, lifestyles, and traditions that authentically represent the culture and heritage of past and present communities. 
5.  Identify cultural and heritage tourism assets that are unique and character-defining; ensure their protection and continuation; encourage the development of new cultural and heritage tourism uses that support and complement existing assets; [and] fully integrate cultural and heritage tourism assets into the daily life of the community. 
6.  Manage the impacts of tourism on local infrastructure by planning for and providing adequate parking, transportation routes, accommodations, services, amenities and public open spaces. 
7.  Encourage quality improvements and investments in the community and the delivery of authentic products and excellent services by establishing standards that result in a physical environment, experience, and character that attracts tourists and entices them to linger and return. 
8.  Support tourism as a means to achieve economic sustainability and success in the State of Georgia as defined in the Rules of Department of Community Affairs 110-9 Job Tax Credit Program, Chapter 110-9-1 Job Tax Credit Program Regulations and to encourage the use of any subsequent and applicable state-sponsored development incentives. 
9.  Ensure that historic character and quality is protected and enhanced by requiring that both modified historic structures and new development are compatible with the community's historic character. 
C. - Definitions. 
When a word used in this section is in SMALL CAPS [ italics ], the following definitions shall apply. Words used in this section but not defined herein shall be as defined by The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Darien as amended hereafter. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit not greater than 850 square feet or 40 percent of the floor area of the primary dwelling unit, whichever is greater, located in an Outbuilding and located on the same lot with the primary dwelling unit. 
Build-To Line: The Build-To Line is the line along which the building Street Facade or Street Wall is permitted to be located. The distance between the Build-To Line and the nearest street curb is equal to the Sidewalk Area width requirements, except where Public or Private Open Space is adjacent to the Sidewalk Area , the Build-To Line shall extend around the perimeter of such Open Space . requirements include the minimum Street Facade Frontage of principal structures. 
Cultural And Heritage Tourism District : The area approved on the accompanying Cultural And Heritage Tourism District Subarea Map, which includes areas around both sides of US Highway 17 as shown on the official City of Darien Zoning Map. 
Habitable Space: Covered and conditioned building floor area utilized for any principal permitted use except parking, storage, digital industry switchboards, power generators, and other relay equipment. 
Multifamily: A building containing more than one residential unit. 
Open Space: Private Open Space and Public Open Space appropriately improved for pedestrian use and amenity and not including areas used for vehicles, except for incidental service, maintenance or emergency actions only. Open Space shall be exterior and computed as the total square footage of said spaces. Open Space shall meet the requirements of at least one of the following types. 
1.  Private Open Space: Open Space that is private courts, lawns, gardens, terraces, or balconies, which restrict access to residents of adjacent development. 
2.  Public Open Space: Park, Plaza, or Hard Surface Trail that is open to the public during normal City of Darien park hours, Street Medians and Islands and Sidewalk Area requirements located on private property. 
3.  Park: A Public Open Space that provides recreation amenities and gathering places. A Park shall have streets along a minimum of 50 percent of its perimeter and shall have no more than 20 percent of its area covered with impervious surfaces, with the exception of Hard Surface Trails. 
4.  Plaza : A Public Open Space that is fronted by buildings, either civic, or private, and is available for public activities, but may have public access limited for the purposes of providing outdoor dining areas. A Plaza shall have streets along a minimum of 50 percent of its perimeter and a landscape consisting of durable pavement, trees and other plant materials. 
5.  Square: A Plaza that has streets along 100 percent of its perimeter and may or may not consist of durable pavement. 
6.  Street Medians And Islands: A Public Open Space that is surrounded by a street and located entirely within a public right-of-way and not intended for active or passive use. Such area is landscaped and may contain sculpture, fountains, flags or similar features. 
7.  Hard Surface Trail : New multi-use trails which shall be concrete or asphalt with a minimum width of 12 feet with green space on either side for use by pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles. Boardwalks, bridges, and pervious concrete are permitted within floodplains and stream buffers as approved by the city. 
Outbuilding: An ancillary building, such as a garage, workshop, or Accessory Dwelling Unit located towards the rear of the same lot containing a single-family dwelling or Townhouse . It may be connected to such dwelling by an unheated walkway or breezeway. Outbuildings shall not exceed 850 square feet nor shall they exceed 35 feet in height or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less. 
Residential Treatment: An architectural treatment that: 
1.  Is provided on a Street Facade . 
2.  Provides Habitable Space for a minimum of the first 12 feet in depth of the entry level floor behind the Street Facade. 
3.  Provides equally sized vertical windows where the top of which and the bottom of which shall be no higher and no lower than to the top of the door frame and the bottom of door frame. 
4.  Provides windows for a minimum of 30 percent and a maximum of 60 percent of the total Street Facade area, with the facade of each unit and each floor of a unit being calculated independently. 
5.  Provides an entry stoop or porch at a primary pedestrian Street Facade entrance, when the Residential Treatment is provided on the street entry level facade. 
Resource Area: A site shown on the Cultural And Heritage Tourism District Subareas Map, which has specific requirements that supersede certain other requirements of the Cultural And Heritage Tourism District as amended. 
Sidewalk Area: Begins at the street curb, including intervening driveways, and consists of a contiguous Sidewalk Landscape Zone, Sidewalk Clear Zone, And Sidewalk Supplemental Zone as described below. 
Sidewalk Landscape Zone : The portion of a Sidewalk Area adjacent to the street curb and reserved for the placement of trees, ground cover, and street furniture including utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, traffic control boxes, tree grates, newspaper boxes, bus shelters, sandwich boards as defined under the sign ordinance, bicycle racks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
Sidewalk Clear Zone: The portion of a Sidewalk Area that is reserved for pedestrian passage and is unobstructed by permanent objects to a height of eight feet, including but not limited to, steps and stoops, traffic control boxes, and utility structures. The Sidewalk Clear Zone shall be adjacent and between the Sidewalk Landscape Zone and the Sidewalk Supplemental Zone and shall have a consistent cross-slope not exceeding two percent. 
Sidewalk Supplemental Zone : The area between the back of the Sidewalk Clear Zone and the Build-To Line . Adjacent to Storefront Treatments, Sidewalk Supplemental Zones may be used for pedestrian amenity elements such as benches, merchandise display, potted plants, and decorative fountains. Outdoor dining is permitted only when adjacent to bars/eating premises and establishments. Elements that are prohibited in the Supplemental Zone include: recreational areas and facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts; fences and walls greater than 40 inches in height; service elements such as dumpsters, loading docks and similar elements; mechanical features; and parking. Public access may be restricted only for areas adjacent to Residential Treatment , and for outdoor dining areas when adjacent to Storefront Treatments . No element shall be attached to the Sidewalk Supplemental Zone in any way, with the exception of permitted porches, steps, and stoops adjacent to Residential Treatments. 
Storefront Treatment: An architectural treatment that: 
1.  Is provided on the sidewalk entrance level of a Street Facade . 
2.  Provides Habitable Space for a minimum of the first 20 feet in depth behind the Street Facade. 
3.  Provides a display window area consisting of: 
a.  A non-glass bulkhead or knee wall beginning at grade and extending to a point no less than eight inches but not more than 24 inches above the Sidewalk Area at the Build-To Line. 
b.  A glass display window a minimum of 75 percent of the length of the built portion of the Build-To Line beginning at the top of the bulkhead or knee wall, to a height not less than ten feet and not more than 12 feet above said Sidewalk Area at the Build-To Line below the base of the window. Such glass shall provide views into display windows that have a minimum depth of 2½ feet into and are accessible from the building interior. 
c.  Primary pedestrian entrances on the Street Facade which shall be recessed a maximum of seven feet from the exterior facade, and shall remain unlocked during normal business hours, and have a surface area that is a minimum of 70 percent glass. 
d.  A glass transom located along the Street Facade of a structure above the glass display window and entry door shall have a minimum height of 24 inches and a maximum height of 36 inches. 
e.  No facade length shall exceed 20 feet without intervening glass display windows or glass doors. 
4.  [Provides] a non-glass sign band located above the glass transom having a minimum height of 36 inches. 
5.  [Provides] a cornice line above the sign band a minimum height of eight inches. 
6.  [Provides] street address numbers, a minimum of six inches in height, located above the primary pedestrian entrance. 
7.  Recesses any sidewalk entrance level drop ceiling a minimum of 18 inches from the display window opening. 
8.  [Has] finished floor to finished ceiling height shall be [that is] a minimum of 14 feet. Finished ceiling slab height shall not be considered finished ceiling height. 
Street Facade: The exterior wall of a building, not including extruding structures such as porches, stoops or bay windows, which is located along the Build-To Line or street without an intervening building or Street Wall . 
Street Facade Frontage: The percent of Street Facade required along the Build-To Line . 
Street Wall: A wall no less than 75 percent opaque built along the Build-To Line and co-planar with the Street Facade , often for the purpose of masking a parking lot from the street. Street Walls shall be a minimum of 3½ feet in height, and consisting of dense evergreen hedge or constructed of a material matching the adjacent Street Facade. Street Walls shall be discontinued no more than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. The Street Wall shall have other individual openings not exceeding four square feet in area at height of less than 3½. 
ILLUSTRATIONS OF DEFINITIONS 
The drawings within this section are graphic depictions of some of the definitions and requirements herein. Unless otherwise indicated, each is intended to specifically illustrate only the indicated requirement; all other suggestions of design, such as architectural style, tree shape and aesthetics, do not constitute a requirement of this section. 
Build-To Line and Driveway Treatment 



Residential Treatment is provided on the first-story of a Street Facade . It includes equally sized vertical windows that are arranged horizontally and an entry stoop or porch at the primary Street Facade entrance. 

Sidewalk Landscape Zone 
•  Reserved for the placement of trees, ground cover, and street furniture 
•  Street furniture includes utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, traffic control boxes, tree grates, newspaper boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks, etc. 
Sidewalk Clear Zone 
•  Reserved for pedestrian passage 
•  Unobstructed by permanent objects to a height of seven feet 
Sidewalk Supplemental Zone 
•  May be used for stoops, steps, porches, and landscaping 




Storefront Treatment is provided on the first story of a Street Facade. It includes a non-glass base or knee wall, glass display windows, a glass door, a glass transom, a non-glass sign band, a cornice line above the sign band, street address numbers, and a primary pedestrian entrance. 

Sidewalk Landscape Zone 
•  Reserved for the placement of trees, ground cover, and street furniture 
•  Street furniture includes utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, traffic control boxes, tree grates, newspaper boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks, etc. 
Sidewalk Clear Zone 
•  Reserved for pedestrian passage 
•  Unobstructed by permanent objects to a height of eight feet 
Sidewalk Supplemental Zone 
•  May be used for pedestrian amenity elements such as benches, merchandise display, etc. 
•  Outdoor dining is permitted only when adjacent to eating and drinking establishments. 


Planting Strip and Parking Space Size Reduction 

Where the end of a parking space has a permanent concrete or masonry curb and abuts a landscaped area that is a minimum width of six feet, the depth of such space may be reduced by two feet. 
Street Trees and Street Lighting Placement 

Parking Decks 
Structured parking is permitted in the (insert subareas) Parking structures shall conceal automobiles from visibility: shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building on all levels; shall be faced in brick, stone, cast stone, poured-in-place rubbed concrete, or pre-cast concrete faced in or having the appearance of brick or stone. 

Sidewalk Area Special Permit Options 

OPTION: Sidewalk Landscape Zone combined with on-street parking. 

OPTION: Sidewalk Supplemental Zone is moved between Sidewalk Clear Zone and Sidewalk Landscape Zone and used for outdoor dining.   
On certain streets where space is restricted, a special permit may be approved for alternate on-street parking, street tree, and Sidewalk Landscape Zone treatment, where the requirements for street trees within the Sidewalk Landscape Zone are met by locating landscape bulb-outs between on-street parking spaces.                                          
A special permit may be approved for an alternate Sidewalk Supplemental Zone treatment where the Sidewalk Supplemental Zone is a minimum width of ten feet and is located between the Sidewalk Landscape Zone and Sidewalk Clear Zone for purposes of outdoor dining. 
D. - Administration procedures. 
All buildings, whether public or private or non-profit, within the CHT District including any subarea of the district, shall be subject to a code compliance certificate (CCC) review, prior to any exterior site demolition or construction or building facade additions, improvements, or renovations and prior to application for any building permit for such activities. The purpose of a CCC is to ensure compliance with the requirements set forth in this section. A CCC application shall include a site plan, building floor plans, and elevations, drawn to scale, and shall be approved by the city manager, or designee. 
A CCC is also required for the following in keeping with other requirements of the Cultural And Heritage Tourism District: Open Space development and maintenance agreements, paving in parking areas other than asphalt and concrete, reduction of parking requirements, off-site parking, shared parking, angled on-street parking, curb cuts, new streets, Sidewalk Area improvements including special or decorative paving and plantings and street furniture location and type, and Street Wall requirements. 
Existing buildings and building facades are grandfathered in, until such time as changes are made to elements that are cited in this section. Changes to a building facade do not affect the grandfathered status of the building footprint, or other building or site elements. Any changes to the building footprint, except in a rear yard not visible from the street, shall require that all section requirements, such as Sidewalk Area requirements and parking location shall be complied with. Internal renovations that do not alter the building facade or building footprint, and upgrades of building and construction materials, do not affect grandfathered status. 
When an existing building that is more than 50 years old is being renovated, and where such building is not within a Resource Area Designation and where an historic architectural feature does not comply with requirements of this section, an applicant may request an administrative variation from such requirements, subject to other CCC requirements and conditions. Such variation shall be conditioned upon a) architectural drawings of the proposed renovation and details of the subject architectural feature, and b) documentation of the building's historic significance and the importance of the feature to the particular architectural style or historic relevance of the architectural feature. 
Every effort shall be made to preserve existing mature shade trees with a height greater than 50 feet and a trunk caliper greater than ten inches at four feet above grade. For the purposes of protecting an existing mature shade tree, an applicant may request an administrative variation from regulations, subject to CCC requirements and conditioned to a site plan which demonstrates that provisions shall be made to implement an alternate design which meets the intent of the Cultural And Heritage Tourism District. 
A CCC applicant shall receive a response from the city within 15 days of the date that a completed application is submitted. The application fee shall be in accordance with the City of Darien's fee schedule then in effect. 
E. - Cultural and Heritage Tourism District Subareas And Resource Areas. 
The following CHT District Subareas and Resource Areas within the Cultural and Heritage Tourism District are hereby established: 
1.  CHT-HD Historic Downtown permits a mix of retail, office, and residential uses in mixed-use buildings. Retail and service establishments are limited to a maximum of 3,600 square feet; some exceptions apply and are listed in the Principal Permitted Uses Table. Storefront Treatment is required along U.S. Hwy 17 and Broad Street west of U.S. Hwy 17, except that buildings that are more than 50 years old may retain a Residential Treatment. 
2.  CHT-HT Historic Transitional permits a mix of retail, office, and residential uses in mixed-use buildings at a scale and intensity greater than that permitted in the CHT-HD. Only Residential Treatment or Storefront Treatment is permitted except within the Historic Resource Areas . Individual retail uses shall be limited to 8,000 square feet; some exceptions apply and are listed in the Principal Permitted Uses Table. 
3.  CHT-CC Community Commercial permits a mix of uses that are a scale and character compatible with regional serving and highway-oriented developments. Only Storefront Treatment is permitted except within a Resource Area . Individual retail uses shall be limited to 15,000 square feet; some exceptions apply and are listed in the Principal Permitted Uses Table. 
4.  CHT-MR Mixed Residential permits primarily office and residential uses. Non-office and non-residential establishments are limited to the first floor and a maximum of 3,600 square feet; some exceptions apply and are listed in the Principal Permitted Uses Table. Only Residential Treatment is permitted except within a Resource Area . 
5.  CHT-RA Historic Resource Area provides for additional special requirements for particular significant buildings or sites within the CHT district. Uses located within historic structures within the Historic Resource Area are exempt from size limits. Locations such as historic structures, cemeteries, rivers, view sheds, historic event sites, and other historic or cultural features may need to have protections beyond the overall district regulations. Where there is a conflict between the regulations of the Historic Resource Area and the regulations of the Cultural And Heritage Tourism District , the regulations of the Historic Resource Area shall prevail. 
Cultural And Heritage Tourism District Subareas Map (page x)[as attached] establishes areas designated as CHT-HD, CHT-HT, CHT-CC, CHT-MR, and CHT-HRA. 
F. - Principal permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in each Cultural And Heritage Tourism District Subarea are summarized below. In each subarea, the total gross leasable area for bars/eating premises and establishments shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross leasable area of sidewalk level commercial space for that subarea. See Principal Permitted Uses Table for specific allowable uses. 

 
G. - Open space requirements. 
All Open Space requirements shall be subject to a CCC. All developments shall be required to dedicate Open Space . Location of such Open Space shall be approved by the city either within the confines of the development or at a proximate location. Residential development shall provide either Public Open Space or Private Open Space . The minimum requirement for Open Space is 20 percent of the lot area. 
In addition to the definition requirements, Open Space shall be dedicated, designed and constructed pursuant to the following regulations: 
1.  Detention ponds and required stream buffers shall not be used in Open Space calculations. 
2.  The owner shall submit a maintenance agreement establishing a mechanism for maintaining Open Space dedication located within subject development. 
3.  Open Space requirements shall be constructed or dedicated as part of the first phase of construction, at a minimum in an amount equivalent to the first phase proportion of the total development. 
4.  Open Space dedication shall be guaranteed through bonds, conservation easements, or land donation to the city or permanent deed restriction. 
5.  Non-residential development shall provide Public Open Space , which shall be open to the public during daylight hours and other hours as determined by the city. 
6.  Public sidewalks, multiuse trails, or public riverfront access that is constructed on private property shall be counted toward open space requirements. 
7.  New development parcels adjacent to the riverfront shall provide continuous public access along the riverfront. Such public access shall have a minimum width of ten feet, shall have unobstructed views of the river for 75 percent of the length of the riverfront, and shall connect with, or provide for future connection with, adjacent parcels' riverfront access. 
H. - Parking, driveway, and access requirements. 
1.  No parking shall be permitted between a building and the street without an intervening building, except in CHT-CC (Community Commercial) where the Street Facade Frontage requirements have been met. 
2.  Developments are permitted a maximum of one curb cut per block face or one curb cut per 400 linear feet of block face, whichever is greater. For the purposes of this section, two curb cuts serving two one-way driveways shall only be counted as one curb cut. 
3.  No curb cuts, driveways or circular drives shall be permitted on US Highway 17 when access can be provided from a side or rear street. Circular drives are prohibited, with the exception of hotels, in the CHT-HD (Historic Downtown), CHT-HT (Historic Transitional) and CHT-CC (Community Commercial) subareas. 
4.  Curb cuts shall be limited to a one-way a maximum width of 12 feet or a two-way maximum width of 24 feet. 
5.  Any parking not screened from the street by a building shall have a minimum seven-foot wide landscaped area between such parking and the street. Such landscaped area shall have a minimum of one shade tree per 50 linear feet, ground cover, and an evergreen hedge at a maximum of 36 inches or decorative wall or fence with a minimum height of 30 inches. Trees shall be planted and street lighting shall be placed in line with the side stripes of adjacent parking spaces. 
6.  Where the end of a parking space has a permanent concrete or masonry curb and abuts a landscaped area that is a minimum width of six feet, the required minimum depth of such space shall be reduced by two feet. 
7.  Commercial park-for-hire lots are not permitted, except that individual businesses may lease spaces under a shared parking arrangement. 
8.  Paving materials used for parking and loading areas other than asphalt or concrete shall be subject to a CCC. 
9.  Required parking may be provided off-site within 1,000 feet of the use that it serves, subject to a CCC. 
10.  Angled on-street parking shall be permitted on both sides of new streets or as otherwise permitted by a CCC. Forty-five-degree angled parking shall require parking space length of 19 feet and two travel lanes width of ten feet. Sixty-degree angled parking shall require parking space length of 20 feet and two travel lanes width of 11 feet. Ninety-degree angled parking shall require parking space length of 18 feet and two travel lanes width of 12 feet. 
11.  Reduction of parking requirements may be permitted, subject to a shared parking arrangement under the following criteria: 
a.  The minimum number of parking spaces for a development where shared parking is proposed shall be determined by a study prepared by the applicant following the procedures of the Urban Land Institute (ULI) Shared Parking Report or Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Shared Parking Guidelines. The actual number of parking spaces required shall be based on well-recognized sources of parking data such as the ULI or ITE reports. If standard rates are not available or limited, the applicant may collect data at similar sites to establish local parking demand rates. If the shared parking plan assumes use of an existing parking facility, then field surveys shall be conducted to determine actual parking accumulation. If possible, these surveys shall consider the seasonal peak period for the combination of land uses involved. 
b.  All shared parking spaces shall be clearly marked as such; and 
c.  An applicant shall submit the following information as part of an application to reduce parking requirements and avoid conflicting parking demands: 
i.  A to-scale map indicating location of proposed parking spaces; 
ii.  Hours of business operation of nonresidential parking users; 
iii.  Written consent of property owners agreeing to the shared parking arrangement (when provided off-site); 
iv.  Copies of parking lease agreement, easements for parking, or notarized letter or sworn affidavit as to the intent of lease agreement, including renewed leases, shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Zoning, or designee. Lapse of a required lease agreement, or failure to file leases, shall terminate approval for shared parking. 
12.  Rear alleys shall be provided to access Townhouse and Multifamily garages, single-family dwelling garages, and commercial loading and service areas, where such access is feasible. See Street Type Table — Alley Requirements. 
13.  All required off-street parking for Townhouse s and Multifamily dwellings, and Accessory Dwelling Units shall be met on-site or in an adjacent garage or parking structure. 
14.  Bicycle or moped parking spaces are required as follows: 
a.  All new non-residential uses shall provide one such space for every 20 automobile spaces and new Multifamily uses shall provide one such space for every five units provided that no such uses shall have fewer than two such spaces or be required to exceed 30 spaces. 
b.  Such spaces shall be located within the Sidewalk Landscape Zone a maximum distance of 100 feet from the primary pedestrian entrance, or shall be located at least as close as the closest automobile space, except for handicapped parking spaces. 
c.  Bicycle parking spaces shall include a bike rack with a metal anchor sufficient to secure the bicycle frame when used in conjunction with a user-supplied lock. 
15.  Garages and carports shall not face adjacent streets except where alley access is not feasible, in which case such garages and carports shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the street facade and a minimum of 18 feet from the required sidewalk. 
I. - Sidewalk area and street requirements. 
1.  Whenever a development five acres or greater is to be developed or redeveloped, maximum block size requirements shall apply in each subarea as indicated on the Downtown Site Limits Table. The right-of-way for such portion of said street shall be platted according to specified street requirements as indicated below and on the Street Type Tables. The owner is responsible for the dedication of the right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance. The entire dedicated right-of-way shall be shown as such on a final survey plat that is submitted to and approved by the city. Measurements involving minimum lot standards shall be made at the edge of the full right-of-way. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO) for any new development on such lot, the street shall be either constructed or guaranteed through bonds to the standards established herein. Building floor area that would have otherwise been allowed within such dedicated street right-of-way shall be allowed to be developed elsewhere on the site. 
2.  New streets within all subareas shall be B (Local Mixed-Use) streets. See Street Type Tables. 
3.  Dead-end and cul-de-sac streets are prohibited. 
4.  A Sidewalk Area shall be located along all streets and shall consist of a Sidewalk Landscape Zone with street trees, an unobstructed Sidewalk Clear Zone , and a Supplemental Zone with width requirements as indicated on the Street Type Table — Sidewalk Area and Hard Surface Trail Requirements. 
5.  Any paving, including concrete, special or decorative paving, within the Sidewalk Landscape Zone, Sidewalk Clear Zone, or Sidewalk Supplemental Zone shall continue across any intervening driveway. 
6.  Within the Sidewalk Landscape Zone: 
a.  Street trees are required as indicated in the Street Type Table — Sidewalk Area and Hard Surface Trail Requirements. Street trees shall be planted a maximum of 50 feet on center and spaced [an] equal distance between streetlights and in line with stripes of parallel parking spaces. All newly planted trees shall be a minimum caliper of 3½ inches measured 12 inches above ground, shall be limbed up to a minimum height of seven feet and shall have a minimum mature height of 40 feet. Trees planted in front of Storefront Treatments shall be limbed up to a minimum height of ten feet and have a minimum mature height of 50 feet. Trees shall have a minimum planting area of 40 square feet. 
b.  In the Historic Downtown subarea and the Community Commercial subarea, the tree planting area shall also be planted with evergreen ground cover such as Liriope, Mondo Grass, Confederate Jessamine or other evergreen ground cover as approved by the city. 
c.  In the Historic Transitional subarea and the Mixed Residential subarea, the space between required tree planting areas shall be planted with evergreen ground cover or grass as approved by the city. 
d.  All street furniture and pavers, where installed, and all street trees shall have a location and type subject to approval by the Director of Planning and Zoning, or designee, including but not limited to the following: benches, waste receptacles, bicycle racks, newspaper stands, tree grates, and pedestrian lights. Tree grates shall be a minimum of eight feet by five feet. Decorative pedestrian lights shall be placed a maximum of 50 feet on center and shall be spaced [an] equal distance between required street trees. 
e.  Street tree requirements within the Sidewalk Landscape Zone may be met or exceeded through landscape bulb-outs between on-street parking spaces and behind sidewalk extensions at street intersections on US Highway 17. 
f.  All live oaks located within 100 feet of US Hwy 17 right-of-way with a minimum diameter of 24" at breast height shall be preserved. Tree protection measures for each affected site shall be approved by the city through a CCC, and a site plan. 
7.  Within the Sidewalk Supplemental Zone : 
a.  Terraces, porches and stoops, not including stairs, shall encroach a maximum depth of 60 percent of the total zone depth. Terraces, porches, and stoops that are not a required "accessible route into and through the dwelling unit", as established by Sec. 804. [42 USC 3604] (3)(C)(iii)(I) of the Fair Housing Act, shall have a minimum finished floor height of 24 inches above the grade of the Sidewalk Area and such terraces, porches, and stoops shall not be considered Street Facade . 
b.  CHT-MR (Mixed Residential) shall provide landscaping for a minimum of 40 percent of the zone's horizontal area adjacent to sidewalk level Residential Treatments. 
c.  Hardscaping shall be provided for a minimum of 80 percent of the zone's horizontal area adjacent to Storefront Treatments . 
d.  Buildings with no adjacent Sidewalk Supplemental Zone and that existed before December 31, 2006 may have outdoor dining areas encroach a maximum of two feet into the Sidewalk Clear Zone , measured from the Street Facade. 
e.  Sidewalk Supplemental Zone width requirements may be administratively reduced where the Sidewalk Landscape Zone is increased to a minimum width of ten feet for purposes of locating outdoor dining. 
J. - Site limits. 
1.  Where such Street Facade Frontage requirements are satisfied by existing principal buildings, additional principle buildings shall be exempt from these requirements. 
2.  Any balconies, awnings and bay windows may encroach into any Sidewalk Supplemental Zone or required setback a maximum depth of five feet. 
3.  Walkways with a minimum width of four feet shall be provided from the closest public Sidewalk Clear Zone to the primary entrance of all buildings and structures not built to the Sidewalk Area , including parking structure. 

 
K. - Street facade requirements. 
Along the Street Facade of all new and renovated buildings and structures the following shall apply: 
1.  Sidewalk level uses, including but not limited to dwelling units, Multifamily lobbies, and individual business establishments, shall have a primary pedestrian entrance, which shall face and be visible from, and directly adjoin the required Sidewalk Area or adjoining Open Space . Where an individual use has a Street Facade on more than one street, such entrance requirement shall apply along a storefront street, or when on other streets, such requirement shall apply along the higher order of streets in the order of arterial, collector or local street. Where both streets are the same order, entrance orientation may be to either street. Where a historic structure is being renovated, such entrance locations may reflect those of such historic structure. 
2.  All buildings with more than four Sidewalk Area level residential units along a single street shall have individual entrances to such units directly accessible from the required Sidewalk Area or adjoining Open Space . All walkways providing such access shall be shared between no more than two adjacent units. 
3.  The first two stories of building facades, including foundations, shall be brick, cast stone, stucco of Portland cement or Tabby, concrete siding such as Hardiplank, natural wood or stone, with the exception of pedestrian entrances and windows. In CHT-HD (Historic Downtown) such requirements shall apply to the entire building facade along arterial streets and along Fort King George Drive and building facades seen from such streets. 
4.  Awnings shall be of fabrics, canvas, fixed metal, or similar material. Internally lit awnings and canopies that emit light through the awning or canopy material are prohibited. 
5.  Blank, windowless walls are prohibited. All building stories with the exception of Storefront Treatment shall have windows and doors that equal a minimum of 30 percent and maximum of 60 percent of the total facade area with each story being calculated independently. 
6.  All windows shall be vertically shaped with a height greater than width, including display windows but not transoms. 
7.  Glass panels in windows and storefronts shall be clear and unpainted, and shall not be tinted such that views into the building are obstructed, with the exception of transoms, which may be prism glass. 
8.  Entry facade window trim shall not be flush with the exterior wall and shall have a minimum relief of one-quarter inch from the exterior wall. 
9.  Doors and windows that operate as horizontal sliders are prohibited except where renovating a historic building with this window type. 
10.  Window frames shall be recessed a minimum of two inches from the exterior facade. 
11.  Stoops and entry-level porches shall not be enclosed with screen wire or glass. 
12.  Porch and arcade columns shall be a minimum width of eight inches. 
13.  Residential porches shall be covered and have a minimum depth of five feet, a minimum length of six feet and a minimum area of 40 feet. 
14.  Exterior entry steps shall have enclosed risers. 
15.  Parking structures shall conceal automobiles from visibility; shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building on all levels; shall be faced in brick, stone, cast stone, poured-in-place rubbed concrete, or pre-cast concrete faced in or having the appearance of brick or stone. 
16.  The minimum building height as measured along the Build-To Line shall be 18 feet in all subareas. 
17.  All buildings shall have Street Facades with continuous Storefront Treatment or Residential Treatment requirements as indicated in the Building Facade and Materials Requirements Table. 

 

 

 

 
L. - General requirements. 
1.  The primary pedestrian entrance to all sidewalk level retail and bars/eating premises and establishments shall remain unlocked during business hours. 
2.  Primary sidewalk level pedestrian entrances to individual businesses and residential units shall be adjacent to required Sidewalk Area or Open Space. 
3.  Building facade materials shall be combined only horizontally, with the heavier below the lighter. 
4.  Chimneys shall extend to the ground. 
5.  All roofs shall have a minimum 25-year roof and no visible roll roofing. 
6.  The height of fences and walls located between the Street Facade of principal structures and a street shall not exceed 40 inches and in other areas shall not exceed six feet. 
7.  Fences and walls located along the alley right-of-way line or adjacent property line shall be a minimum height of six feet and 75 percent opaque. 
8.  The use of barbed wire, razor wire, chain link or similar elements shall be prohibited. 
9.  Loading docks and dumpsters shall be entirely screened from view of any Public Open Space or Sidewalk Area, with vertically enclosed opaque walls. 
10.  Utilities shall be placed underground or in alleys wherever feasible. 
11.  Building mechanical and accessory features: 
a.  Shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure or on rooftops and shall not be visible from any Public Open Space or Sidewalk Area . 
b.  When located on rooftops shall be incorporated in the design of the building and screened with materials similar to the building. 
M. - Resource area requirements. 
1.  Historic building resource areas (HBRA) 
The purpose of this section is to regulate areas within the Cultural and Heritage Tourism District that contain historic structures that contribute to the character of the district. The regulations contained herein are intended to: 1) insure that modifications to historic buildings are in keeping with the historic architectural styles of the buildings that are being modified, and 2) insure that new primary structures are constructed in a manner compatible with the historic architectural styles found in the Cultural and Heritage Tourism District. 
Parcels within the Historic Building Resource Area are subject to the following regulations, in addition to other requirements of the Cultural and Heritage Tourism District . Where there is a conflict between the regulations of the Historic Resource Area and the regulations of the Cultural and Heritage Tourism District , the regulations of the Historic Resource Area shall prevail. 
a.  In the case of modifications to existing historic structures, the required Build-To Line shall match that of the existing historic structure. 
b.  In the case of the construction of a new primary structure, the required Build-To Line shall match that of the historic structure which previously occupied the parcel. No new structures shall be permitted in front of the rear facade of the original historic building. 
c.  All exterior facade materials, except windows, shall match those of the existing historic structure which is being modified, or shall be of brick, horizontal Hardiplank, stucco of portland cement, natural wood or stone. 
d.  Parking decks shall be prohibited. 
e.  New primary structures shall have a Residential Treatment with roofs that extend a minimum of 18 inches beyond the face of exterior building walls, regardless of use, except when otherwise specifically indicated. 
f.  With the exception of stories partially contained within roofs, all aboveground stories shall be equal in floor area and shape. 
g.  The following sites are designated as an Historic Building Resource Area: 
1.  Strain Building (also known as 102 Broad St.) 
2.  Courthouse (also known as 310 Northway) 
3.  Old Jail (also known as 404 Northway) 
4.  The Trail Head Center (Also known as 104 1st St.) 
5.  Old City Hall (also known as 106 Washington St.) 
6.  Property known as 200 Walton St. 
7.  The Palmer House (NW corner of 1st St. and Screven St.) 
8.  Oglethorpe Inn (also known as 104 2nd St.) 
9.  The Church located on the northwest corner of Jackson St. and 6th St. West 
10.  The Catholic Church located at 100 N way 
11.  The property located at 015 Broad St. 
12.  The commercial buildings on the SE corner of US 17 and 1st St. 
HISTORIC BUILDING RESOURCE AREAS (HBRA) RESIDENTIAL STYLES ARCHITECTURAL STYLES 
Craftsman 

Colonial Revival 

Gothic Revival 

HISTORIC BUILDING RESOURCE AREAS (HBRA) COMMERCIAL ARCHITECTURAL STYLES 

•  Structures are two or more stories 
•  Horizontally divided into two distinct zones with the first story comprising one of the zones 
•  The first story, street level zone, indicates public spaces such as retail stores, banking lobbies, insurance offices, or hotel lobbies 
•  The upper zone suggests more private spaces, including offices, hotel rooms, meeting halls, or apartments 
•  The facade characteristics of the two zones may not relate to one another 
•  The upper zone may contain a variety of elements, including an attic story 



•  Limited to structures of one story 
•  The structures are a simple box with a decorated facade 
•  The structures are usually attached to one another 
•  In many cases, the street facade of a single store front unit is narrow and comprised of only plate glass windows, an entrance, and a cornice or parapet 
•  Larger examples may have a unified, horizontal, and streamlined design that encompass several storefronts 



•  Must be at least three stories in height 
•  The facade is divided horizontally into two major zones that are different yet carefully related to one another 
•  The lower zone rises one or two stories and serves as a visual base for the upper zone 
•  The upper zone functions as an ordered, composed, and unified whole, designed to emphasize the verticality of the building 
•  A transitional zone of one or two stories may exist between the lower and upper zones 
•  The top story may be slightly different in its window treatment 
•  The roof is generally designed to appear flat 



Appendix D - TREES, SHRUBS AND GROUNDCOVERS[1] 
Tree Species Recommendations 
For Darien & McIntosh County, GA 
(Reference: Trees of the Southeastern U.S./Duncan & Duncan) 

 
Large Evergreen Shrub Species List 
(8—12 Feet in Height) 

 
Large Deciduous Shrub Species List 
(8—12 Feet in Height) 

 
Medium Evergreen Shrub Species List 
(3—8 Feet in Height) 

 
Medium Deciduous Shrub Species List 
(3—8 Feet in Height) 

 
Small Evergreen Shrub Species List 
(Up to 3 Feet in Height) 

 
Small Deciduous Shrub Species List 
(Up to 3 Feet in Height) 

 
Evergreen Ground Covers 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the table entitled "Trees, Shrubs and Groundcovers Recommended for Planting in Darien, Georgia," which was included as Appendix A to an ordinance adopted by the City Council on June 18, 2002. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the title, enactment date, severability, repealer, transitional language, ratification date, publication date or effective date of the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. The same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text has been used as it appears in the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Appendix E - WATER RESOURCES PROTECTION ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Water Resources Protection Ordinance was adopted on November 21, 2006, by the City Council of the City of Darien, Georgia, and is available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
Editor's note— The Water Resources Protection Ordinance Article VI—Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control was adopted on August 21, 2007, by the City Council of the City of Darien, Georgia, and is available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
Editor's note— The Water Resources Protection Ordinance Article V—Flood Damage Prevention was adopted on March 24, 2009, by the City Council of the City of Darien, Georgia, and is available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 

Appendix F - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Subdivision Regulations were adopted on November 21, 2006, by the City Council of the City of Darien, Georgia, and are available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 

Appendix G - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Development Standards were adopted on November 21, 2006, by the City Council of the City of Darien, Georgia, and are available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 

Appendix H - STORM WATER LOCAL DESIGN MANUAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Storm Water Local Design Manual was adopted on November 21, 2006, by the City Council of the City of Darien, Georgia, and is available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1998 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1998 Code, as updated through November 21, 2006, which are included herein. Sections of the 1998 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1998 Code, as updated through November 21, 2006, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1998 Code, as supplemented. This tables contains some ordinances which precede November 21, 2006, but which were never included in the 1998 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since November 21, 2006, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 